PAGE: 23
CHAPTER 1
Essential Ideas
Figure1.1 Chemical substances and processes are essential for our existence, providing sustenance, keeping us
clean and healthy, fabricating electronic devices, enabling transportation, and much more. (credit “left”:
modification of work by “vxla”/Flickr; credit “left middle”: modification of work by “the Italian voice”/Flickr; credit
“right middle”: modification of work by Jason Trim; credit “right”: modification of work by “gosheshe”/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1Chemistry in Context
1.2Phases and Classification of Matter
1.3Physical and Chemical Properties
1.4Measurements
1.5Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
1.6Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
INTRODUCTION Your alarm goes off and, after hitting “snooze” once or twice, you pry yourself out of bed. You
make a cup of coffee to help you get going, and then you shower, get dressed, eat breakfast, and check your
phone for messages. On your way to school, you stop to fill your car’s gas tank, almost making you late for the
first day of chemistry class. As you find a seat in the classroom, you read the question projected on the screen:
“Welcome to class! Why should we study chemistry?”
Do you have an answer? You may be studying chemistry because it fulfills an academic requirement, but if you
consider your daily activities, you might find chemistry interesting for other reasons. Most everything you do
and encounter during your day involves chemistry. Making coffee, cooking eggs, and toasting bread involve
chemistry. The products you use—like soap and shampoo, the fabrics you wear, the electronics that keep you
connected to your world, the gasoline that propels your car—all of these and more involve chemical substances
and processes. Whether you are aware or not, chemistry is part of your everyday world. In this course, you will
learn many of the essential principles underlying the chemistry of modern-day life.
1.1 Chemistry in Context
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline the historical development of chemistry
• Provide examples of the importance of chemistry in everyday life
• Describe the scientific method
• Differentiate among hypotheses, theories, and laws
• Provide examples illustrating macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic domains
Throughout human history, people have tried to convert matter into more useful forms. Our Stone Age
PAGE: 24
10 1 • Essential Ideas
ancestors chipped pieces of flint into useful tools and carved wood into statues and toys. These endeavors
involved changing the shape of a substance without changing the substance itself. But as our knowledge
increased, humans began to change the composition of the substances as well—clay was converted into
pottery, hides were cured to make garments, copper ores were transformed into copper tools and weapons,
and grain was made into bread.
Humans began to practice chemistry when they learned to control fire and use it to cook, make pottery, and
smelt metals. Subsequently, they began to separate and use specific components of matter. A variety of drugs
such as aloe, myrrh, and opium were isolated from plants. Dyes, such as indigo and Tyrian purple, were
extracted from plant and animal matter. Metals were combined to form alloys—for example, copper and tin
were mixed together to make bronze—and more elaborate smelting techniques produced iron. Alkalis were
extracted from ashes, and soaps were prepared by combining these alkalis with fats. Alcohol was produced by
fermentation and purified by distillation.
Attempts to understand the behavior of matter extend back for more than 2500 years. As early as the sixth
century BC, Greek philosophers discussed a system in which water was the basis of all things. You may have
heard of the Greek postulate that matter consists of four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Subsequently, an
amalgamation of chemical technologies and philosophical speculations was spread from Egypt, China, and the
eastern Mediterranean by alchemists, who endeavored to transform “base metals” such as lead into “noble
metals” like gold, and to create elixirs to cure disease and extend life (Figure 1.2).
FIGURE1.2 (a) This portrayal shows an alchemist’s workshop circa 1580. Although alchemy made some useful
contributions to how to manipulate matter, it was not scientific by modern standards. (b) While the equipment used
by Alma Levant Hayden in this 1952 picture might not seem as sleek as you might find in a lab today, her approach
was highly methodical and carefully recorded. A department head at the FDA, Hayden is most famous for exposing
an aggressively marketed anti-cancer drug as nothing more than an unhelpful solution of common substances.
(credit a: Chemical Heritage Foundation; b: NIH History Office)
From alchemy came the historical progressions that led to modern chemistry: the isolation of drugs from
natural sources, such as plants and animals. But while many of the substances extracted or processed from
those natural sources were critical in the treatment of diseases, many were scarce. For example, progesterone,
which is critical to women's health, became available as a medicine in 1935, but its animal sources produced
extremely small quantities, limiting its availability and increasing its expense. Likewise, in the 1940s,
cortisone came into use to treat arthritis and other disorders and injuries, but it took a 36-step process to
synthesize. Chemist Percy Lavon Julian turned to a more plentiful source: soybeans. Previously, Julian had
developed a lab to isolate soy protein, which was used in firefighting among other applications. He focused on
using the soy sterols—substances mostly used in plant membranes—and was able to quickly produce
progesterone and later testosterone and other hormones. He later developed a process to do the same for
cortisone, and laid the groundwork for modern drug design. Since soybeans and similar plant sources were
extremely plentiful, the drugs soon became widely available, saving many lives.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 25
1.1 • Chemistry in Context 11
Chemistry: The Central Science
Chemistry is sometimes referred to as “the central science” due to its interconnectedness with a vast array of
other STEM disciplines (STEM stands for areas of study in the science, technology, engineering, and math
fields). Chemistry and the language of chemists play vital roles in biology, medicine, materials science,
forensics, environmental science, and many other fields (Figure 1.3). The basic principles of physics are
essential for understanding many aspects of chemistry, and there is extensive overlap between many
subdisciplines within the two fields, such as chemical physics and nuclear chemistry. Mathematics, computer
science, and information theory provide important tools that help us calculate, interpret, describe, and
generally make sense of the chemical world. Biology and chemistry converge in biochemistry, which is crucial
to understanding the many complex factors and processes that keep living organisms (such as us) alive.
Chemical engineering, materials science, and nanotechnology combine chemical principles and empirical
findings to produce useful substances, ranging from gasoline to fabrics to electronics. Agriculture, food
science, veterinary science, and brewing and wine making help provide sustenance in the form of food and
drink to the world’s population. Medicine, pharmacology, biotechnology, and botany identify and produce
substances that help keep us healthy. Environmental science, geology, oceanography, and atmospheric science
incorporate many chemical ideas to help us better understand and protect our physical world. Chemical ideas
are used to help understand the universe in astronomy and cosmology.
FIGURE1.3 Knowledge of chemistry is central to understanding a wide range of scientific disciplines. This diagram
shows just some of the interrelationships between chemistry and other fields.
What are some changes in matter that are essential to daily life? Digesting and assimilating food, synthesizing
polymers that are used to make clothing, containers, cookware, and credit cards, and refining crude oil into
gasoline and other products are just a few examples. As you proceed through this course, you will discover
many different examples of changes in the composition and structure of matter, how to classify these changes
and how they occurred, their causes, the changes in energy that accompany them, and the principles and laws
involved. As you learn about these things, you will be learningchemistry, the study of the composition,
properties, and interactions of matter. The practice of chemistry is not limited to chemistry books or
laboratories: It happens whenever someone is involved in changes in matter or in conditions that may lead to
such changes.
The Scientific Method
Chemistry is a science based on observation and experimentation. Doing chemistry involves attempting to
answer questions and explain observations in terms of the laws and theories of chemistry, using procedures
that are accepted by the scientific community. There is no single route to answering a question or explaining
an observation, but there is an aspect common to every approach: Each uses knowledge based on experiments
that can be reproduced to verify the results. Some routes involve ahypothesis, a tentative explanation of
PAGE: 26
12 1 • Essential Ideas
observations that acts as a guide for gathering and checking information. A hypothesis is tested by
experimentation, calculation, and/or comparison with the experiments of others and then refined as needed.
Some hypotheses are attempts to explain the behavior that is summarized in laws. Thelawsof science
summarize a vast number of experimental observations, and describe or predict some facet of the natural
world. If such a hypothesis turns out to be capable of explaining a large body of experimental data, it can reach
the status of a theory. Scientifictheoriesare well-substantiated, comprehensive, testable explanations of
particular aspects of nature. Theories are accepted because they provide satisfactory explanations, but they
can be modified if new data become available. The path of discovery that leads from question and observation
to law or hypothesis to theory, combined with experimental verification of the hypothesis and any necessary
modification of the theory, is called thescientific method(Figure 1.4).
FIGURE1.4 The scientific method follows a process similar to the one shown in this diagram. All the key
components are shown, in roughly the right order. Scientific progress is seldom neat and clean: It requires open
inquiry and the reworking of questions and ideas in response to findings.
The Domains of Chemistry
Chemists study and describe the behavior of matter and energy in three different domains: macroscopic,
microscopic, and symbolic. These domains provide different ways of considering and describing chemical
behavior.
Macrois a Greek word that means “large.” Themacroscopic domainis familiar to us: It is the realm of
everyday things that are large enough to be sensed directly by human sight or touch. In daily life, this includes
the food you eat and the breeze you feel on your face. The macroscopic domain includes everyday and
laboratory chemistry, where we observe and measure physical and chemical properties such as density,
solubility, and flammability.
Microcomes from Greek and means “small.” Themicroscopic domainof chemistry is often visited in the
imagination. Some aspects of the microscopic domain are visible through standard optical microscopes, for
example, many biological cells. More sophisticated instruments are capable of imaging even smaller entities
such as molecules and atoms (seeFigure 1.5(b)).
However, most of the subjects in the microscopic domain of chemistry are too small to be seen even with the
most advanced microscopes and may only be pictured in the mind. Other components of the microscopic
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 27
1.1 • Chemistry in Context 13
domain include ions and electrons, protons and neutrons, and chemical bonds, each of which is far too small
to see.
Thesymbolic domaincontains the specialized language used to represent components of the macroscopic
and microscopic domains. Chemical symbols (such as those used in the periodic table), chemical formulas,
and chemical equations are part of the symbolic domain, as are graphs, drawings, and calculations. These
symbols play an important role in chemistry because they help interpret the behavior of the macroscopic
domain in terms of the components of the microscopic domain. One of the challenges for students learning
chemistry is recognizing that the same symbols can represent different things in the macroscopic and
microscopic domains, and one of the features that makes chemistry fascinating is the use of a domain that
must be imagined to explain behavior in a domain that can be observed.
A helpful way to understand the three domains is via the essential and ubiquitous substance of water. That
water is a liquid at moderate temperatures, will freeze to form a solid at lower temperatures, and boil to form a
gas at higher temperatures (Figure 1.5) are macroscopic observations. But some properties of water fall into
the microscopic domain—what cannot be observed with the naked eye. The description of water as comprising
two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, and the explanation of freezing and boiling in terms of attractions
between these molecules, is within the microscopic arena. The formula H O, which can describe water at
2
either the macroscopic or microscopic levels, is an example of the symbolic domain. The abbreviations (g) for
gas, (s) for solid, and (l) for liquid are also symbolic.
FIGURE1.5 (a) Moisture in the air, icebergs, and the ocean represent water in the macroscopic domain. (b) At the
molecular level (microscopic domain), gas molecules are far apart and disorganized, solid water molecules are close
together and organized, and liquid molecules are close together and disorganized. (c) The formula H O symbolizes
2
water, and (g), (s), and (l) symbolize its phases. Note that clouds are actually comprised of either very small liquid
water droplets or solid water crystals; gaseous water in our atmosphere is not visible to the naked eye, although it
may be sensed as humidity. (credit a: modification of work by “Gorkaazk”/Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 28
14 1 • Essential Ideas
1.2 Phases and Classification of Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic properties of each physical state of matter: solid, liquid, and gas
• Distinguish between mass and weight
• Apply the law of conservation of matter
• Classify matter as an element, compound, homogeneous mixture, or heterogeneous mixture with regard to its
physical state and composition
• Define and give examples of atoms and molecules
Matteris defined as anything that occupies space and has mass, and it is all around us. Solids and liquids are
more obviously matter: We can see that they take up space, and their weight tells us that they have mass. Gases
are also matter; if gases did not take up space, a balloon would not inflate (increase its volume) when filled with
gas.
Solids, liquids, and gases are the three states of matter commonly found on earth (Figure 1.6). Asolidis rigid
and possesses a definite shape. Aliquidflows and takes the shape of its container, except that it forms a flat or
slightly curved upper surface when acted upon by gravity. (In zero gravity, liquids assume a spherical shape.)
Both liquid and solid samples have volumes that are very nearly independent of pressure. Agastakes both the
shape and volume of its container.
FIGURE1.6 The three most common states or phases of matter are solid, liquid, and gas.
A fourth state of matter, plasma, occurs naturally in the interiors of stars. Aplasmais a gaseous state of matter
that contains appreciable numbers of electrically charged particles (Figure 1.7). The presence of these charged
particles imparts unique properties to plasmas that justify their classification as a state of matter distinct from
gases. In addition to stars, plasmas are found in some other high-temperature environments (both natural and
man-made), such as lightning strikes, certain television screens, and specialized analytical instruments used
to detect trace amounts of metals.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 29
1.2 • Phases and Classification of Matter 15
FIGURE1.7 A plasma torch can be used to cut metal. (credit: “Hypertherm”/Wikimedia Commons)
LINK TO LEARNING
In a tiny cell in a plasma television, the plasma emits ultraviolet light, which in turn causes the display at that
location to appear a specific color. The composite of these tiny dots of color makes up the image that you see.
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16plasma)to learn more about plasma and the places you encounter it.
Some samples of matter appear to have properties of solids, liquids, and/or gases at the same time. This can
occur when the sample is composed of many small pieces. For example, we can pour sand as if it were a liquid
because it is composed of many small grains of solid sand. Matter can also have properties of more than one
state when it is a mixture, such as with clouds. Clouds appear to behave somewhat like gases, but they are
actually mixtures of air (gas) and tiny particles of water (liquid or solid).
Themassof an object is a measure of the amount of matter in it. One way to measure an object’s mass is to
measure the force it takes to accelerate the object. It takes much more force to accelerate a car than a bicycle
because the car has much more mass. A more common way to determine the mass of an object is to use a
balance to compare its mass with a standard mass.
Although weight is related to mass, it is not the same thing.Weightrefers to the force that gravity exerts on an
object. This force is directly proportional to the mass of the object. The weight of an object changes as the force
of gravity changes, but its mass does not. An astronaut’s mass does not change just because she goes to the
moon. But her weight on the moon is only one-sixth her earth-bound weight because the moon’s gravity is only
one-sixth that of the earth’s. She may feel “weightless” during her trip when she experiences negligible
external forces (gravitational or any other), although she is, of course, never “massless.”
Thelaw of conservation of mattersummarizes many scientific observations about matter: It states thatthere
is no detectable change in the total quantity of matter present when matter converts from one type to another
(a chemical change) or changes among solid, liquid, or gaseous states (a physical change). Brewing beer and
the operation of batteries provide examples of the conservation of matter (Figure 1.8). During the brewing of
beer, the ingredients (water, yeast, grains, malt, hops, and sugar) are converted into beer (water, alcohol,
carbonation, and flavoring substances) with no actual loss of substance. This is most clearly seen during the
bottling process, when glucose turns into ethanol and carbon dioxide, and the total mass of the substances
does not change. This can also be seen in a lead-acid car battery: The original substances (lead, lead oxide, and
sulfuric acid), which are capable of producing electricity, are changed into other substances (lead sulfate and
water) that do not produce electricity, with no change in the actual amount of matter.
PAGE: 30
16 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.8 (a) The mass of beer precursor materials is the same as the mass of beer produced: Sugar has
become alcohol and carbon dioxide. (b) The mass of the lead, lead oxide, and sulfuric acid consumed by the
production of electricity is exactly equal to the mass of lead sulfate and water that is formed.
Although this conservation law holds true for all conversions of matter, convincing examples are few and far
between because, outside of the controlled conditions in a laboratory, we seldom collect all of the material that
is produced during a particular conversion. For example, when you eat, digest, and assimilate food, all of the
matter in the original food is preserved. But because some of the matter is incorporated into your body, and
much is excreted as various types of waste, it is challenging to verify by measurement.
Classifying Matter
Matter can be classified into several categories. Two broad categories are mixtures and pure substances. A
pure substancehas a constant composition. All specimens of a pure substance have exactly the same makeup
and properties. Any sample of sucrose (table sugar) consists of 42.1% carbon, 6.5% hydrogen, and 51.4%
oxygen by mass. Any sample of sucrose also has the same physical properties, such as melting point, color, and
sweetness, regardless of the source from which it is isolated.
Pure substances may be divided into two classes: elements and compounds. Pure substances that cannot be
broken down into simpler substances by chemical changes are calledelements. Iron, silver, gold, aluminum,
sulfur, oxygen, and copper are familiar examples of the more than 100 known elements, of which about 90
occur naturally on the earth, and two dozen or so have been created in laboratories.
Pure substances that are comprised of two or more elements are calledcompounds. Compounds may be
broken down by chemical changes to yield either elements or other compounds, or both. Mercury(II) oxide, an
orange, crystalline solid, can be broken down by heat into the elements mercury and oxygen (Figure 1.9).
When heated in the absence of air, the compound sucrose is broken down into the element carbon and the
compound water. (The initial stage of this process, when the sugar is turning brown, is known as
caramelization—this is what imparts the characteristic sweet and nutty flavor to caramel apples, caramelized
onions, and caramel). Silver(I) chloride is a white solid that can be broken down into its elements, silver and
chlorine, by absorption of light. This property is the basis for the use of this compound in photographic films
and photochromic eyeglasses (those with lenses that darken when exposed to light).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 31
1.2 • Phases and Classification of Matter 17
FIGURE1.9 (a) The compound mercury(II) oxide, (b) when heated, (c) decomposes into silvery droplets of liquid
mercury and invisible oxygen gas. (credit: modification of work by Paul Flowers)
LINK TO LEARNING
Many compounds break down when heated. Thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16mercury)shows the breakdown
of mercury oxide, HgO. You can also view an example of thephotochemical decomposition of silver chloride
(http://openstax.org/l/16silvchloride)(AgCl), the basis of early photography.
The properties of combined elements are different from those in the free, or uncombined, state. For example,
white crystalline sugar (sucrose) is a compound resulting from the chemical combination of the element
carbon, which is a black solid in one of its uncombined forms, and the two elements hydrogen and oxygen,
which are colorless gases when uncombined. Free sodium, an element that is a soft, shiny, metallic solid, and
free chlorine, an element that is a yellow-green gas, combine to form sodium chloride (table salt), a compound
that is a white, crystalline solid.
Amixtureis composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be
separated by physical changes, such as evaporation (you will learn more about this later). A mixture with a
composition that varies from point to point is called aheterogeneous mixture. Italian dressing is an example
of a heterogeneous mixture (Figure 1.10). Its composition can vary because it may be prepared from varying
amounts of oil, vinegar, and herbs. It is not the same from point to point throughout the mixture—one drop
may be mostly vinegar, whereas a different drop may be mostly oil or herbs because the oil and vinegar
separate and the herbs settle. Other examples of heterogeneous mixtures are chocolate chip cookies (we can
see the separate bits of chocolate, nuts, and cookie dough) and granite (we can see the quartz, mica, feldspar,
and more).
Ahomogeneous mixture, also called asolution, exhibits a uniform composition and appears visually the
same throughout. An example of a solution is a sports drink, consisting of water, sugar, coloring, flavoring, and
electrolytes mixed together uniformly (Figure 1.10). Each drop of a sports drink tastes the same because each
drop contains the same amounts of water, sugar, and other components. Note that the composition of a sports
drink can vary—it could be made with somewhat more or less sugar, flavoring, or other components, and still
be a sports drink. Other examples of homogeneous mixtures include air, maple syrup, gasoline, and a solution
of salt in water.
FIGURE1.10 (a) Oil and vinegar salad dressing is a heterogeneous mixture because its composition is not uniform
throughout. (b) A commercial sports drink is a homogeneous mixture because its composition is uniform
throughout. (credit a “left”: modification of work by John Mayer; credit a “right”: modification of work by Umberto
Salvagnin; credit b “left: modification of work by Jeff Bedford)
PAGE: 32
18 1 • Essential Ideas
Although there are just over 100 elements, tens of millions of chemical compounds result from different
combinations of these elements. Each compound has a specific composition and possesses definite chemical
and physical properties that distinguish it from all other compounds. And, of course, there are innumerable
ways to combine elements and compounds to form different mixtures. A summary of how to distinguish
between the various major classifications of matter is shown in (Figure 1.11).
FIGURE1.11 Depending on its properties, a given substance can be classified as a homogeneous mixture, a
heterogeneous mixture, a compound, or an element.
Eleven elements make up about 99% of the earth’s crust and atmosphere (Table 1.1). Oxygen constitutes
nearly one-half and silicon about one-quarter of the total quantity of these elements. A majority of elements on
earth are found in chemical combinations with other elements; about one-quarter of the elements are also
found in the free state.
Elemental Composition of Earth
Element Symbol Percent Mass Element Symbol Percent Mass
oxygen O 49.20 chlorine Cl 0.19
silicon Si 25.67 phosphorus P 0.11
aluminum Al 7.50 manganese Mn 0.09
iron Fe 4.71 carbon C 0.08
calcium Ca 3.39 sulfur S 0.06
sodium Na 2.63 barium Ba 0.04
potassium K 2.40 nitrogen N 0.03
magnesium Mg 1.93 fluorine F 0.03
hydrogen H 0.87 strontium Sr 0.02
titanium Ti 0.58 all others - 0.47
TABLE1.1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 33
1.2 • Phases and Classification of Matter 19
Atoms and Molecules
Anatomis the smallest particle of an element that has the properties of that element and can enter into a
chemical combination. Consider the element gold, for example. Imagine cutting a gold nugget in half, then
cutting one of the halves in half, and repeating this process until a piece of gold remained that was so small
that it could not be cut in half (regardless of how tiny your knife may be). This minimally sized piece of gold is
an atom (from the Greekatomos, meaning “indivisible”) (Figure 1.12). This atom would no longer be gold if it
were divided any further.
FIGURE1.12 (a) This photograph shows a gold nugget. (b) A scanning-tunneling microscope (STM) can generate
views of the surfaces of solids, such as this image of a gold crystal. Each sphere represents one gold atom. (credit a:
modification of work by United States Geological Survey; credit b: modification of work by “Erwinrossen”/Wikimedia
Commons)
The first suggestion that matter is composed of atoms is attributed to the Greek philosophers Leucippus and
Democritus, who developed their ideas in the 5th century BCE. However, it was not until the early nineteenth
century that JohnDalton(1766–1844), a British schoolteacher with a keen interest in science, supported this
hypothesis with quantitative measurements. Since that time, repeated experiments have confirmed many
aspects of this hypothesis, and it has become one of the central theories of chemistry. Other aspects of Dalton’s
atomic theory are still used but with minor revisions (details of Dalton’s theory are provided in the chapter on
atoms and molecules).
An atom is so small that its size is difficult to imagine. One of the smallest things we can see with our unaided
eye is a single thread of a spider web: These strands are about 1/10,000 of a centimeter (0.0001 cm) in
diameter. Although the cross-section of one strand is almost impossible to see without a microscope, it is huge
on an atomic scale. A single carbon atom in the web has a diameter of about 0.000000015 centimeter, and it
would take about 7000 carbon atoms to span the diameter of the strand. To put this in perspective, if a carbon
atom were the size of a dime, the cross-section of one strand would be larger than a football field, which would
require about 150 million carbon atom “dimes” to cover it. (Figure 1.13) shows increasingly close microscopic
and atomic-level views of ordinary cotton.
PAGE: 34
20 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.13 These images provide an increasingly closer view: (a) a cotton boll, (b) a single cotton fiber viewed
under an optical microscope (magnified 40 times), (c) an image of a cotton fiber obtained with an electron
microscope (much higher magnification than with the optical microscope); and (d and e) atomic-level models of the
fiber (spheres of different colors represent atoms of different elements). (credit c: modification of work by
“Featheredtar”/Wikimedia Commons)
An atom is so light that its mass is also difficult to imagine. A billion lead atoms (1,000,000,000 atoms) weigh
about 3 10−13grams, a mass that is far too light to be weighed on even the world’s most sensitive balances. It
would require over 300,000,000,000,000 lead atoms (300 trillion, or 3 1014) to be weighed, and they would
weigh only 0.0000001 gram.
It is rare to find collections of individual atoms. Only a few elements, such as the gases helium, neon, and
argon, consist of a collection of individual atoms that move about independently of one another. Other
elements, such as the gases hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and chlorine, are composed of units that consist of
pairs of atoms (Figure 1.14). One form of the element phosphorus consists of units composed of four
phosphorus atoms. The element sulfur exists in various forms, one of which consists of units composed of
eight sulfur atoms. These units are called molecules. Amoleculeconsists of two or more atoms joined by
strong forces called chemical bonds. The atoms in a molecule move around as a unit, much like the cans of
soda in a six-pack or a bunch of keys joined together on a single key ring. A molecule may consist of two or
more identical atoms, as in the molecules found in the elements hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur, or it may consist
of two or more different atoms, as in the molecules found in water. Each water molecule is a unit that contains
two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Each glucose molecule is a unit that contains 6 carbon atoms, 12
hydrogen atoms, and 6 oxygen atoms. Like atoms, molecules are incredibly small and light. If an ordinary glass
of water were enlarged to the size of the earth, the water molecules inside it would be about the size of golf
balls.
FIGURE1.14 The elements hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur form molecules consisting of two or more
atoms of the same element. The compounds water, carbon dioxide, and glucose consist of combinations of atoms of
different elements.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Decomposition of Water / Production of Hydrogen
Water consists of the elements hydrogen and oxygen combined in a 2 to 1 ratio. Water can be broken down
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 35
1.2 • Phases and Classification of Matter 21
into hydrogen and oxygen gases by the addition of energy. One way to do this is with a battery or power
supply, as shown in (Figure 1.15).
FIGURE1.15 The decomposition of water is shown at the macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic levels. The
battery provides an electric current (microscopic) that decomposes water. At the macroscopic level, the liquid
separates into the gases hydrogen (on the left) and oxygen (on the right). Symbolically, this change is presented
by showing how liquid H O separates into H and O gases.
2 2 2
The breakdown of water involves a rearrangement of the atoms in water molecules into different
molecules, each composed of two hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms, respectively. Two water
molecules form one oxygen molecule and two hydrogen molecules. The representation for what occurs,
will be explored in more depth in later chapters.
The two gases produced have distinctly different properties. Oxygen is not flammable but is required for
combustion of a fuel, and hydrogen is highly flammable and a potent energy source. How might this
knowledge be applied in our world? One application involves research into more fuel-efficient
transportation. Fuel-cell vehicles (FCV) run on hydrogen instead of gasoline (Figure 1.16). They are more
efficient than vehicles with internal combustion engines, are nonpolluting, and reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, making us less dependent on fossil fuels. FCVs are not yet economically viable, however, and
current hydrogen production depends on natural gas. If we can develop a process to economically
decompose water, or produce hydrogen in another environmentally sound way, FCVs may be the way of the
future.
PAGE: 36
22 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.16 A fuel cell generates electrical energy from hydrogen and oxygen via an electrochemical process
and produces only water as the waste product.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Chemistry of Cell Phones
Imagine how different your life would be without cell phones (Figure 1.17) and other smart devices. Cell
phones are made from numerous chemical substances, which are extracted, refined, purified, and
assembled using an extensive and in-depth understanding of chemical principles. About 30% of the
elements that are found in nature are found within a typical smart phone. The case/body/frame consists of
a combination of sturdy, durable polymers composed primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen
[acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and polycarbonate thermoplastics], and light, strong, structural
metals, such as aluminum, magnesium, and iron. The display screen is made from a specially toughened
glass (silica glass strengthened by the addition of aluminum, sodium, and potassium) and coated with a
material to make it conductive (such as indium tin oxide). The circuit board uses a semiconductor material
(usually silicon); commonly used metals like copper, tin, silver, and gold; and more unfamiliar elements
such as yttrium, praseodymium, and gadolinium. The battery relies upon lithium ions and a variety of
other materials, including iron, cobalt, copper, polyethylene oxide, and polyacrylonitrile.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 37
1.3 • Physical and Chemical Properties 23
FIGURE1.17 Almost one-third of naturally occurring elements are used to make a cell phone. (credit:
modification of work by John Taylor)
1.3 Physical and Chemical Properties
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify properties of and changes in matter as physical or chemical
• Identify properties of matter as extensive or intensive
The characteristics that distinguish one substance from another are called properties. Aphysical propertyis a
characteristic of matter that is not associated with a change in its chemical composition. Familiar examples of
physical properties include density, color, hardness, melting and boiling points, and electrical conductivity.
Some physical properties, such as density and color, may be observed without changing the physical state of
the matter. Other physical properties, such as the melting temperature of iron or the freezing temperature of
water, can only be observed as matter undergoes a physical change. Aphysical changeis a change in the state
or properties of matter without any accompanying change in the chemical identities of the substances
contained in the matter. Physical changes are observed when wax melts, when sugar dissolves in coffee, and
when steam condenses into liquid water (Figure 1.18). Other examples of physical changes include
magnetizing and demagnetizing metals (as is done with common antitheft security tags) and grinding solids
into powders (which can sometimes yield noticeable changes in color). In each of these examples, there is a
change in the physical state, form, or properties of the substance, but no change in its chemical composition.
PAGE: 38
24 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.18 (a) Wax undergoes a physical change when solid wax is heated and forms liquid wax. (b) Steam
condensing inside a cooking pot is a physical change, as water vapor is changed into liquid water. (credit a:
modification of work by “95jb14”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by “mjneuby”/Flickr)
The change of one type of matter into another type (or the inability to change) is achemical property.
Examples of chemical properties include flammability, toxicity, acidity, and many other types of reactivity.
Iron, for example, combines with oxygen in the presence of water to form rust; chromium does not oxidize
(Figure 1.19). Nitroglycerin is very dangerous because it explodes easily; neon poses almost no hazard because
it is very unreactive.
FIGURE1.19 (a) One of the chemical properties of iron is that it rusts; (b) one of the chemical properties of
chromium is that it does not. (credit a: modification of work by Tony Hisgett; credit b: modification of work by
“Atoma”/Wikimedia Commons)
Achemical changealways produces one or more types of matter that differ from the matter present before the
change. The formation of rust is a chemical change because rust is a different kind of matter than the iron,
oxygen, and water present before the rust formed. The explosion of nitroglycerin is a chemical change because
the gases produced are very different kinds of matter from the original substance. Other examples of chemical
changes include reactions that are performed in a lab (such as copper reacting with nitric acid), all forms of
combustion (burning), and food being cooked, digested, or rotting (Figure 1.20).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 39
1.3 • Physical and Chemical Properties 25
FIGURE1.20 (a) Copper and nitric acid undergo a chemical change to form copper nitrate and brown, gaseous
nitrogen dioxide. (b) During the combustion of a match, cellulose in the match and oxygen from the air undergo a
chemical change to form carbon dioxide and water vapor. (c) Cooking red meat causes a number of chemical
changes, including the oxidation of iron in myoglobin that results in the familiar red-to-brown color change. (d) A
banana turning brown is a chemical change as new, darker (and less tasty) substances form. (credit b: modification
of work by Jeff Turner; credit c: modification of work by Gloria Cabada-Leman; credit d: modification of work by
Roberto Verzo)
Properties of matter fall into one of two categories. If the property depends on the amount of matter present, it
is anextensive property. The mass and volume of a substance are examples of extensive properties; for
instance, a gallon of milk has a larger mass than a cup of milk. The value of an extensive property is directly
proportional to the amount of matter in question. If the property of a sample of matter does not depend on the
amount of matter present, it is anintensive property. Temperature is an example of an intensive property. If
the gallon and cup of milk are each at 20 °C (room temperature), when they are combined, the temperature
remains at 20 °C. As another example, consider the distinct but related properties of heat and temperature. A
drop of hot cooking oil spattered on your arm causes brief, minor discomfort, whereas a pot of hot oil yields
severe burns. Both the drop and the pot of oil are at the same temperature (an intensive property), but the pot
clearly contains much more heat (extensive property).
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Hazard Diamond
You may have seen the symbol shown inFigure 1.21on containers of chemicals in a laboratory or
workplace. Sometimes called a “fire diamond” or “hazard diamond,” this chemical hazard diamond
provides valuable information that briefly summarizes the various dangers of which to be aware when
working with a particular substance.
PAGE: 40
26 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.21 The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) hazard diamond summarizes the major hazards of a
chemical substance.
The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) 704 Hazard Identification System was developed by NFPA to
provide safety information about certain substances. The system details flammability, reactivity, health,
and other hazards. Within the overall diamond symbol, the top (red) diamond specifies the level of fire
hazard (temperature range for flash point). The blue (left) diamond indicates the level of health hazard. The
yellow (right) diamond describes reactivity hazards, such as how readily the substance will undergo
detonation or a violent chemical change. The white (bottom) diamond points out special hazards, such as if
it is an oxidizer (which allows the substance to burn in the absence of air/oxygen), undergoes an unusual or
dangerous reaction with water, is corrosive, acidic, alkaline, a biological hazard, radioactive, and so on.
Each hazard is rated on a scale from 0 to 4, with 0 being no hazard and 4 being extremely hazardous.
While many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties, some elements have
similar properties. For example, many elements conduct heat and electricity well, whereas others are poor
conductors. These properties can be used to sort the elements into three classes: metals (elements that
conduct well), nonmetals (elements that conduct poorly), and metalloids (elements that have intermediate
conductivities).
The periodic table is a table of elements that places elements with similar properties close together (Figure
1.22). You will learn more about the periodic table as you continue your study of chemistry.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 41
1.4 • Measurements 27
FIGURE1.22 The periodic table shows how elements may be grouped according to certain similar properties. Note
the background color denotes whether an element is a metal, metalloid, or nonmetal, whereas the element symbol
color indicates whether it is a solid, liquid, or gas.
1.4 Measurements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the process of measurement
• Identify the three basic parts of a quantity
• Describe the properties and units of length, mass, volume, density, temperature, and time
• Perform basic unit calculations and conversions in the metric and other unit systems
Measurements provide much of the information that informs the hypotheses, theories, and laws describing the
behavior of matter and energy in both the macroscopic and microscopic domains of chemistry. Every
measurement provides three kinds of information: the size or magnitude of the measurement (a number); a
standard of comparison for the measurement (a unit); and an indication of the uncertainty of the
measurement. While the number and unit are explicitly represented when a quantity is written, the
uncertainty is an aspect of the measurement result that is more implicitly represented and will be discussed
later.
The number in the measurement can be represented in different ways, including decimal form and scientific
notation. (Scientific notation is also known as exponential notation; a review of this topic can be found in
Appendix B.) For example, the maximum takeoff weight of a Boeing 777-200ER airliner is 298,000 kilograms,
which can also be written as 2.98 105kg. The mass of the average mosquito is about 0.0000025 kilograms,
PAGE: 42
28 1 • Essential Ideas
which can be written as 2.5 10−6kg.
Units, such as liters, pounds, and centimeters, are standards of comparison for measurements. A 2-liter bottle
of a soft drink contains a volume of beverage that is twice that of the accepted volume of 1 liter. The meat used
to prepare a 0.25-pound hamburger weighs one-fourth as much as the accepted weight of 1 pound. Without
units, a number can be meaningless, confusing, or possibly life threatening. Suppose a doctor prescribes
phenobarbital to control a patient’s seizures and states a dosage of “100” without specifying units. Not only will
this be confusing to the medical professional giving the dose, but the consequences can be dire: 100 mg given
three times per day can be effective as an anticonvulsant, but a single dose of 100 g is more than 10 times the
lethal amount.
The measurement units for seven fundamental properties (“base units”) are listed inTable 1.2. The standards
for these units are fixed by international agreement, and they are called theInternational System of Unitsor
SI Units(from the French,Le Système International d’Unités). SI units have been used by the United States
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) since 1964. Units for other properties may be derived
from these seven base units.
Base Units of the SI System
Property Measured Name of Unit Symbol of Unit
length meter m
mass kilogram kg
time second s
temperature kelvin K
electric current ampere A
amount of substance mole mol
luminous intensity candela cd
TABLE1.2
Everyday measurement units are often defined as fractions or multiples of other units. Milk is commonly
packaged in containers of 1 gallon (4 quarts), 1 quart (0.25 gallon), and one pint (0.5 quart). This same
approach is used with SI units, but these fractions or multiples are always powers of 10. Fractional or multiple
SI units are named using a prefix and the name of the base unit. For example, a length of 1000 meters is also
called a kilometer because the prefixkilomeans “one thousand,” which in scientific notation is 103(1
kilometer = 1000 m = 103m). The prefixes used and the powers to which 10 are raised are listed inTable 1.3.
Common Unit Prefixes
Prefix Symbol Factor Example
femto f 10−15 1 femtosecond (fs) = 1 10−15s (0.000000000000001 s)
pico p 10−12 1 picometer (pm) = 1 10−12m (0.000000000001 m)
TABLE1.3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 43
1.4 • Measurements 29
Prefix Symbol Factor Example
nano n 10−9 4 nanograms (ng) = 4 10−9g (0.000000004 g)
micro µ 10−6 1 microliter (μL) = 1 10−6L (0.000001 L)
milli m 10−3 2 millimoles (mmol) = 2 10−3mol (0.002 mol)
centi c 10−2 7 centimeters (cm) = 7 10−2m (0.07 m)
deci d 10−1 1 deciliter (dL) = 1 10−1L (0.1 L )
kilo k 103 1 kilometer (km) = 1 103m (1000 m)
mega M 106 3 megahertz (MHz) = 3 106Hz (3,000,000 Hz)
giga G 109 8 gigayears (Gyr) = 8 109yr (8,000,000,000 yr)
tera T 1012 5 terawatts (TW) = 5 1012W (5,000,000,000,000 W)
TABLE1.3
LINK TO LEARNING
Need a refresher or more practice with scientific notation? Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16notation)to
go over the basics of scientific notation.
SI Base Units
The initial units of the metric system, which eventually evolved into the SI system, were established in France
during the French Revolution. The original standards for the meter and the kilogram were adopted there in
1799 and eventually by other countries. This section introduces four of the SI base units commonly used in
chemistry. Other SI units will be introduced in subsequent chapters.
Length
The standard unit oflengthin both the SI and original metric systems is themeter (m). A meter was originally
specified as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the North Pole to the equator. It is now defined as the distance
light in a vacuum travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second. A meter is about 3 inches longer than a yard (Figure
1.23); one meter is about 39.37 inches or 1.094 yards. Longer distances are often reported in kilometers (1 km
= 1000 m = 103m), whereas shorter distances can be reported in centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m = 10−2m) or
millimeters (1 mm = 0.001 m = 10−3m).
PAGE: 44
30 1 • Essential Ideas
FIGURE1.23 The relative lengths of 1 m, 1 yd, 1 cm, and 1 in. are shown (not actual size), as well as comparisons
of 2.54 cm and 1 in., and of 1 m and 1.094 yd.
Mass
The standard unit of mass in the SI system is thekilogram (kg). The kilogram was previously defined by the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) as the mass of a specific reference object. This
object was originally one liter of pure water, and more recently it was a metal cylinder made from a platinum-
iridium alloy with a height and diameter of 39 mm (Figure 1.24). In May 2019, this definition was changed to
1
one that is based instead on precisely measured values of several fundamental physical constants. . One
kilogram is about 2.2 pounds. The gram (g) is exactly equal to 1/1000 of the mass of the kilogram (10−3kg).
FIGURE1.24 This replica prototype kilogram as previously defined is housed at the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) in Maryland. (credit: National Institutes of Standards and Technology)
Temperature
Temperature is an intensive property. The SI unit of temperature is thekelvin (K). The IUPAC convention is to
use kelvin (all lowercase) for the word, K (uppercase) for the unit symbol, and neither the word “degree” nor
the degree symbol (°). The degreeCelsius (°C)is also allowed in the SI system, with both the word “degree” and
the degree symbol used for Celsius measurements. Celsius degrees are the same magnitude as those of kelvin,
but the two scales place their zeros in different places. Water freezes at 273.15 K (0 °C) and boils at 373.15 K
(100 °C) by definition, and normal human body temperature is approximately 310 K (37 °C). The conversion
1 For details see https://www.nist.gov/pml/weights-and-measures/si-units-mass
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 45
1.4 • Measurements 31
between these two units and the Fahrenheit scale will be discussed later in this chapter.
Time
The SI base unit of time is thesecond (s). Small and large time intervals can be expressed with the appropriate
prefixes; for example, 3 microseconds = 0.000003 s = 3 10−6and 5 megaseconds = 5,000,000 s = 5 106s.
Alternatively, hours, days, and years can be used.
Derived SI Units
We can derive many units from the seven SI base units. For example, we can use the base unit of length to
define a unit of volume, and the base units of mass and length to define a unit of density.
Volume
Volumeis the measure of the amount of space occupied by an object. The standard SI unit of volume is defined
by the base unit of length (Figure 1.25). The standard volume is acubic meter (m3), a cube with an edge length
of exactly one meter. To dispense a cubic meter of water, we could build a cubic box with edge lengths of
exactly one meter. This box would hold a cubic meter of water or any other substance.
A more commonly used unit of volume is derived from the decimeter (0.1 m, or 10 cm). A cube with edge
lengths of exactly one decimeter contains a volume of one cubic decimeter (dm3). Aliter (L)is the more
common name for the cubic decimeter. One liter is about 1.06 quarts.
Acubic centimeter (cm3)is the volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly one centimeter. The
abbreviationcc(forcubiccentimeter) is often used by health professionals. A cubic centimeter is equivalent to
amilliliter (mL)and is 1/1000 of a liter.
FIGURE1.25 (a) The relative volumes are shown for cubes of 1 m3, 1 dm3(1 L), and 1 cm3(1 mL) (not to scale). (b)
The diameter of a dime is compared relative to the edge length of a 1-cm3(1-mL) cube.
Density
We use the mass and volume of a substance to determine its density. Thus, the units of density are defined by
the base units of mass and length.
Thedensityof a substance is the ratio of the mass of a sample of the substance to its volume. The SI unit for
density is the kilogram per cubic meter (kg/m3). For many situations, however, this is an inconvenient unit,
and we often use grams per cubic centimeter (g/cm3) for the densities of solids and liquids, and grams per liter
(g/L) for gases. Although there are exceptions, most liquids and solids have densities that range from about 0.7
g/cm3(the density of gasoline) to 19 g/cm3(the density of gold). The density of air is about 1.2 g/L.Table 1.4
PAGE: 46
32 1 • Essential Ideas
shows the densities of some common substances.
Densities of Common Substances
Solids Liquids Gases (at 25 °C and 1 atm)
ice (at 0 °C) 0.92 g/cm3 water 1.0 g/cm3 dry air 1.20 g/L
oak (wood) 0.60–0.90 g/cm3 ethanol 0.79 g/cm3 oxygen 1.31 g/L
iron 7.9 g/cm3 acetone 0.79 g/cm3 nitrogen 1.14 g/L
copper 9.0 g/cm3 glycerin 1.26 g/cm3 carbon dioxide 1.80 g/L
lead 11.3 g/cm3 olive oil 0.92 g/cm3 helium 0.16 g/L
silver 10.5 g/cm3 gasoline 0.70–0.77 g/cm3 neon 0.83 g/L
gold 19.3 g/cm3 mercury 13.6 g/cm3 radon 9.1 g/L
TABLE1.4
While there are many ways to determine the density of an object, perhaps the most straightforward method
involves separately finding the mass and volume of the object, and then dividing the mass of the sample by its
volume. In the following example, the mass is found directly by weighing, but the volume is found indirectly
through length measurements.
EXAMPLE 1.1
Calculation of Density
Gold—in bricks, bars, and coins—has been a form of currency for centuries. In order to swindle people into
paying for a brick of gold without actually investing in a brick of gold, people have considered filling the
centers of hollow gold bricks with lead to fool buyers into thinking that the entire brick is gold. It does not
work: Lead is a dense substance, but its density is not as great as that of gold, 19.3 g/cm3. What is the density of
lead if a cube of lead has an edge length of 2.00 cm and a mass of 90.7 g?
Solution
The density of a substance can be calculated by dividing its mass by its volume. The volume of a cube is
calculated by cubing the edge length.
(We will discuss the reason for rounding to the first decimal place in the next section.)
Check Your Learning
(a) To three decimal places, what is the volume of a cube (cm3) with an edge length of 0.843 cm?
(b) If the cube in part (a) is copper and has a mass of 5.34 g, what is the density of copper to two decimal
places?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 47
1.5 • Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision 33
Answer:
(a) 0.599 cm3; (b) 8.91 g/cm3
LINK TO LEARNING
To learn more about the relationship between mass, volume, and density, use thisinteractive simulator
(http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden)to explore the density of different materials.
EXAMPLE 1.2
Using Displacement of Water to Determine Density
This exercise uses asimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden)to illustrate an alternative approach
to the determination of density that involves measuring the object’s volume via displacement of water. Use the
simulator to determine the densities iron and wood.
Solution
Click the “turn fluid into water” button in the simulator to adjust the density of liquid in the beaker to 1.00 g/
mL. Remove the red block from the beaker and note the volume of water is 25.5 mL. Select the iron sample by
clicking “iron” in the table of materials at the bottom of the screen, place the iron block on the balance pan,
and observe its mass is 31.48 g. Transfer the iron block to the beaker and notice that it sinks, displacing a
volume of water equal to its own volume and causing the water level to rise to 29.5 mL. The volume of the iron
block is therefore:
The density of the iron is then calculated to be:
Remove the iron block from the beaker, change the block material to wood, and then repeat the mass and
volume measurements. Unlike iron, the wood block does not sink in the water but instead floats on the water’s
surface. To measure its volume, drag it beneath the water’s surface so that it is fully submerged.
Note: The sink versus float behavior illustrated in this example demonstrates the property of “buoyancy” (see
end of chapterExercise 1.42andExercise 1.43).
Check Your Learning
Following the water displacement approach, use the simulator to measure the density of the foam sample.
Answer:
0.230 g/mL
1.5 Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define accuracy and precision
• Distinguish exact and uncertain numbers
• Correctly represent uncertainty in quantities using significant figures
• Apply proper rounding rules to computed quantities
Counting is the only type of measurement that is free from uncertainty, provided the number of objects being
PAGE: 48
34 1 • Essential Ideas
counted does not change while the counting process is underway. The result of such a counting measurement
is an example of anexact number. By counting the eggs in a carton, one can determineexactlyhow many eggs
the carton contains. The numbers of defined quantities are also exact. By definition, 1 foot is exactly 12 inches,
1 inch is exactly 2.54 centimeters, and 1 gram is exactly 0.001 kilogram. Quantities derived from
measurements other than counting, however, are uncertain to varying extents due to practical limitations of
the measurement process used.
Significant Figures in Measurement
The numbers of measured quantities, unlike defined or directly counted quantities, are not exact. To measure
the volume of liquid in a graduated cylinder, you should make a reading at the bottom of the meniscus, the
lowest point on the curved surface of the liquid.
FIGURE1.26 To measure the volume of liquid in this graduated cylinder, you must mentally subdivide the distance
between the 21 and 22 mL marks into tenths of a milliliter, and then make a reading (estimate) at the bottom of the
meniscus.
Refer to the illustration inFigure 1.26. The bottom of the meniscus in this case clearly lies between the 21 and
22 markings, meaning the liquid volume iscertainlygreater than 21 mL but less than 22 mL. The meniscus
appears to be a bit closer to the 22-mL mark than to the 21-mL mark, and so a reasonable estimate of the
liquid’s volume would be 21.6 mL. In the number 21.6, then, the digits 2 and 1 are certain, but the 6 is an
estimate. Some people might estimate the meniscus position to be equally distant from each of the markings
and estimate the tenth-place digit as 5, while others may think it to be even closer to the 22-mL mark and
estimate this digit to be 7. Note that it would be pointless to attempt to estimate a digit for the hundredths
place, given that the tenths-place digit is uncertain. In general, numerical scales such as the one on this
graduated cylinder will permit measurements to one-tenth of the smallest scale division. The scale in this case
has 1-mL divisions, and so volumes may be measured to the nearest 0.1 mL.
This concept holds true for all measurements, even if you do not actively make an estimate. If you place a
quarter on a standard electronic balance, you may obtain a reading of 6.72 g. The digits 6 and 7 are certain,
and the 2 indicates that the mass of the quarter is likely between 6.71 and 6.73 grams. The quarter weighs
about6.72 grams, with a nominal uncertainty in the measurement of ± 0.01 gram. If the coin is weighed on a
more sensitive balance, the mass might be 6.723 g. This means its mass lies between 6.722 and 6.724 grams,
an uncertainty of 0.001 gram. Every measurement has someuncertainty, which depends on the device used
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 49
1.5 • Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision 35
(and the user’s ability). All of the digits in a measurement, including the uncertain last digit, are called
significant figuresorsignificant digits. Note that zero may be a measured value; for example, if you stand on
a scale that shows weight to the nearest pound and it shows “120,” then the 1 (hundreds), 2 (tens) and 0 (ones)
are all significant (measured) values.
A measurement result is properly reported when its significant digits accurately represent the certainty of the
measurement process. But what if you were analyzing a reported value and trying to determine what is
significant and what is not? Well, for starters, all nonzero digits are significant, and it is only zeros that require
some thought. We will use the terms “leading,” “trailing,” and “captive” for the zeros and will consider how to
deal with them.
Starting with the first nonzero digit on the left, count this digit and all remaining digits to the right. This is the
number of significant figures in the measurement unless the last digit is a trailing zero lying to the left of the
decimal point.
Captive zeros result from measurement and are therefore always significant. Leading zeros, however, are
never significant—they merely tell us where the decimal point is located.
The leading zeros in this example are not significant. We could use exponential notation (as described in
Appendix B) and express the number as 8.32407 10−3; then the number 8.32407 contains all of the
significant figures, and 10−3locates the decimal point.
The number of significant figures is uncertain in a number that ends with a zero to the left of the decimal point
location. The zeros in the measurement 1,300 grams could be significant or they could simply indicate where
the decimal point is located. The ambiguity can be resolved with the use of exponential notation: 1.3 103(two
significant figures), 1.30 103(three significant figures, if the tens place was measured), or 1.300 103(four
significant figures, if the ones place was also measured). In cases where only the decimal-formatted number is
available, it is prudent to assume that all trailing zeros are not significant.
When determining significant figures, be sure to pay attention to reported values and think about the
measurement and significant figures in terms of what is reasonable or likely when evaluating whether the
PAGE: 50
36 1 • Essential Ideas
value makes sense. For example, the official January 2014 census reported the resident population of the US
as 317,297,725. Do you think the US population was correctly determined to the reported nine significant
figures, that is, to the exact number of people? People are constantly being born, dying, or moving into or out of
the country, and assumptions are made to account for the large number of people who are not actually
counted. Because of these uncertainties, it might be more reasonable to expect that we know the population to
within perhaps a million or so, in which case the population should be reported as 3.17 108people.
Significant Figures in Calculations
A second important principle of uncertainty is that results calculated from a measurement are at least as
uncertain as the measurement itself. Take the uncertainty in measurements into account to avoid
misrepresenting the uncertainty in calculated results. One way to do this is to report the result of a calculation
with the correct number of significant figures, which is determined by the following three rules forrounding
numbers:
1. When adding or subtracting numbers, round the result to the same number of decimal places as the
number with the least number of decimal places (the least certain value in terms of addition and
subtraction).
2. When multiplying or dividing numbers, round the result to the same number of digits as the number with
the least number of significant figures (the least certain value in terms of multiplication and division).
3. If the digit to be dropped (the one immediately to the right of the digit to be retained) is less than 5, “round
down” and leave the retained digit unchanged; if it is more than 5, “round up” and increase the retained
digit by 1. If the dropped digit is 5, and it’s either the last digit in the number or it’s followed only by zeros,
round up or down, whichever yields an even value for the retained digit. If any nonzero digits follow the
dropped 5, round up. (The last part of this rule may strike you as a bit odd, but it’s based on reliable
statistics and is aimed at avoiding any bias when dropping the digit “5,” since it is equally close to both
possible values of the retained digit.)
The following examples illustrate the application of this rule in rounding a few different numbers to three
significant figures:
• 0.028675 rounds “up” to 0.0287 (the dropped digit, 7, is greater than 5)
• 18.3384 rounds “down” to 18.3 (the dropped digit, 3, is less than 5)
• 6.8752 rounds “up” to 6.88 (the dropped digit is 5, and a nonzero digit follows it)
• 92.85 rounds “down” to 92.8 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
Let’s work through these rules with a few examples.
EXAMPLE 1.3
Rounding Numbers
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:
(a) 31.57 (to two significant figures)
(b) 8.1649 (to three significant figures)
(c) 0.051065 (to four significant figures)
(d) 0.90275 (to four significant figures)
Solution
(a) 31.57 rounds “up” to 32 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
(b) 8.1649 rounds “down” to 8.16 (the dropped digit, 4, is less than 5)
(c) 0.051065 rounds “down” to 0.05106 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
(d) 0.90275 rounds “up” to 0.9028 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 51
1.5 • Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision 37
Check Your Learning
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:
(a) 0.424 (to two significant figures)
(b) 0.0038661 (to three significant figures)
(c) 421.25 (to four significant figures)
(d) 28,683.5 (to five significant figures)
Answer:
(a) 0.42; (b) 0.00387; (c) 421.2; (d) 28,684
EXAMPLE 1.4
Addition and Subtraction with Significant Figures
Rule: When adding or subtracting numbers, round the result to the same number of decimal places as the
number with the fewest decimal places (i.e., the least certain value in terms of addition and subtraction).
(a) Add 1.0023 g and 4.383 g.
(b) Subtract 421.23 g from 486 g.
Solution
(a)
Answer is 5.385 g (round to the thousandths place; three decimal places)
(b)
Answer is 65 g (round to the ones place; no decimal places)
Check Your Learning
(a) Add 2.334 mL and 0.31 mL.
(b) Subtract 55.8752 m from 56.533 m.
Answer:
(a) 2.64 mL; (b) 0.658 m
PAGE: 52
38 1 • Essential Ideas
EXAMPLE 1.5
Multiplication and Division with Significant Figures
Rule: When multiplying or dividing numbers, round the result to the same number of digits as the number
with the fewest significant figures (the least certain value in terms of multiplication and division).
(a) Multiply 0.6238 cm by 6.6 cm.
(b) Divide 421.23 g by 486 mL.
Solution
(a)
(b)
Check Your Learning
(a) Multiply 2.334 cm and 0.320 cm.
(b) Divide 55.8752 m by 56.53 s.
Answer:
(a) 0.747 cm2(b) 0.9884 m/s
In the midst of all these technicalities, it is important to keep in mind the reason for these rules about
significant figures and rounding—to correctly represent the certainty of the values reported and to ensure that
a calculated result is not represented as being more certain than the least certain value used in the calculation.
EXAMPLE 1.6
Calculation with Significant Figures
One common bathtub is 13.44 dm long, 5.920 dm wide, and 2.54 dm deep. Assume that the tub is rectangular
and calculate its approximate volume in liters.
Solution
Check Your Learning
What is the density of a liquid with a mass of 31.1415 g and a volume of 30.13 cm3?
Answer:
1.034 g/mL
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 53
1.5 • Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision 39
EXAMPLE 1.7
Experimental Determination of Density Using Water Displacement
A piece of rebar is weighed and then submerged in a graduated cylinder partially filled with water, with results
as shown.
(a) Use these values to determine the density of this piece of rebar.
(b) Rebar is mostly iron. Does your result in (a) support this statement? How?
Solution
The volume of the piece of rebar is equal to the volume of the water displaced:
(rounded to the nearest 0.1 mL, per the rule for addition and subtraction)
The density is the mass-to-volume ratio:
(rounded to two significant figures, per the rule for multiplication and division)
FromTable 1.4, the density of iron is 7.9 g/cm3, very close to that of rebar, which lends some support to the fact
that rebar is mostly iron.
Check Your Learning
An irregularly shaped piece of a shiny yellowish material is weighed and then submerged in a graduated
cylinder, with results as shown.
PAGE: 54
40 1 • Essential Ideas
(a) Use these values to determine the density of this material.
(b) Do you have any reasonable guesses as to the identity of this material? Explain your reasoning.
Answer:
(a) 19 g/cm3; (b) It is likely gold; the right appearance for gold and very close to the density given for gold in
Table 1.4.
Accuracy and Precision
Scientists typically make repeated measurements of a quantity to ensure the quality of their findings and to
evaluate both theprecisionand theaccuracyof their results. Measurements are said to be precise if they yield
very similar results when repeated in the same manner. A measurement is considered accurate if it yields a
result that is very close to the true or accepted value. Precise values agree with each other; accurate values
agree with a true value. These characterizations can be extended to other contexts, such as the results of an
archery competition (Figure 1.27).
FIGURE1.27 (a) These arrows are close to both the bull’s eye and one another, so they are both accurate and
precise. (b) These arrows are close to one another but not on target, so they are precise but not accurate. (c) These
arrows are neither on target nor close to one another, so they are neither accurate nor precise.
Suppose a quality control chemist at a pharmaceutical company is tasked with checking the accuracy and
precision of three different machines that are meant to dispense 10 ounces (296 mL) of cough syrup into
storage bottles. She proceeds to use each machine to fill five bottles and then carefully determines the actual
volume dispensed, obtaining the results tabulated inTable 1.5.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 55
1.6 • Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results 41
Volume (mL) of Cough Medicine Delivered by 10-oz (296 mL) Dispensers
Dispenser #1 Dispenser #2 Dispenser #3
283.3 298.3 296.1
284.1 294.2 295.9
283.9 296.0 296.1
284.0 297.8 296.0
284.1 293.9 296.1
TABLE1.5
Considering these results, she will report that dispenser #1 is precise (values all close to one another, within a
few tenths of a milliliter) but not accurate (none of the values are close to the target value of 296 mL, each
being more than 10 mL too low). Results for dispenser #2 represent improved accuracy (each volume is less
than 3 mL away from 296 mL) but worse precision (volumes vary by more than 4 mL). Finally, she can report
that dispenser #3 is working well, dispensing cough syrup both accurately (all volumes within 0.1 mL of the
target volume) and precisely (volumes differing from each other by no more than 0.2 mL).
1.6 Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the dimensional analysis (factor label) approach to mathematical calculations involving quantities
• Use dimensional analysis to carry out unit conversions for a given property and computations involving two or
more properties
It is often the case that a quantity of interest may not be easy (or even possible) to measure directly but instead
must be calculated from other directly measured properties and appropriate mathematical relationships. For
example, consider measuring the average speed of an athlete running sprints. This is typically accomplished
by measuring thetimerequired for the athlete to run from the starting line to the finish line, and thedistance
between these two lines, and then computingspeedfrom the equation that relates these three properties:
An Olympic-quality sprinter can run 100 m in approximately 10 s, corresponding to an average speed of
Note that this simple arithmetic involves dividing the numbers of each measured quantity to yield the number
of the computed quantity (100/10 = 10)and likewisedividing the units of each measured quantity to yield the
unit of the computed quantity (m/s = m/s). Now, consider using this same relation to predict the time required
for a person running at this speed to travel a distance of 25 m. The same relation among the three properties is
used, but in this case, the two quantities provided are a speed (10 m/s) and a distance (25 m). To yield the
sought property, time, the equation must be rearranged appropriately:
The time can then be computed as:
PAGE: 56
42 1 • Essential Ideas
Again, arithmetic on the numbers (25/10 = 2.5) was accompanied by the same arithmetic on the units (m/(m/s)
= s) to yield the number and unit of the result, 2.5 s. Note that, just as for numbers, when a unit is divided by an
identical unit (in this case, m/m), the result is “1”—or, as commonly phrased, the units “cancel.”
These calculations are examples of a versatile mathematical approach known asdimensional analysis(or the
factor-label method). Dimensional analysis is based on this premise:the units of quantities must be subjected
to the same mathematical operations as their associated numbers. This method can be applied to
computations ranging from simple unit conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involving
several different quantities.
Conversion Factors and Dimensional Analysis
A ratio of two equivalent quantities expressed with different measurement units can be used as aunit
conversion factor. For example, the lengths of 2.54 cm and 1 in. are equivalent (by definition), and so a unit
conversion factor may be derived from the ratio,
Several other commonly used conversion factors are given inTable 1.6.
Common Conversion Factors
Length Volume Mass
1 m = 1.0936 yd 1 L = 1.0567 qt 1 kg = 2.2046 lb
1 in. = 2.54 cm (exact) 1 qt = 0.94635 L 1 lb = 453.59 g
1 km = 0.62137 mi 1 ft3= 28.317 L 1 (avoirdupois) oz = 28.349 g
1 mi = 1609.3 m 1 tbsp = 14.787 mL 1 (troy) oz = 31.103 g
TABLE1.6
When a quantity (such as distance in inches) is multiplied by an appropriate unit conversion factor, the
quantity is converted to an equivalent value with different units (such as distance in centimeters). For
example, a basketball player’s vertical jump of 34 inches can be converted to centimeters by:
Since this simple arithmetic involvesquantities, the premise of dimensional analysis requires that we multiply
bothnumbers and units. The numbers of these two quantities are multiplied to yield the number of the
product quantity, 86, whereas the units are multiplied to yield . Just as for numbers, a ratio of identical
units is also numerically equal to one, and the unit product thus simplifies tocm. (When identical
units divide to yield a factor of 1, they are said to “cancel.”) Dimensional analysis may be used to confirm the
proper application of unit conversion factors as demonstrated in the following example.
EXAMPLE 1.8
Using a Unit Conversion Factor
The mass of a competition frisbee is 125 g. Convert its mass to ounces using the unit conversion factor derived
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 57
1.6 • Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results 43
from the relationship 1 oz = 28.349 g (Table 1.6).
Solution
Given the conversion factor, the mass in ounces may be derived using an equation similar to the one used for
converting length from inches to centimeters.
The unit conversion factor may be represented as:
The correct unit conversion factor is the ratio that cancels the units of grams and leaves ounces.
Check Your Learning
Convert a volume of 9.345 qt to liters.
Answer:
8.844 L
Beyond simple unit conversions, the factor-label method can be used to solve more complex problems
involving computations. Regardless of the details, the basic approach is the same—all thefactorsinvolved in
the calculation must be appropriately oriented to ensure that theirlabels(units) will appropriately cancel and/
or combine to yield the desired unit in the result. As your study of chemistry continues, you will encounter
many opportunities to apply this approach.
EXAMPLE 1.9
Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known Mathematical Relations
What is the density of common antifreeze in units of g/mL? A 4.00-qt sample of the antifreeze weighs 9.26 lb.
Solution
Since , we need to divide the mass in grams by the volume in milliliters. In general: the
number of units of B = the number of units of A unit conversion factor. The necessary conversion factors are
given inTable 1.6: 1 lb = 453.59 g; 1 L = 1.0567 qt; 1 L = 1,000 mL. Mass may be converted from pounds to
grams as follows:
Volume may be converted from quarts to milliliters via two steps:
Step 1.Convert quarts to liters.
Step 2.Convert liters to milliliters.
Then,
PAGE: 58
44 1 • Essential Ideas
Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses three unit conversion factors sequentially as
follows:
Check Your Learning
What is the volume in liters of 1.000 oz, given that 1 L = 1.0567 qt and 1 qt = 32 oz (exactly)?
Answer:
2.956 × 10−2L
EXAMPLE 1.10
Computing Quantities from Measurement Results and Known Mathematical Relations
While being driven from Philadelphia to Atlanta, a distance of about 1250 km, a 2014 Lamborghini Aventador
Roadster uses 213 L gasoline.
(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Roadster get during this trip?
(b) If gasoline costs $3.80 per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?
Solution
(a) First convert distance from kilometers to miles:
and then convert volume from liters to gallons:
Finally,
Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way that uses all the conversion factors sequentially, as
follows:
(b) Using the previously calculated volume in gallons, we find:
Check Your Learning
A Toyota Prius Hybrid uses 59.7 L gasoline to drive from San Francisco to Seattle, a distance of 1300 km (two
significant digits).
(a) What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did the Prius get during this trip?
(b) If gasoline costs $3.90 per gallon, what was the fuel cost for this trip?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 59
1.6 • Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results 45
Answer:
(a) 51 mpg; (b) $62
Conversion of Temperature Units
We use the wordtemperatureto refer to the hotness or coldness of a substance. One way we measure a change
in temperature is to use the fact that most substances expand when their temperature increases and contract
when their temperature decreases. The liquid in a common glass thermometer changes its volume as the
temperature changes, and the position of the trapped liquid's surface along a printed scale may be used as a
measure of temperature.
Temperature scales are defined relative to selected reference temperatures: Two of the most commonly used
are the freezing and boiling temperatures of water at a specified atmospheric pressure. On the Celsius scale, 0
°C is defined as the freezing temperature of water and 100 °C as the boiling temperature of water. The space
between the two temperatures is divided into 100 equal intervals, which we call degrees. On theFahrenheit
scale, the freezing point of water is defined as 32 °F and the boiling temperature as 212 °F. The space between
these two points on a Fahrenheit thermometer is divided into 180 equal parts (degrees).
Defining the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales as described in the previous paragraph results in a
slightly more complex relationship between temperature values on these two scales than for different units of
measure for other properties. Most measurement units for a given property are directly proportional to one
another (y = mx). Using familiar length units as one example:
where y = length in feet, x = length in inches, and the proportionality constant, m, is the conversion factor. The
Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales, however, do not share a common zero point, and so the
relationship between these two scales is a linear one rather than a proportional one (y = mx + b). Consequently,
converting a temperature from one of these scales into the other requires more than simple multiplication by a
conversion factor, m, it also must take into account differences in the scales’ zero points (b).
The linear equation relating Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures is easily derived from the two temperatures
used to define each scale. Representing the Celsius temperature asxand the Fahrenheit temperature asy, the
slope,m, is computed to be:
They-intercept of the equation,b, is then calculated using either of the equivalent temperature pairs, (100 °C,
212 °F) or (0 °C, 32 °F), as:
The equation relating the temperature (T) scales is then:
An abbreviated form of this equation that omits the measurement units is:
Rearrangement of this equation yields the form useful for converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius:
PAGE: 60
46 1 • Essential Ideas
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (K). Unlike the Celsius and
Fahrenheit scales, the kelvin scale is an absolute temperature scale in which 0 (zero) K corresponds to the
lowest temperature that can theoretically be achieved. Since the kelvin temperature scale is absolute, a degree
symbol is not included in the unit abbreviation, K. The early 19th-century discovery of the relationship
between a gas’s volume and temperature suggested that the volume of a gas would be zero at −273.15 °C. In
1848, British physicist William Thompson, who later adopted the title of Lord Kelvin, proposed an absolute
temperature scale based on this concept (further treatment of this topic is provided in this text’s chapter on
gases).
The freezing temperature of water on this scale is 273.15 K and its boiling temperature is 373.15 K. Notice the
numerical difference in these two reference temperatures is 100, the same as for the Celsius scale, and so the
linear relation between these two temperature scales will exhibit a slope of . Following the same approach,
the equations for converting between the kelvin and Celsius temperature scales are derived to be:
The 273.15 in these equations has been determined experimentally, so it is not exact.Figure 1.28shows the
relationship among the three temperature scales.
FIGURE1.28 The Fahrenheit, Celsius, and kelvin temperature scales are compared.
Although the kelvin (absolute) temperature scale is the official SI temperature scale, Celsius is commonly used
in many scientific contexts and is the scale of choice for nonscience contexts in almost all areas of the world.
Very few countries (the U.S. and its territories, the Bahamas, Belize, Cayman Islands, and Palau) still use
Fahrenheit for weather, medicine, and cooking.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 61
1.6 • Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results 47
EXAMPLE 1.11
Conversion from Celsius
Normal body temperature has been commonly accepted as 37.0 °C (although it varies depending on time of
day and method of measurement, as well as among individuals). What is this temperature on the kelvin scale
and on the Fahrenheit scale?
Solution
Check Your Learning
Convert 80.92 °C to K and °F.
Answer:
354.07 K, 177.7 °F
EXAMPLE 1.12
Conversion from Fahrenheit
Baking a ready-made pizza calls for an oven temperature of 450 °F. If you are in Europe, and your oven
thermometer uses the Celsius scale, what is the setting? What is the kelvin temperature?
Solution
Check Your Learning
Convert 50 °F to °C and K.
Answer:
10 °C, 280 K
PAGE: 62
48 1 • Key Terms
Key Terms
accuracy how closely a measurement aligns with a predicts some aspect of the natural world
correct value law of conservation of matter when matter
atom smallest particle of an element that can enter converts from one type to another or changes
into a chemical combination form, there is no detectable change in the total
Celsius (°C) unit of temperature; water freezes at 0 amount of matter present
°C and boils at 100 °C on this scale length measure of one dimension of an object
chemical change change producing a different liquid state of matter that has a definite volume but
kind of matter from the original kind of matter indefinite shape
chemical property behavior that is related to the liter (L) (also, cubic decimeter) unit of volume; 1 L
change of one kind of matter into another kind of = 1,000 cm3
matter macroscopic domain realm of everyday things
chemistry study of the composition, properties, that are large enough to sense directly by human
and interactions of matter sight and touch
compound pure substance that can be mass fundamental property indicating amount of
decomposed into two or more elements matter
cubic centimeter (cm3or cc) volume of a cube matter anything that occupies space and has mass
with an edge length of exactly 1 cm meter (m) standard metric and SI unit of length; 1
cubic meter (m3) SI unit of volume m = approximately 1.094 yards
density ratio of mass to volume for a substance or microscopic domain realm of things that are
object much too small to be sensed directly
dimensional analysis (also, factor-label method) milliliter (mL) 1/1,000 of a liter; equal to 1 cm3
versatile mathematical approach that can be mixture matter that can be separated into its
applied to computations ranging from simple unit components by physical means
conversions to more complex, multi-step molecule bonded collection of two or more atoms
calculations involving several different quantities of the same or different elements
element substance that is composed of a single physical change change in the state or properties
type of atom; a substance that cannot be of matter that does not involve a change in its
decomposed by a chemical change chemical composition
exact number number derived by counting or by physical property characteristic of matter that is
definition not associated with any change in its chemical
extensive property property of a substance that composition
depends on the amount of the substance plasma gaseous state of matter containing a large
Fahrenheit unit of temperature; water freezes at number of electrically charged atoms and/or
32 °F and boils at 212 °F on this scale molecules
gas state in which matter has neither definite precision how closely a measurement matches the
volume nor shape same measurement when repeated
heterogeneous mixture combination of pure substance homogeneous substance that has
substances with a composition that varies from a constant composition
point to point rounding procedure used to ensure that calculated
homogeneous mixture (also, solution) results properly reflect the uncertainty in the
combination of substances with a composition measurements used in the calculation
that is uniform throughout scientific method path of discovery that leads
hypothesis tentative explanation of observations from question and observation to law or
that acts as a guide for gathering and checking hypothesis to theory, combined with
information experimental verification of the hypothesis and
intensive property property of a substance that is any necessary modification of the theory
independent of the amount of the substance second (s) SI unit of time
kelvin (K) SI unit of temperature; 273.15 K = 0 ºC SI units (International System of Units)
kilogram (kg) standard SI unit of mass; 1 kg = standards fixed by international agreement in the
approximately 2.2 pounds International System of Units (Le Système
law statement that summarizes a vast number of International d’Unités)
experimental observations, and describes or significant figures (also, significant digits) all of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 63
1 • Key Equations 49
the measured digits in a determination, including theory well-substantiated, comprehensive,
the uncertain last digit testable explanation of a particular aspect of
solid state of matter that is rigid, has a definite nature
shape, and has a fairly constant volume uncertainty estimate of amount by which
symbolic domain specialized language used to measurement differs from true value
represent components of the macroscopic and unit standard of comparison for measurements
microscopic domains, such as chemical symbols, unit conversion factor ratio of equivalent
chemical formulas, chemical equations, graphs, quantities expressed with different units; used to
drawings, and calculations convert from one unit to a different unit
temperature intensive property representing the volume amount of space occupied by an object
hotness or coldness of matter weight force that gravity exerts on an object
Key Equations
Summary
1.1Chemistry in Context composition from point to point; homogeneous
mixtures have the same composition from point to
Chemistry deals with the composition, structure,
point. Pure substances consist of only one type of
and properties of matter, and the ways by which
matter. A pure substance can be an element, which
various forms of matter may be interconverted.
consists of only one type of atom and cannot be
Thus, it occupies a central place in the study and
broken down by a chemical change, or a compound,
practice of science and technology. Chemists use the
which consists of two or more types of atoms.
scientific method to perform experiments, pose
hypotheses, and formulate laws and develop 1.3Physical and Chemical Properties
theories, so that they can better understand the
All substances have distinct physical and chemical
behavior of the natural world. To do so, they operate
properties, and may undergo physical or chemical
in the macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic
changes. Physical properties, such as hardness and
domains. Chemists measure, analyze, purify, and
boiling point, and physical changes, such as melting
synthesize a wide variety of substances that are
or freezing, do not involve a change in the
important to our lives.
composition of matter. Chemical properties, such
1.2Phases and Classification of Matter flammability and acidity, and chemical changes,
such as rusting, involve production of matter that
Matter is anything that occupies space and has
differs from that present beforehand.
mass. The basic building block of matter is the atom,
the smallest unit of an element that can enter into Measurable properties fall into one of two categories.
combinations with atoms of the same or other Extensive properties depend on the amount of
elements. In many substances, atoms are combined matter present, for example, the mass of gold.
into molecules. On earth, matter commonly exists in Intensive properties do not depend on the amount of
three states: solids, of fixed shape and volume; matter present, for example, the density of gold.
liquids, of variable shape but fixed volume; and Heat is an example of an extensive property, and
gases, of variable shape and volume. Under high- temperature is an example of an intensive property.
temperature conditions, matter also can exist as a
1.4Measurements
plasma. Most matter is a mixture: It is composed of
two or more types of matter that can be present in Measurements provide quantitative information that
varying amounts and can be separated by physical is critical in studying and practicing chemistry. Each
means. Heterogeneous mixtures vary in measurement has an amount, a unit for comparison,
PAGE: 64
50 1 • Exercises
and an uncertainty. Measurements can be reflected in how the value is rounded. Quantities are
represented in either decimal or scientific notation. characterized with regard to accuracy (closeness to a
Scientists primarily use SI (International System) true or accepted value) and precision (variation
units such as meters, seconds, and kilograms, as among replicate measurement results).
well as derived units, such as liters (for volume) and
1.6Mathematical Treatment of
g/cm3(for density). In many cases, it is convenient to
Measurement Results
use prefixes that yield fractional and multiple units,
such as microseconds (10−6seconds) and megahertz Measurements are made using a variety of units. It is
(106hertz), respectively. often useful or necessary to convert a measured
quantity from one unit into another. These
1.5Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy,
conversions are accomplished using unit conversion
and Precision
factors, which are derived by simple applications of
Quantities can be defined or measured. Measured a mathematical approach called the factor-label
quantities have an associated uncertainty that is method or dimensional analysis. This strategy is
represented by the number of significant figures in also employed to calculate sought quantities using
the quantity’s number. The uncertainty of a measured quantities and appropriate mathematical
calculated quantity depends on the uncertainties in relations.
the quantities used in the calculation and is
Exercises
1.1Chemistry in Context
1. Explain how you could experimentally determine whether the outside temperature is higher or lower than
0 °C (32 °F) without using a thermometer.
2. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain
your reasoning.
(a) Falling barometric pressure precedes the onset of bad weather.
(b) All life on earth has evolved from a common, primitive organism through the process of natural
selection.
(c) My truck’s gas mileage has dropped significantly, probably because it’s due for a tune-up.
3. Identify each of the following statements as being most similar to a hypothesis, a law, or a theory. Explain
your reasoning.
(a) The pressure of a sample of gas is directly proportional to the temperature of the gas.
(b) Matter consists of tiny particles that can combine in specific ratios to form substances with specific
properties.
(c) At a higher temperature, solids (such as salt or sugar) will dissolve better in water.
4. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain,
or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For any in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols
for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature.
(a) The mass of alead pipeis 14 lb.
(b) The mass of a certainchlorine atomis 35 amu.
(c) A bottle with a label that readsAlcontains aluminum metal.
(d)Alis the symbol for an aluminum atom.
5. Identify each of the underlined items as a part of either the macroscopic domain, the microscopic domain,
or the symbolic domain of chemistry. For those in the symbolic domain, indicate whether they are symbols
for a macroscopic or a microscopic feature.
(a) A certain molecule contains oneHatom and one Cl atom.
(b)Copper wirehas a density of about 8 g/cm3.
(c) The bottle contains 15 grams ofNi powder.
(d) Asulfur moleculeis composed of eight sulfur atoms.
6. According to one theory, the pressure of a gas increases as its volume decreases because the molecules in
the gas have to move a shorter distance to hit the walls of the container. Does this theory follow a
macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 65
1 • Exercises 51
7. The amount of heat required to melt 2 lbs of ice is twice the amount of heat required to melt 1 lb of ice. Is
this observation a macroscopic or microscopic description of chemical behavior? Explain your answer.
1.2Phases and Classification of Matter
8. Why is an object’s mass, rather than its weight, used to indicate the amount of matter it contains?
9. What properties distinguish solids from liquids? Liquids from gases? Solids from gases?
10. How does a heterogeneous mixture differ from a homogeneous mixture? How are they similar?
11. How does a homogeneous mixture differ from a pure substance? How are they similar?
12. How does an element differ from a compound? How are they similar?
13. How do molecules of elements and molecules of compounds differ? In what ways are they similar?
14. How does an atom differ from a molecule? In what ways are they similar?
15. Many of the items you purchase are mixtures of pure compounds. Select three of these commercial
products and prepare a list of the ingredients that are pure compounds.
16. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture:
(a) copper
(b) water
(c) nitrogen
(d) sulfur
(e) air
(f) sucrose
(g) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains two iodine atoms
(h) gasoline
17. Classify each of the following as an element, a compound, or a mixture:
(a) iron
(b) oxygen
(c) mercury oxide
(d) pancake syrup
(e) carbon dioxide
(f) a substance composed of molecules each of which contains one hydrogen atom and one chlorine atom
(g) baking soda
(h) baking powder
18. A sulfur atom and a sulfur molecule are not identical. What is the difference?
19. How are the molecules in oxygen gas, the molecules in hydrogen gas, and water molecules similar? How
do they differ?
20. Why are astronauts in space said to be “weightless,” but not “massless”?
21. Prepare a list of the principal chemicals consumed and produced during the operation of an automobile.
22. Matter is everywhere around us. Make a list by name of fifteen different kinds of matter that you encounter
every day. Your list should include (and label at least one example of each) the following: a solid, a liquid, a
gas, an element, a compound, a homogenous mixture, a heterogeneous mixture, and a pure substance.
23. When elemental iron corrodes it combines with oxygen in the air to ultimately form red brown iron(III)
oxide called rust. (a) If a shiny iron nail with an initial mass of 23.2 g is weighed after being coated in a
layer of rust, would you expect the mass to have increased, decreased, or remained the same? Explain. (b)
If the mass of the iron nail increases to 24.1 g, what mass of oxygen combined with the iron?
PAGE: 66
52 1 • Exercises
24. As stated in the text, convincing examples that demonstrate the law of conservation of matter outside of
the laboratory are few and far between. Indicate whether the mass would increase, decrease, or stay the
same for the following scenarios where chemical reactions take place:
(a) Exactly one pound of bread dough is placed in a baking tin. The dough is cooked in an oven at 350 °F
releasing a wonderful aroma of freshly baked bread during the cooking process. Is the mass of the baked
loaf less than, greater than, or the same as the one pound of original dough? Explain.
(b) When magnesium burns in air a white flaky ash of magnesium oxide is produced. Is the mass of
magnesium oxide less than, greater than, or the same as the original piece of magnesium? Explain.
(c) Antoine Lavoisier, the French scientist credited with first stating the law of conservation of matter,
heated a mixture of tin and air in a sealed flask to produce tin oxide. Did the mass of the sealed flask and
contents decrease, increase, or remain the same after the heating?
25. Yeast converts glucose to ethanol and carbon dioxide during anaerobic fermentation as depicted in the
simple chemical equation here:
(a) If 200.0 g of glucose is fully converted, what will be the total mass of ethanol and carbon dioxide
produced?
(b) If the fermentation is carried out in an open container, would you expect the mass of the container and
contents after fermentation to be less than, greater than, or the same as the mass of the container and
contents before fermentation? Explain.
(c) If 97.7 g of carbon dioxide is produced, what mass of ethanol is produced?
1.3Physical and Chemical Properties
26. Classify the six underlined properties in the following paragraph as chemical or physical:
Fluorine is a pale yellowgasthatreacts with most substances. The free elementmelts at −220 °Candboils
at −188 °C. Finely dividedmetals burn in fluorinewith a bright flame.Nineteen grams of fluorine will
react with 1.0 gram of hydrogen.
27. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical:
(a) condensation of steam
(b) burning of gasoline
(c) souring of milk
(d) dissolving of sugar in water
(e) melting of gold
28. Classify each of the following changes as physical or chemical:
(a) coal burning
(b) ice melting
(c) mixing chocolate syrup with milk
(d) explosion of a firecracker
(e) magnetizing of a screwdriver
29. The volume of a sample of oxygen gas changed from 10 mL to 11 mL as the temperature changed. Is this a
chemical or physical change?
30. A 2.0-liter volume of hydrogen gas combined with 1.0 liter of oxygen gas to produce 2.0 liters of water
vapor. Does oxygen undergo a chemical or physical change?
31. Explain the difference between extensive properties and intensive properties.
32. Identify the following properties as either extensive or intensive.
(a) volume
(b) temperature
(c) humidity
(d) heat
(e) boiling point
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 67
1 • Exercises 53
33. The density (d) of a substance is an intensive property that is defined as the ratio of its mass (m) to its
volume (V).
Considering that mass and volume are both extensive properties, explain why their ratio, density, is
intensive.
1.4Measurements
34. Is one liter about an ounce, a pint, a quart, or a gallon?
35. Is a meter about an inch, a foot, a yard, or a mile?
36. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements:
(a) the length of a marathon race (26 miles 385 yards)
(b) the mass of an automobile
(c) the volume of a swimming pool
(d) the speed of an airplane
(e) the density of gold
(f) the area of a football field
(g) the maximum temperature at the South Pole on April 1, 1913
37. Indicate the SI base units or derived units that are appropriate for the following measurements:
(a) the mass of the moon
(b) the distance from Dallas to Oklahoma City
(c) the speed of sound
(d) the density of air
(e) the temperature at which alcohol boils
(f) the area of the state of Delaware
(g) the volume of a flu shot or a measles vaccination
38. Give the name and symbol of the prefixes used with SI units to indicate multiplication by the following
exact quantities.
(a) 103
(b) 10−2
(c) 0.1
(d) 10−3
(e) 1,000,000
(f) 0.000001
39. Give the name of the prefix and the quantity indicated by the following symbols that are used with SI base
units.
(a) c
(b) d
(c) G
(d) k
(e) m
(f) n
(g) p
(h) T
40. A large piece of jewelry has a mass of 132.6 g. A graduated cylinder initially contains 48.6 mL water. When
the jewelry is submerged in the graduated cylinder, the total volume increases to 61.2 mL.
(a) Determine the density of this piece of jewelry.
(b) Assuming that the jewelry is made from only one substance, what substance is it likely to be? Explain.
PAGE: 68
54 1 • Exercises
41. Visit thisdensity simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden)and click the "turn fluid into water"
button to adjust the density of liquid in the beaker to 1.00 g/mL.
(a) Use the water displacement approach to measure the mass and volume of the unknown material
(select the green block with question marks).
(b) Use the measured mass and volume data from step (a) to calculate the density of the unknown
material.
(c) Link out to the link provided.
(d) Assuming this material is a copper-containing gemstone, identify its three most likely identities by
comparing the measured density to the values tabulated atthis gemstone density guide
(https://www.ajsgem.com/articles/gemstone-density-definitive-guide.html).
(e) How are mass and density related for blocks of the same volume?
42. Visit thisdensity simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden)and click the "reset" button to
ensure all simulator parameters are at their default values.
(a) Use the water displacement approach to measure the mass and volume of the red block.
(b) Use the measured mass and volume data from step (a) to calculate the density of the red block.
(c) Use the vertical green slide control to adjust the fluid density to values well above, then well below, and
finally nearly equal to the density of the red block, reporting your observations.
43. Visit thisdensity simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetmasvolden)and click the “turn fluid into water”
button to adjust the density of liquid in the beaker to 1.00 g/mL. Change the block material to foam, and
then wait patiently until the foam block stops bobbing up and down in the water.
(a) The foam block should be floating on the surface of the water (that is, only partially submerged). What
is the volume of water displaced?
(b) Use the water volume from part (a) and the density of water (1.00 g/mL) to calculate the mass of water
displaced.
(c) Remove and weigh the foam block. How does the block’s mass compare to the mass of displaced water
from part (b)?
1.5Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
44. Express each of the following numbers in scientific notation with correct significant figures:
(a) 711.0
(b) 0.239
(c) 90743
(d) 134.2
(e) 0.05499
(f) 10000.0
(g) 0.000000738592
45. Express each of the following numbers in exponential notation with correct significant figures:
(a) 704
(b) 0.03344
(c) 547.9
(d) 22086
(e) 1000.00
(f) 0.0000000651
(g) 0.007157
46. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some degree
of uncertainty:
(a) the number of eggs in a basket
(b) the mass of a dozen eggs
(c) the number of gallons of gasoline necessary to fill an automobile gas tank
(d) the number of cm in 2 m
(e) the mass of a textbook
(f) the time required to drive from San Francisco to Kansas City at an average speed of 53 mi/h
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 69
1 • Exercises 55
47. Indicate whether each of the following can be determined exactly or must be measured with some degree
of uncertainty:
(a) the number of seconds in an hour
(b) the number of pages in this book
(c) the number of grams in your weight
(d) the number of grams in 3 kilograms
(e) the volume of water you drink in one day
(f) the distance from San Francisco to Kansas City
48. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements?
(a) 38.7 g
(b) 2 1018m
(c) 3,486,002 kg
(d) 9.74150 10−4J
(e) 0.0613 cm3
(f) 17.0 kg
(g) 0.01400 g/mL
49. How many significant figures are contained in each of the following measurements?
(a) 53 cm
(b) 2.05 108m
(c) 86,002 J
(d) 9.740 104m/s
(e) 10.0613 m3
(f) 0.17 g/mL
(g) 0.88400 s
50. The following quantities were reported on the labels of commercial products. Determine the number of
significant figures in each.
(a) 0.0055 g active ingredients
(b) 12 tablets
(c) 3% hydrogen peroxide
(d) 5.5 ounces
(e) 473 mL
(f) 1.75% bismuth
(g) 0.001% phosphoric acid
(h) 99.80% inert ingredients
51. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures:
(a) 0.436
(b) 9.000
(c) 27.2
(d) 135
(e) 1.497 10−3
(f) 0.445
52. Round off each of the following numbers to two significant figures:
(a) 517
(b) 86.3
(c) 6.382 103
(d) 5.0008
(e) 22.497
(f) 0.885
PAGE: 70
56 1 • Exercises
53. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures.
(a) 628 342
(b) (5.63 102) (7.4 103)
(c)
(d) 8119 0.000023
(e) 14.98 + 27,340 + 84.7593
(f) 42.7 + 0.259
54. Perform the following calculations and report each answer with the correct number of significant figures.
(a) 62.8 34
(b) 0.147 + 0.0066 + 0.012
(c) 38 95 1.792
(d) 15 – 0.15 – 0.6155
(e)
(f) 140 + 7.68 + 0.014
(g) 28.7 – 0.0483
(h)
55. Consider the results of the archery contest shown in this figure.
(a) Which archer is most precise?
(b) Which archer is most accurate?
(c) Who is both least precise and least accurate?
56. Classify the following sets of measurements as accurate, precise, both, or neither.
(a) Checking for consistency in the weight of chocolate chip cookies: 17.27 g, 13.05 g, 19.46 g, 16.92 g
(b) Testing the volume of a batch of 25-mL pipettes: 27.02 mL, 26.99 mL, 26.97 mL, 27.01 mL
(c) Determining the purity of gold: 99.9999%, 99.9998%, 99.9998%, 99.9999%
1.6Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
57. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of:
(a) yards in 1 meter
(b) liters in 1 liquid quart
(c) pounds in 1 kilogram
58. Write conversion factors (as ratios) for the number of:
(a) kilometers in 1 mile
(b) liters in 1 cubic foot
(c) grams in 1 ounce
59. The label on a soft drink bottle gives the volume in two units: 2.0 L and 67.6 fl oz. Use this information to
derive a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant figures can you
justify in your conversion factor?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 71
1 • Exercises 57
60. The label on a box of cereal gives the mass of cereal in two units: 978 grams and 34.5 oz. Use this
information to find a conversion factor between the English and metric units. How many significant
figures can you justify in your conversion factor?
61. Soccer is played with a round ball having a circumference between 27 and 28 in. and a weight between 14
and 16 oz. What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?
62. A woman’s basketball has a circumference between 28.5 and 29.0 inches and a maximum weight of 20
ounces (two significant figures). What are these specifications in units of centimeters and grams?
63. How many milliliters of a soft drink are contained in a 12.0-oz can?
64. A barrel of oil is exactly 42 gal. How many liters of oil are in a barrel?
65. The diameter of a red blood cell is about 3 10−4in. What is its diameter in centimeters?
66. The distance between the centers of the two oxygen atoms in an oxygen molecule is 1.21 10−8cm. What
is this distance in inches?
67. Is a 197-lb weight lifter light enough to compete in a class limited to those weighing 90 kg or less?
68. A very good 197-lb weight lifter lifted 192 kg in a move called the clean and jerk. What was the mass of the
weight lifted in pounds?
69. Many medical laboratory tests are run using 5.0 μL blood serum. What is this volume in milliliters?
70. If an aspirin tablet contains 325 mg aspirin, how many grams of aspirin does it contain?
71. Use scientific (exponential) notation to express the following quantities in terms of the SI base units in
Table 1.2:
(a) 0.13 g
(b) 232 Gg
(c) 5.23 pm
(d) 86.3 mg
(e) 37.6 cm
(f) 54 μm
(g) 1 Ts
(h) 27 ps
(i) 0.15 mK
72. Complete the following conversions between SI units.
(a) 612 g = ________ mg
(b) 8.160 m = ________ cm
(c) 3779 μg = ________ g
(d) 781 mL = ________ L
(e) 4.18 kg = ________ g
(f) 27.8 m = ________ km
(g) 0.13 mL = ________ L
(h) 1738 km = ________ m
(i) 1.9 Gg = ________ g
73. Gasoline is sold by the liter in many countries. How many liters are required to fill a 12.0-gal gas tank?
74. Milk is sold by the liter in many countries. What is the volume of exactly 1/2 gal of milk in liters?
75. A long ton is defined as exactly 2240 lb. What is this mass in kilograms?
76. Make the conversion indicated in each of the following:
(a) the men’s world record long jump, 29 ft 4¼ in., to meters
(b) the greatest depth of the ocean, about 6.5 mi, to kilometers
(c) the area of the state of Oregon, 96,981 mi2, to square kilometers
(d) the volume of 1 gill (exactly 4 oz) to milliliters
(e) the estimated volume of the oceans, 330,000,000 mi3, to cubic kilometers.
(f) the mass of a 3525-lb car to kilograms
(g) the mass of a 2.3-oz egg to grams
PAGE: 72
58 1 • Exercises
77. Make the conversion indicated in each of the following:
(a) the length of a soccer field, 120 m (three significant figures), to feet
(b) the height of Mt. Kilimanjaro, at 19,565 ft, the highest mountain in Africa, to kilometers
(c) the area of an 8.5- × 11-inch sheet of paper in cm2
(d) the displacement volume of an automobile engine, 161 in.3, to liters
(e) the estimated mass of the atmosphere, 5.6 × 1015tons, to kilograms
(f) the mass of a bushel of rye, 32.0 lb, to kilograms
(g) the mass of a 5.00-grain aspirin tablet to milligrams (1 grain = 0.00229 oz)
78. Many chemistry conferences have held a 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (two significant figures). How long is
this run in kilometers and in miles? (1 Å = 1 10−10m)
79. A chemist’s 50-Trillion Angstrom Run (seeExercise 1.78) would be an archeologist’s 10,900 cubit run.
How long is one cubit in meters and in feet? (1 Å = 1 10−8cm)
80. The gas tank of a certain luxury automobile holds 22.3 gallons according to the owner’s manual. If the
density of gasoline is 0.8206 g/mL, determine the mass in kilograms and pounds of the fuel in a full tank.
81. As an instructor is preparing for an experiment, he requires 225 g phosphoric acid. The only container
readily available is a 150-mL Erlenmeyer flask. Is it large enough to contain the acid, whose density is 1.83
g/mL?
82. To prepare for a laboratory period, a student lab assistant needs 125 g of a compound. A bottle containing
1/4 lb is available. Did the student have enough of the compound?
83. A chemistry student is 159 cm tall and weighs 45.8 kg. What is her height in inches and weight in pounds?
84. In a recent Grand Prix, the winner completed the race with an average speed of 229.8 km/h. What was his
speed in miles per hour, meters per second, and feet per second?
85. Solve these problems about lumber dimensions.
(a) To describe to a European how houses are constructed in the US, the dimensions of “two-by-four”
lumber must be converted into metric units. The thickness width length dimensions are 1.50 in.
3.50 in. 8.00 ft in the US. What are the dimensions in cm cm m?
(b) This lumber can be used as vertical studs, which are typically placed 16.0 in. apart. What is that
distance in centimeters?
86. The mercury content of a stream was believed to be above the minimum considered safe—1 part per
billion (ppb) by weight. An analysis indicated that the concentration was 0.68 parts per billion. What
quantity of mercury in grams was present in 15.0 L of the water, the density of which is 0.998 g/ml?
87. Calculate the density of aluminum if 27.6 cm3has a mass of 74.6 g.
88. Osmium is one of the densest elements known. What is its density if 2.72 g has a volume of 0.121 cm3?
89. Calculate these masses.
(a) What is the mass of 6.00 cm3of mercury, density = 13.5939 g/cm3?
(b) What is the mass of 25.0 mL octane, density = 0.702 g/cm3?
90. Calculate these masses.
(a) What is the mass of 4.00 cm3of sodium, density = 0.97 g/cm3?
(b) What is the mass of 125 mL gaseous chlorine, density = 3.16 g/L?
91. Calculate these volumes.
(a) What is the volume of 25 g iodine, density = 4.93 g/cm3?
(b) What is the volume of 3.28 g gaseous hydrogen, density = 0.089 g/L?
92. Calculate these volumes.
(a) What is the volume of 11.3 g graphite, density = 2.25 g/cm3?
(b) What is the volume of 39.657 g bromine, density = 2.928 g/cm3?
93. Convert the boiling temperature of gold, 2966 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
94. Convert the temperature of scalding water, 54 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
95. Convert the temperature of the coldest area in a freezer, −10 °F, to degrees Celsius and kelvin.
96. Convert the temperature of dry ice, −77 °C, into degrees Fahrenheit and kelvin.
97. Convert the boiling temperature of liquid ammonia, −28.1 °F, into degrees Celsius and kelvin.
98. The label on a pressurized can of spray disinfectant warns against heating the can above 130 °F. What are
the corresponding temperatures on the Celsius and kelvin temperature scales?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 73
1 • Exercises 59
99. The weather in Europe was unusually warm during the summer of 1995. The TV news reported
temperatures as high as 45 °C. What was the temperature on the Fahrenheit scale?
PAGE: 74
60 1 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 75
CHAPTER 2
Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Figure2.1 Analysis of molecules in an exhaled breath can provide valuable information, leading to early diagnosis
of diseases or detection of environmental exposure to harmful substances. (credit: modification of work by Paul
Flowers)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1Early Ideas in Atomic Theory
2.2Evolution of Atomic Theory
2.3Atomic Structure and Symbolism
2.4Chemical Formulas
2.5The Periodic Table
2.6Ionic and Molecular Compounds
2.7Chemical Nomenclature
INTRODUCTION Lung diseases and lung cancers are among the world's most devastating illnesses partly due
to delayed detection and diagnosis. Most noninvasive screening procedures aren't reliable, and patients often
resist more accurate methods due to discomfort with the procedures or with the potential danger that the
procedures cause. But what if you could be accurately diagnosed through a simple breath test?
Early detection of biomarkers, substances that indicate an organism’s disease or physiological state, could
allow diagnosis and treatment before a condition becomes serious or irreversible. Recent studies have shown
that your exhaled breath can contain molecules that may be biomarkers for recent exposure to environmental
contaminants or for pathological conditions ranging from asthma to lung cancer. Scientists are working to
develop biomarker “fingerprints” that could be used to diagnose a specific disease based on the amounts and
identities of certain molecules in a patient’s exhaled breath. In Sangeeta Bhatia's lab at MIT, a team used
substances that react specifically inside diseased lung tissue; the products of the reactions will be present as
biomarkers that can be identified through mass spectrometry (an analytical method discussed later in the
chapter). A potential application would allow patients with early symptoms to inhale or ingest a "sensor"
PAGE: 76
62 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
substance, and, minutes later, to breathe into a detector for diagnosis. Similar research by scientists such as
Laura López-Sánchez has provided similar processes for lung cancer. An essential concept underlying this goal
is that of a molecule’s identity, which is determined by the numbers and types of atoms it contains, and how
they are bonded together. This chapter will describe some of the fundamental chemical principles related to
the composition of matter, including those central to the concept of molecular identity.
2.1 Early Ideas in Atomic Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory
• Use postulates of Dalton’s atomic theory to explain the laws of definite and multiple proportions
The earliest recorded discussion of the basic structure of matter comes from ancient Greek philosophers, the
scientists of their day. In the fifth century BC, Leucippus and Democritus argued that all matter was composed
of small, finite particles that they calledatomos, a term derived from the Greek word for “indivisible.” They
thought of atoms as moving particles that differed in shape and size, and which could join together. Later,
Aristotle and others came to the conclusion that matter consisted of various combinations of the four
“elements”—fire, earth, air, and water—and could be infinitely divided. Interestingly, these philosophers
thought about atoms and “elements” as philosophical concepts, but apparently never considered performing
experiments to test their ideas.
The Aristotelian view of the composition of matter held sway for over two thousand years, until English
schoolteacher John Dalton helped to revolutionize chemistry with his hypothesis that the behavior of matter
could be explained using an atomic theory. First published in 1807, many of Dalton’s hypotheses about the
microscopic features of matter are still valid in modern atomic theory. Here are the postulates ofDalton’s
atomic theory.
1. Matter is composed of exceedingly small particles called atoms. Anatomis the smallest unit of an element
that can participate in a chemical change.
2. Anelementconsists of only one type of atom, which has a mass that is characteristic of the element and is
the same for all atoms of that element (Figure 2.2). A macroscopic sample of an element contains an
incredibly large number of atoms, all of which have identical chemical properties.
FIGURE2.2 A pre-1982 copper penny (left) contains approximately 3 1022copper atoms (several dozen are
represented as brown spheres at the right), each of which has the same chemical properties. (credit:
modification of work by “slgckgc”/Flickr)
3. Atoms of one element differ in properties from atoms of all other elements.
4. A compound consists of atoms of two or more elements combined in a small, whole-number ratio. In a
given compound, the numbers of atoms of each of its elements are always present in the same ratio
(Figure 2.3).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 77
2.1 • Early Ideas in Atomic Theory 63
FIGURE2.3 Copper(II) oxide, a powdery, black compound, results from the combination of two types of
atoms—copper (brown spheres) and oxygen (red spheres)—in a 1:1 ratio. (credit: modification of work by
“Chemicalinterest”/Wikimedia Commons)
5. Atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change, but are instead rearranged to yield
substances that are different from those present before the change (Figure 2.4).
FIGURE2.4 When the elements copper (a shiny, red-brown solid, shown here as brown spheres) and oxygen
(a clear and colorless gas, shown here as red spheres) react, their atoms rearrange to form a compound
containing copper and oxygen (a powdery, black solid). (credit copper: modification of work by http://images-of-
elements.com/copper.php)
Dalton’s atomic theory provides a microscopic explanation of the many macroscopic properties of matter that
you’ve learned about. For example, if an element such as copper consists of only one kind of atom, then it
cannot be broken down into simpler substances, that is, into substances composed of fewer types of atoms.
And if atoms are neither created nor destroyed during a chemical change, then the total mass of matter
present when matter changes from one type to another will remain constant (the law of conservation of
matter).
EXAMPLE 2.1
Testing Dalton’s Atomic Theory
In the following drawing, the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element. The purple spheres
represent atoms of another element. If the spheres touch, they are part of a single unit of a compound. Does
the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton’s atomic theory?
If so, which one?
PAGE: 78
64 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Solution
The starting materials consist of two green spheres and two purple spheres. The products consist of only one
green sphere and one purple sphere. This violates Dalton’s postulate that atoms are neither created nor
destroyed during a chemical change, but are merely redistributed. (In this case, atoms appear to have been
destroyed.)
Check Your Learning
In the following drawing, the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element. The purple spheres
represent atoms of another element. If the spheres touch, they are part of a single unit of a compound. Does
the following chemical change represented by these symbols violate any of the ideas of Dalton’s atomic theory?
If so, which one?
Answer:
The starting materials consist of four green spheres and two purple spheres. The products consist of four
green spheres and two purple spheres. This does not violate any of Dalton’s postulates: Atoms are neither
created nor destroyed, but are redistributed in small, whole-number ratios.
Dalton knew of the experiments of French chemist Joseph Proust, who demonstrated thatall samples of a pure
compound contain the same elements in the same proportion by mass. This statement is known as thelaw of
definite proportionsor thelaw of constant composition. The suggestion that the numbers of atoms of the
elements in a given compound always exist in the same ratio is consistent with these observations. For
example, when different samples of isooctane (a component of gasoline and one of the standards used in the
octane rating system) are analyzed, they are found to have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of 5.33:1, as
shown inTable 2.1.
Constant Composition of Isooctane
Sample Carbon Hydrogen Mass Ratio
A 14.82 g 2.78 g
B 22.33 g 4.19 g
C 19.40 g 3.64 g
TABLE2.1
It is worth noting that although all samples of a particular compound have the same mass ratio, the converse is
not true in general. That is, samples that have the same mass ratio are not necessarily the same substance. For
example, there are many compounds other than isooctane that also have a carbon-to-hydrogen mass ratio of
5.33:1.00.
Dalton also used data from Proust, as well as results from his own experiments, to formulate another
interesting law. Thelaw of multiple proportionsstates thatwhen two elements react to form more than one
compound, a fixed mass of one element will react with masses of the other element in a ratio of small, whole
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 79
2.1 • Early Ideas in Atomic Theory 65
numbers. For example, copper and chlorine can form a green, crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 0.558 g
chlorine to 1 g copper, as well as a brown crystalline solid with a mass ratio of 1.116 g chlorine to 1 g copper.
These ratios by themselves may not seem particularly interesting or informative; however, if we take a ratio of
these ratios, we obtain a useful and possibly surprising result: a small, whole-number ratio.
This 2-to-1 ratio means that the brown compound has twice the amount of chlorine per amount of copper as
the green compound.
This can be explained by atomic theory if the copper-to-chlorine ratio in the brown compound is 1 copper
atom to 2 chlorine atoms, and the ratio in the green compound is 1 copper atom to 1 chlorine atom. The ratio
of chlorine atoms (and thus the ratio of their masses) is therefore 2 to 1 (Figure 2.5).
FIGURE2.5 Compared to the copper chlorine compound in (a), where copper is represented by brown spheres and
chlorine by green spheres, the copper chlorine compound in (b) has twice as many chlorine atoms per copper atom.
(credit a: modification of work by “Benjah-bmm27”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by
“Walkerma”/Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 2.2
Laws of Definite and Multiple Proportions
A sample of compound A (a clear, colorless gas) is analyzed and found to contain 4.27 g carbon and 5.69 g
oxygen. A sample of compound B (also a clear, colorless gas) is analyzed and found to contain 5.19 g carbon
and 13.84 g oxygen. Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions, the law of multiple
proportions, or neither? What do these data tell you about substances A and B?
Solution
In compound A, the mass ratio of oxygen to carbon is:
In compound B, the mass ratio of oxygen to carbon is:
The ratio of these ratios is:
PAGE: 80
66 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
This supports the law of multiple proportions. This means that A and B are different compounds, with A having
one-half as much oxygen per amount of carbon (or twice as much carbon per amount of oxygen) as B. A
possible pair of compounds that would fit this relationship would be A = CO and B = CO .
2
Check Your Learning
A sample of compound X (a clear, colorless, combustible liquid with a noticeable odor) is analyzed and found to
contain 14.13 g carbon and 2.96 g hydrogen. A sample of compound Y (a clear, colorless, combustible liquid
with a noticeable odor that is slightly different from X’s odor) is analyzed and found to contain 19.91 g carbon
and 3.34 g hydrogen. Are these data an example of the law of definite proportions, the law of multiple
proportions, or neither? What do these data tell you about substances X and Y?
Answer:
In compound X, the mass ratio of carbon to hydrogen is In compound Y, the mass ratio of carbon to
hydrogen is The ratio of these ratios is This small, whole-
number ratio supports the law of multiple proportions. This means that X and Y are different compounds.
2.2 Evolution of Atomic Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline milestones in the development of modern atomic theory
• Summarize and interpret the results of the experiments of Thomson, Millikan, and Rutherford
• Describe the three subatomic particles that compose atoms
• Define isotopes and give examples for several elements
If matter is composed of atoms, what are atoms composed of? Are they the smallest particles, or is there
something smaller? In the late 1800s, a number of scientists interested in questions like these investigated the
electrical discharges that could be produced in low-pressure gases, with the most significant discovery made
by English physicist J. J.Thomsonusing acathode raytube. This apparatus consisted of a sealed glass tube
from which almost all the air had been removed; the tube contained two metal electrodes. When high voltage
was applied across the electrodes, a visible beam called a cathode ray appeared between them. This beam was
deflected toward the positive charge and away from the negative charge, and was produced in the same way
with identical properties when different metals were used for the electrodes. In similar experiments, the ray
was simultaneously deflected by an applied magnetic field, and measurements of the extent of deflection and
the magnetic field strength allowed Thomson to calculate the charge-to-mass ratio of the cathode ray particles.
The results of these measurements indicated that these particles were much lighter than atoms (Figure 2.6).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 81
2.2 • Evolution of Atomic Theory 67
FIGURE2.6 (a) J. J. Thomson produced a visible beam in a cathode ray tube. (b) This is an early cathode ray tube,
invented in 1897 by Ferdinand Braun. (c) In the cathode ray, the beam (shown in yellow) comes from the cathode
and is accelerated past the anode toward a fluorescent scale at the end of the tube. Simultaneous deflections by
applied electric and magnetic fields permitted Thomson to calculate the mass-to-charge ratio of the particles
composing the cathode ray. (credit a: modification of work by Nobel Foundation; credit b: modification of work by
Eugen Nesper; credit c: modification of work by “Kurzon”/Wikimedia Commons)
Based on his observations, here is what Thomson proposed and why: The particles are attracted by positive (+)
charges and repelled by negative (−) charges, so they must be negatively charged (like charges repel and unlike
charges attract); they are less massive than atoms and indistinguishable, regardless of the source material, so
they must be fundamental, subatomic constituents of all atoms. Although controversial at the time, Thomson’s
idea was gradually accepted, and his cathode ray particle is what we now call anelectron, a negatively
charged, subatomic particle with a mass more than one thousand-times less that of an atom. The term
“electron” was coined in 1891 by Irish physicist George Stoney, from “electric ion.”
LINK TO LEARNING
Clickhere(http://openstax.org/l/16JJThomson)to hear Thomson describe his discovery in his own voice.
In 1909, more information about the electron was uncovered by American physicist Robert A.Millikanvia his
“oil drop” experiments. Millikan created microscopic oil droplets, which could be electrically charged by
friction as they formed or by using X-rays. These droplets initially fell due to gravity, but their downward
progress could be slowed or even reversed by an electric field lower in the apparatus. By adjusting the electric
field strength and making careful measurements and appropriate calculations, Millikan was able to determine
the charge on individual drops (Figure 2.7).
PAGE: 82
68 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
FIGURE2.7 Millikan’s experiment measured the charge of individual oil drops. The tabulated data are examples of
a few possible values.
Looking at the charge data that Millikan gathered, you may have recognized that the charge of an oil droplet is
always a multiple of a specific charge, 1.6 10−19C. Millikan concluded that this value must therefore be a
fundamental charge—the charge of a single electron—with his measured charges due to an excess of one
electron (1 times 1.6 10−19C), two electrons (2 times 1.6 10−19C), three electrons (3 times 1.6 10−19C),
and so on, on a given oil droplet. Since the charge of an electron was now known due to Millikan’s research,
and the charge-to-mass ratio was already known due to Thomson’s research (1.759 1011C/kg), it only
required a simple calculation to determine the mass of the electron as well.
Scientists had now established that the atom was not indivisible as Dalton had believed, and due to the work of
Thomson, Millikan, and others, the charge and mass of the negative, subatomic particles—the electrons—were
known. However, the positively charged part of an atom was not yet well understood. In 1904, Thomson
proposed the “plum pudding” model of atoms, which described a positively charged mass with an equal
amount of negative charge in the form of electrons embedded in it, since all atoms are electrically neutral. A
competing model had been proposed in 1903 by HantaroNagaoka, who postulated a Saturn-like atom,
consisting of a positively charged sphere surrounded by a halo of electrons (Figure 2.8).
FIGURE2.8 (a) Thomson suggested that atoms resembled plum pudding, an English dessert consisting of moist
cake with embedded raisins (“plums”). (b) Nagaoka proposed that atoms resembled the planet Saturn, with a ring of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 83
2.2 • Evolution of Atomic Theory 69
electrons surrounding a positive “planet.” (credit a: modification of work by “Man vyi”/Wikimedia Commons; credit
b: modification of work by “NASA”/Wikimedia Commons)
The next major development in understanding the atom came from ErnestRutherford, a physicist from New
Zealand who largely spent his scientific career in Canada and England. He performed a series of experiments
using a beam of high-speed, positively chargedalpha particles (α particles)that were produced by the
radioactive decay of radium; α particles consist of two protons and two neutrons (you will learn more about
radioactive decay in the chapter on nuclear chemistry). Rutherford and his colleagues HansGeiger(later
famous for the Geiger counter) and ErnestMarsdenaimed a beam of α particles, the source of which was
embedded in a lead block to absorb most of the radiation, at a very thin piece of gold foil and examined the
resultant scattering of the α particles using a luminescent screen that glowed briefly where hit by an α particle.
What did they discover? Most particles passed right through the foil without being deflected at all. However,
some were diverted slightly, and a very small number were deflected almost straight back toward the source
(Figure 2.9). Rutherford described finding these results: “It was quite the most incredible event that has ever
happened to me in my life. It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper
1
and it came back and hit you.”
FIGURE2.9 Geiger and Rutherford fired α particles at a piece of gold foil and detected where those particles went,
as shown in this schematic diagram of their experiment. Most of the particles passed straight through the foil, but a
few were deflected slightly and a very small number were significantly deflected.
Here is what Rutherford deduced: Because most of the fast-moving α particles passed through the gold atoms
undeflected, they must have traveled through essentially empty space inside the atom. Alpha particles are
positively charged, so deflections arose when they encountered another positive charge (like charges repel
each other). Since like charges repel one another, the few positively charged α particles that changed paths
abruptly must have hit, or closely approached, another body that also had a highly concentrated, positive
charge. Since the deflections occurred a small fraction of the time, this charge only occupied a small amount of
the space in the gold foil. Analyzing a series of such experiments in detail, Rutherford drew two conclusions:
1. The volume occupied by an atom must consist of a large amount of empty space.
2. A small, relatively heavy, positively charged body, thenucleus, must be at the center of each atom.
LINK TO LEARNING
View thissimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16Rutherford)of the Rutherford gold foil experiment. Adjust the slit
width to produce a narrower or broader beam of α particles to see how that affects the scattering pattern.
1 Ernest Rutherford, “The Development of the Theory of Atomic Structure,” ed. J. A. Ratcliffe, inBackground to Modern Science,
eds. Joseph Needham and Walter Pagel, (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1938), 61–74. Accessed September 22, 2014,
https://ia600508.us.archive.org/3/items/backgroundtomode032734mbp/backgroundtomode032734mbp.pdf.
PAGE: 84
70 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
This analysis led Rutherford to propose a model in which an atom consists of a very small, positively charged
nucleus, in which most of the mass of the atom is concentrated, surrounded by the negatively charged
electrons, so that the atom is electrically neutral (Figure 2.10). After many more experiments, Rutherford also
discovered that the nuclei of other elements contain the hydrogen nucleus as a “building block,” and he named
this more fundamental particle theproton, the positively charged, subatomic particle found in the nucleus.
With one addition, which you will learn next, this nuclear model of the atom, proposed over a century ago, is
still used today.
FIGURE2.10 The α particles are deflected only when they collide with or pass close to the much heavier,
positively charged gold nucleus. Because the nucleus is very small compared to the size of an atom, very few α
particles are deflected. Most pass through the relatively large region occupied by electrons, which are too light to
deflect the rapidly moving particles.
LINK TO LEARNING
TheRutherford Scattering simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetScatter)allows you to investigate the
differences between a “plum pudding” atom and a Rutherford atom by firing α particles at each type of atom.
Another important finding was the discovery of isotopes. During the early 1900s, scientists identified several
substances that appeared to be new elements, isolating them from radioactive ores. For example, a “new
element” produced by the radioactive decay of thorium was initially given the name mesothorium. However, a
more detailed analysis showed that mesothorium was chemically identical to radium (another decay product),
despite having a different atomic mass. This result, along with similar findings for other elements, led the
English chemist FrederickSoddyto realize that an element could have types of atoms with different masses
that were chemically indistinguishable. These different types are calledisotopes—atoms of the same element
that differ in mass. Soddy was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1921 for this discovery.
One puzzle remained: The nucleus was known to contain almost all of the mass of an atom, with the number of
protons only providing half, or less, of that mass. Different proposals were made to explain what constituted
the remaining mass, including the existence of neutral particles in the nucleus. As you might expect, detecting
uncharged particles is very challenging, and it was not until 1932 that JamesChadwickfound evidence of
neutrons, uncharged, subatomic particles with a mass approximately the same as that of protons. The
existence of the neutron also explained isotopes: They differ in mass because they have different numbers of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 85
2.3 • Atomic Structure and Symbolism 71
neutrons, but they are chemically identical because they have the same number of protons. This will be
explained in more detail later in this chapter.
2.3 Atomic Structure and Symbolism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Write and interpret symbols that depict the atomic number, mass number, and charge of an atom or ion
• Define the atomic mass unit and average atomic mass
• Calculate average atomic mass and isotopic abundance
The development of modern atomic theory revealed much about the inner structure of atoms. It was learned
that an atom contains a very small nucleus composed of positively charged protons and uncharged neutrons,
surrounded by a much larger volume of space containing negatively charged electrons. The nucleus contains
the majority of an atom’s mass because protons and neutrons are much heavier than electrons, whereas
electrons occupy almost all of an atom’s volume. The diameter of an atom is on the order of 10−10m, whereas
the diameter of the nucleus is roughly 10−15m—about 100,000 times smaller. For a perspective about their
relative sizes, consider this: If the nucleus were the size of a blueberry, the atom would be about the size of a
football stadium (Figure 2.11).
FIGURE2.11 If an atom could be expanded to the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a
single blueberry. (credit middle: modification of work by “babyknight”/Wikimedia Commons; credit right:
modification of work by Paxson Woelber)
Atoms—and the protons, neutrons, and electrons that compose them—are extremely small. For example, a
carbon atom weighs less than 2 10−23g, and an electron has a charge of less than 2 10−19C (coulomb).
When describing the properties of tiny objects such as atoms, we use appropriately small units of measure,
such as theatomic mass unit (amu)and thefundamental unit of charge (e). The amu was originally defined
based on hydrogen, the lightest element, then later in terms of oxygen. Since 1961, it has been defined with
regard to the most abundant isotope of carbon, atoms of which are assigned masses of exactly 12 amu. (This
isotope is known as “carbon-12” as will be discussed later in this module.) Thus, one amu is exactly of the
mass of one carbon-12 atom: 1 amu = 1.6605 10−24g. (TheDalton (Da)and theunified atomic mass unit (u)
are alternative units that are equivalent to the amu.) The fundamental unit of charge (also called the
elementary charge) equals the magnitude of the charge of an electron (e) with e = 1.602 10−19C.
A proton has a mass of 1.0073 amu and a charge of 1+. A neutron is a slightly heavier particle with a mass
1.0087 amu and a charge of zero; as its name suggests, it is neutral. The electron has a charge of 1− and is a
much lighter particle with a mass of about 0.00055 amu (it would take about 1800 electrons to equal the mass
of one proton). The properties of these fundamental particles are summarized inTable 2.2. (An observant
student might notice that the sum of an atom’s subatomic particles does not equal the atom’s actual mass: The
total mass of six protons, six neutrons, and six electrons is 12.0993 amu, slightly larger than 12.00 amu. This
“missing” mass is known as the mass defect, and you will learn about it in the chapter on nuclear chemistry.)
PAGE: 86
72 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Properties of Subatomic Particles
Name Location Charge (C) Unit Charge Mass (amu) Mass (g)
electron outside nucleus −1.602 10−19 1− 0.00055 0.00091 10−24
proton nucleus 1.602 10−19 1+ 1.00727 1.67262 10−24
neutron nucleus 0 0 1.00866 1.67493 10−24
TABLE2.2
The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is itsatomic number (Z). This is the defining trait of an
element: Its value determines the identity of the atom. For example, any atom that contains six protons is the
element carbon and has the atomic number 6, regardless of how many neutrons or electrons it may have. A
neutral atom must contain the same number of positive and negative charges, so the number of protons equals
the number of electrons. Therefore, the atomic number also indicates the number of electrons in an atom. The
total number of protons and neutrons in an atom is called itsmass number (A). The number of neutrons is
therefore the difference between the mass number and the atomic number: A – Z = number of neutrons.
Atoms are electrically neutral if they contain the same number of positively charged protons and negatively
charged electrons. When the numbers of these subatomic particles arenotequal, the atom is electrically
charged and is called anion. The charge of an atom is defined as follows:
Atomic charge = number of protons − number of electrons
As will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter, atoms (and molecules) typically acquire charge by
gaining or losing electrons. An atom that gains one or more electrons will exhibit a negative charge and is
called ananion. Positively charged atoms calledcationsare formed when an atom loses one or more
electrons. For example, a neutral sodium atom (Z = 11) has 11 electrons. If this atom loses one electron, it will
become a cation with a 1+ charge (11 − 10 = 1+). A neutral oxygen atom (Z = 8) has eight electrons, and if it
gains two electrons it will become an anion with a 2− charge (8 − 10 = 2−).
EXAMPLE 2.3
Composition of an Atom
Iodine is an essential trace element in our diet; it is needed to produce thyroid hormone. Insufficient iodine in
the diet can lead to the development of a goiter, an enlargement of the thyroid gland (Figure 2.12).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 87
2.3 • Atomic Structure and Symbolism 73
FIGURE2.12 (a) Insufficient iodine in the diet can cause an enlargement of the thyroid gland called a goiter. (b)
The addition of small amounts of iodine to salt, which prevents the formation of goiters, has helped eliminate this
concern in the US where salt consumption is high. (credit a: modification of work by “Almazi”/Wikimedia Commons;
credit b: modification of work by Mike Mozart)
The addition of small amounts of iodine to table salt (iodized salt) has essentially eliminated this health
concern in the United States, but as much as 40% of the world’s population is still at risk of iodine deficiency.
The iodine atoms are added as anions, and each has a 1− charge and a mass number of 127. Determine the
numbers of protons, neutrons, and electrons in one of these iodine anions.
Solution
The atomic number of iodine (53) tells us that a neutral iodine atom contains 53 protons in its nucleus and 53
electrons outside its nucleus. Because the sum of the numbers of protons and neutrons equals the mass
number, 127, the number of neutrons is 74 (127 − 53 = 74). Since the iodine is added as a 1− anion, the
number of electrons is 54 [53 – (1–) = 54].
Check Your Learning
An ion of platinum has a mass number of 195 and contains 74 electrons. How many protons and neutrons
does it contain, and what is its charge?
Answer:
78 protons; 117 neutrons; charge is 4+
Chemical Symbols
Achemical symbolis an abbreviation that we use to indicate an element or an atom of an element. For
example, the symbol for mercury is Hg (Figure 2.13). We use the same symbol to indicate one atom of mercury
(microscopic domain) or to label a container of many atoms of the element mercury (macroscopic domain).
PAGE: 88
74 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
FIGURE2.13 The symbol Hg represents the element mercury regardless of the amount; it could represent one
atom of mercury or a large amount of mercury.
The symbols for several common elements and their atoms are listed inTable 2.3. Some symbols are derived
from the common name of the element; others are abbreviations of the name in another language. Most
symbols have one or two letters, but three-letter symbols have been used to describe some elements that have
atomic numbers greater than 112. To avoid confusion with other notations, only the first letter of a symbol is
capitalized. For example, Co is the symbol for the element cobalt, but CO is the notation for the compound
carbon monoxide, which contains atoms of the elements carbon (C) and oxygen (O). All known elements and
their symbols are in the periodic table inFigure 2.26(also found inAppendix A).
Some Common Elements and Their Symbols
Element Symbol Element Symbol
aluminum Al iron Fe (fromferrum)
bromine Br lead Pb (fromplumbum)
calcium Ca magnesium Mg
carbon C mercury Hg (fromhydrargyrum)
chlorine Cl nitrogen N
chromium Cr oxygen O
cobalt Co potassium K (fromkalium)
copper Cu (fromcuprum) silicon Si
fluorine F silver Ag (fromargentum)
gold Au (fromaurum) sodium Na (fromnatrium)
helium He sulfur S
TABLE2.3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 89
2.3 • Atomic Structure and Symbolism 75
Element Symbol Element Symbol
hydrogen H tin Sn (fromstannum)
iodine I zinc Zn
TABLE2.3
Traditionally, the discoverer (or discoverers) of a new element names the element. However, until the name is
recognized by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the recommended name of the
new element is based on the Latin word(s) for its atomic number. For example, element 106 was called
unnilhexium (Unh), element 107 was called unnilseptium (Uns), and element 108 was called unniloctium
(Uno) for several years. These elements are now named after scientists (or occasionally locations); for example,
element 106 is now known asseaborgium(Sg) in honor of Glenn Seaborg, a Nobel Prize winner who was active
in the discovery of several heavy elements. Element 109 was named in honor of Lise Meitner, who discovered
nuclear fission, a phenomenon that would have world-changing impacts; Meitner also contributed to the
discovery of some major isotopes, discussed immediately below.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16IUPAC)to learn more about IUPAC, the International Union of Pure and
Applied Chemistry, and explore its periodic table.
Isotopes
The symbol for a specific isotope of any element is written by placing the mass number as a superscript to the
left of the element symbol (Figure 2.14). The atomic number is sometimes written as a subscript preceding the
symbol, but since this number defines the element’s identity, as does its symbol, it is often omitted. For
example, magnesium exists as a mixture of three isotopes, each with an atomic number of 12 and with mass
numbers of 24, 25, and 26, respectively. These isotopes can be identified as24Mg,25Mg, and26Mg. These
isotope symbols are read as “element, mass number” and can be symbolized consistent with this reading. For
instance,24Mg is read as “magnesium 24,” and can be written as “magnesium-24” or “Mg-24.”25Mg is read as
“magnesium 25,” and can be written as “magnesium-25” or “Mg-25.” All magnesium atoms have 12 protons in
their nucleus. They differ only because a24Mg atom has 12 neutrons in its nucleus, a25Mg atom has 13
neutrons, and a26Mg has 14 neutrons.
FIGURE2.14 The symbol for an atom indicates the element via its usual two-letter symbol, the mass number as a
left superscript, the atomic number as a left subscript (sometimes omitted), and the charge as a right superscript.
Information about the naturally occurring isotopes of elements with atomic numbers 1 through 10 is given in
Table 2.4. Note that in addition to standard names and symbols, the isotopes of hydrogen are often referred to
using common names and accompanying symbols. Hydrogen-2, symbolized2H, is also called deuterium and
sometimes symbolized D. Hydrogen-3, symbolized3H, is also called tritium and sometimes symbolized T.
PAGE: 90
76 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Nuclear Compositions of Atoms of the Very Light Elements
Atomic Number of Number of Mass % Natural
Element Symbol
Number Protons Neutrons (amu) Abundance
1 1 0 1.0078 99.989
(protium)
hydrogen 1 1 1 2.0141 0.0115
(deuterium)
1 1 2 3.01605 — (trace)
(tritium)
2 2 1 3.01603 0.00013
helium
2 2 2 4.0026 100
3 3 3 6.0151 7.59
lithium
3 3 4 7.0160 92.41
beryllium 4 4 5 9.0122 100
5 5 5 10.0129 19.9
boron
5 5 6 11.0093 80.1
6 6 6 12.0000 98.89
carbon 6 6 7 13.0034 1.11
6 6 8 14.0032 — (trace)
7 7 7 14.0031 99.63
nitrogen
7 7 8 15.0001 0.37
8 8 8 15.9949 99.757
oxygen 8 8 9 16.9991 0.038
8 8 10 17.9992 0.205
fluorine 9 9 10 18.9984 100
neon 10 10 10 19.9924 90.48
TABLE2.4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 91
2.3 • Atomic Structure and Symbolism 77
Atomic Number of Number of Mass % Natural
Element Symbol
Number Protons Neutrons (amu) Abundance
10 10 11 20.9938 0.27
10 10 12 21.9914 9.25
TABLE2.4
LINK TO LEARNING
Use thisBuild an Atom simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomBld)to build atoms of the first 10
elements, see which isotopes exist, check nuclear stability, and gain experience with isotope symbols.
Atomic Mass
Because each proton and each neutron contribute approximately one amu to the mass of an atom, and each
electron contributes far less, theatomic massof a single atom is approximately equal to its mass number (a
whole number). However, the average masses of atoms of most elements are not whole numbers because most
elements exist naturally as mixtures of two or more isotopes.
The mass of an element shown in a periodic table or listed in a table of atomic masses is a weighted, average
mass of all the isotopes present in a naturally occurring sample of that element. This is equal to the sum of
each individual isotope’s mass multiplied by its fractional abundance.
For example, the element boron is composed of two isotopes: About 19.9% of all boron atoms are10B with a
mass of 10.0129 amu, and the remaining 80.1% are11B with a mass of 11.0093 amu. The average atomic mass
for boron is calculated to be:
It is important to understand that no single boron atom weighs exactly 10.8 amu; 10.8 amu is the average mass
of all boron atoms, and individual boron atoms weigh either approximately 10 amu or 11 amu.
EXAMPLE 2.4
Calculation of Average Atomic Mass
A meteorite found in central Indiana contains traces of the noble gas neon picked up from the solar wind
during the meteorite’s trip through the solar system. Analysis of a sample of the gas showed that it consisted of
91.84%20Ne (mass 19.9924 amu), 0.47%21Ne (mass 20.9940 amu), and 7.69%22Ne (mass 21.9914 amu).
What is the average mass of the neon in the solar wind?
Solution
The average mass of a neon atom in the solar wind is 20.15 amu. (The average mass of a terrestrial neon atom
is 20.1796 amu. This result demonstrates that we may find slight differences in the natural abundance of
PAGE: 92
78 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
isotopes, depending on their origin.)
Check Your Learning
A sample of magnesium is found to contain 78.70% of24Mg atoms (mass 23.98 amu), 10.13% of25Mg atoms
(mass 24.99 amu), and 11.17% of26Mg atoms (mass 25.98 amu). Calculate the average mass of a Mg atom.
Answer:
24.31 amu
We can also do variations of this type of calculation, as shown in the next example.
EXAMPLE 2.5
Calculation of Percent Abundance
Naturally occurring chlorine consists of35Cl (mass 34.96885 amu) and37Cl (mass 36.96590 amu), with an
average mass of 35.453 amu. What is the percent composition of Cl in terms of these two isotopes?
Solution
The average mass of chlorine is the fraction that is35Cl times the mass of35Cl plus the fraction that is37Cl
times the mass of37Cl.
If we letxrepresent the fraction that is35Cl, then the fraction that is37Cl is represented by 1.00 −x.
(The fraction that is35Cl + the fraction that is37Cl must add up to 1, so the fraction of37Cl must equal 1.00 − the
fraction of35Cl.)
Substituting this into the average mass equation, we have:
So solving yields:x= 0.7576, which means that 1.00 − 0.7576 = 0.2424. Therefore, chlorine consists of 75.76%
35Cl and 24.24%37Cl.
Check Your Learning
Naturally occurring copper consists of63Cu (mass 62.9296 amu) and65Cu (mass 64.9278 amu), with an
average mass of 63.546 amu. What is the percent composition of Cu in terms of these two isotopes?
Answer:
69.15% Cu-63 and 30.85% Cu-65
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomMass)to make mixtures of the main isotopes of the first 18
elements, gain experience with average atomic mass, and check naturally occurring isotope ratios using the
Isotopes and Atomic Mass simulation.
As you will learn, isotopes are important in nature and especially in human understanding of science and
medicine. Let's consider just one natural, stable isotope: Oxygen-18, which is noted in the table above and is
referred to as one of the environmental isotopes. It is important in paleoclimatology, for example, because
scientists can use the ratio between Oxygen-18 and Oxygen-16 in an ice core to determine the temperature of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 93
2.4 • Chemical Formulas 79
precipitation over time. Oxygen-18 was also critical to the discovery of metabolic pathways and the
mechanisms of enzymes. Mildred Cohn pioneered the usage of these isotopes to act as tracers, so that
researchers could follow their path through reactions and gain a better understanding of what is happening.
One of her first discoveries provided insight into the phosphorylation of glucose that takes place in
mitochondria. And the methods of using isotopes for this research contributed to entire fields of study.
The occurrence and natural abundances of isotopes can be experimentally determined using an instrument
called a mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry (MS) is widely used in chemistry, forensics, medicine,
environmental science, and many other fields to analyze and help identify the substances in a sample of
material. In a typical mass spectrometer (Figure 2.15), the sample is vaporized and exposed to a high-energy
electron beam that causes the sample’s atoms (or molecules) to become electrically charged, typically by losing
one or more electrons. These cations then pass through a (variable) electric or magnetic field that deflects each
cation’s path to an extent that depends on both its mass and charge (similar to how the path of a large steel ball
rolling past a magnet is deflected to a lesser extent that that of a small steel ball). The ions are detected, and a
plot of the relative number of ions generated versus their mass-to-charge ratios (amass spectrum) is made.
The height of each vertical feature or peak in a mass spectrum is proportional to the fraction of cations with
the specified mass-to-charge ratio. Since its initial use during the development of modern atomic theory, MS
has evolved to become a powerful tool for chemical analysis in a wide range of applications.
FIGURE2.15 Analysis of zirconium in a mass spectrometer produces a mass spectrum with peaks showing the
different isotopes of Zr.
LINK TO LEARNING
See ananimation(http://openstax.org/l/16MassSpec)that explains mass spectrometry. Watch thisvideo
(http://openstax.org/l/16RSChemistry)from the Royal Society for Chemistry for a brief description of the
rudiments of mass spectrometry.
2.4 Chemical Formulas
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Symbolize the composition of molecules using molecular formulas and empirical formulas
• Represent the bonding arrangement of atoms within molecules using structural formulas
Amolecular formulais a representation of a molecule that uses chemical symbols to indicate the types of
atoms followed by subscripts to show the number of atoms of each type in the molecule. (A subscript is used
only when more than one atom of a given type is present.) Molecular formulas are also used as abbreviations
PAGE: 94
80 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
for the names of compounds.
Thestructural formulafor a compound gives the same information as its molecular formula (the types and
numbers of atoms in the molecule) but also shows how the atoms are connected in the molecule. The
structural formula for methane contains symbols for one C atom and four H atoms, indicating the number of
atoms in the molecule (Figure 2.16). The lines represent bonds that hold the atoms together. (A chemical bond
is an attraction between atoms or ions that holds them together in a molecule or a crystal.) We will discuss
chemical bonds and see how to predict the arrangement of atoms in a molecule later. For now, simply know
that the lines are an indication of how the atoms are connected in a molecule. A ball-and-stick model shows
the geometric arrangement of the atoms with atomic sizes not to scale, and a space-filling model shows the
relative sizes of the atoms.
FIGURE2.16 A methane molecule can be represented as (a) a molecular formula, (b) a structural formula, (c) a
ball-and-stick model, and (d) a space-filling model. Carbon and hydrogen atoms are represented by black and white
spheres, respectively.
Although many elements consist of discrete, individual atoms, some exist as molecules made up of two or
more atoms of the element chemically bonded together. For example, most samples of the elements hydrogen,
oxygen, and nitrogen are composed of molecules that contain two atoms each (called diatomic molecules) and
thus have the molecular formulas H , O , and N , respectively. Other elements commonly found as diatomic
2 2 2
molecules are fluorine (F ), chlorine (Cl ), bromine (Br ), and iodine (I ). The most common form of the
2 2 2 2
element sulfur is composed of molecules that consist of eight atoms of sulfur; its molecular formula is S
8
(Figure 2.17).
FIGURE2.17 A molecule of sulfur is composed of eight sulfur atoms and is therefore written as S . It can be
8
represented as (a) a structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick model, and (c) a space-filling model. Sulfur atoms are
represented by yellow spheres.
It is important to note that a subscript following a symbol and a number in front of a symbol do not represent
the same thing; for example, H and 2H represent distinctly different species. H is a molecular formula; it
2 2
represents a diatomic molecule of hydrogen, consisting of two atoms of the element that are chemically
bonded together. The expression 2H, on the other hand, indicates two separate hydrogen atoms that are not
combined as a unit. The expression 2H represents two molecules of diatomic hydrogen (Figure 2.18).
2
FIGURE2.18 The symbols H, 2H, H , and 2H represent very different entities.
2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 95
2.4 • Chemical Formulas 81
Compounds are formed when two or more elements chemically combine, resulting in the formation of bonds.
For example, hydrogen and oxygen can react to form water, and sodium and chlorine can react to form table
salt. We sometimes describe the composition of these compounds with anempirical formula, which indicates
the types of atoms present andthe simplest whole-number ratio of the number of atoms (or ions) in the
compound. For example, titanium dioxide (used as pigment in white paint and in the thick, white, blocking
type of sunscreen) has an empirical formula of TiO . This identifies the elements titanium (Ti) and oxygen (O)
2
as the constituents of titanium dioxide, and indicates the presence of twice as many atoms of the element
oxygen as atoms of the element titanium (Figure 2.19).
FIGURE2.19 (a) The white compound titanium dioxide provides effective protection from the sun. (b) A crystal of
titanium dioxide, TiO , contains titanium and oxygen in a ratio of 1 to 2. The titanium atoms are gray and the oxygen
2
atoms are red. (credit a: modification of work by “osseous”/Flickr)
As discussed previously, we can describe a compound with a molecular formula, in which the subscripts
indicate theactual numbers of atomsof each element in a molecule of the compound. In many cases, the
molecular formula of a substance is derived from experimental determination of both its empirical formula
and itsmolecular mass(the sum of atomic masses for all atoms composing the molecule). For example, it can
be determined experimentally that benzene contains two elements, carbon (C) and hydrogen (H), and that for
every carbon atom in benzene, there is one hydrogen atom. Thus, the empirical formula is CH. An
experimental determination of the molecular mass reveals that a molecule of benzene contains six carbon
atoms and six hydrogen atoms, so the molecular formula for benzene is C H (Figure 2.20).
6 6
FIGURE2.20 Benzene, C H , is produced during oil refining and has many industrial uses. A benzene molecule can
6 6
be represented as (a) a structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick model, and (c) a space-filling model. (d) Benzene is a
clear liquid. (credit d: modification of work by Sahar Atwa)
If we know a compound’s formula, we can easily determine the empirical formula. (This is somewhat of an
academic exercise; the reverse chronology is generally followed in actual practice.) For example, the molecular
formula for acetic acid, the component that gives vinegar its sharp taste, is C H O . This formula indicates that
2 4 2
a molecule of acetic acid (Figure 2.21) contains two carbon atoms, four hydrogen atoms, and two oxygen atoms.
The ratio of atoms is 2:4:2. Dividing by the lowest common denominator (2) gives the simplest, whole-number
ratio of atoms, 1:2:1, so the empirical formula is CH O. Note that a molecular formula is always a whole-
2
number multiple of an empirical formula.
PAGE: 96
82 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
FIGURE2.21 (a) Vinegar contains acetic acid, C H O , which has an empirical formula of CH O. It can be
2 4 2 2
represented as (b) a structural formula and (c) as a ball-and-stick model. (credit a: modification of work by
“HomeSpot HQ”/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 2.6
Empirical and Molecular Formulas
Molecules of glucose (blood sugar) contain 6 carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 6 oxygen atoms. What are
the molecular and empirical formulas of glucose?
Solution
The molecular formula is C H O because one molecule actually contains 6 C, 12 H, and 6 O atoms. The
6 12 6
simplest whole-number ratio of C to H to O atoms in glucose is 1:2:1, so the empirical formula is CH O.
2
Check Your Learning
A molecule of metaldehyde (a pesticide used for snails and slugs) contains 8 carbon atoms, 16 hydrogen atoms,
and 4 oxygen atoms. What are the molecular and empirical formulas of metaldehyde?
Answer:
Molecular formula, C H O ; empirical formula, C H O
8 16 4 2 4
LINK TO LEARNING
You can exploremolecule building(http://openstax.org/l/16molbuilding)using an online simulation.
Portrait of a Chemist
Lee Cronin
What is it that chemists do? According to LeeCronin(Figure 2.22), chemists make very complicated
molecules by “chopping up” small molecules and “reverse engineering” them. He wonders if we could
“make a really cool universal chemistry set” by what he calls “app-ing” chemistry. Could we “app”
chemistry?
In a 2012 TED talk, Lee describes one fascinating possibility: combining a collection of chemical “inks”
with a 3D printer capable of fabricating a reaction apparatus (tiny test tubes, beakers, and the like) to
fashion a “universal toolkit of chemistry.” This toolkit could be used to create custom-tailored drugs to fight
a new superbug or to “print” medicine personally configured to your genetic makeup, environment, and
health situation. Says Cronin, “What Apple did for music, I’d like to do for the discovery and distribution of
2
prescription drugs.” View hisfull talk(http://openstax.org/l/16LeeCronin)at the TED website.
2 Lee Cronin, “Print Your Own Medicine,” Talk presented at TED Global 2012, Edinburgh, Scotland, June 2012.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 97
2.4 • Chemical Formulas 83
FIGURE2.22 Chemist Lee Cronin has been named one of the UK’s 10 most inspirational scientists. The
youngest chair at the University of Glasgow, Lee runs a large research group, collaborates with many scientists
worldwide, has published over 250 papers in top scientific journals, and has given more than 150 invited talks.
His research focuses on complex chemical systems and their potential to transform technology, but also
branches into nanoscience, solar fuels, synthetic biology, and even artificial life and evolution. (credit: image
courtesy of Lee Cronin)
It is important to be aware that it may be possible for the same atoms to be arranged in different ways:
Compounds with the same molecular formula may have different atom-to-atom bonding and therefore
different structures. For example, could there be another compound with the same formula as acetic acid,
C H O ? And if so, what would be the structure of its molecules?
2 4 2
If you predict that another compound with the formula C H O could exist, then you demonstrated good
2 4 2
chemical insight and are correct. Two C atoms, four H atoms, and two O atoms can also be arranged to form a
methyl formate, which is used in manufacturing, as an insecticide, and for quick-drying finishes. Methyl
formate molecules have one of the oxygen atoms between the two carbon atoms, differing from the
arrangement in acetic acid molecules. Acetic acid and methyl formate are examples ofisomers—compounds
with the same chemical formula but different molecular structures (Figure 2.23). Note that this small
difference in the arrangement of the atoms has a major effect on their respective chemical properties. You
would certainly not want to use a solution of methyl formate as a substitute for a solution of acetic acid
(vinegar) when you make salad dressing.
FIGURE2.23 Molecules of (a) acetic acid and methyl formate (b) are structural isomers; they have the same
formula (C H O ) but different structures (and therefore different chemical properties).
2 4 2
Many types of isomers exist (Figure 2.24). Acetic acid and methyl formate arestructural isomers, compounds
PAGE: 98
84 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
in which the molecules differ in how the atoms are connected to each other. There are also various types of
spatial isomers, in which the relative orientations of the atoms in space can be different. For example, the
compound carvone (found in caraway seeds, spearmint, and mandarin orange peels) consists of two isomers
that are mirror images of each other.S-(+)-carvone smells like caraway, andR-(−)-carvone smells like
spearmint.
FIGURE2.24 Molecules of carvone are spatial isomers; they only differ in the relative orientations of the atoms in
space. (credit bottom left: modification of work by “Miansari66”/Wikimedia Commons; credit bottom right:
modification of work by Forest & Kim Starr)
LINK TO LEARNING
Select thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16isomers)to view an explanation of isomers, spatial isomers, and why
they have different smells (select the video titled “Mirror Molecule: Carvone”).
2.5 The Periodic Table
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the periodic law and explain the organization of elements in the periodic table
• Predict the general properties of elements based on their location within the periodic table
• Identify metals, nonmetals, and metalloids by their properties and/or location on the periodic table
As early chemists worked to purify ores and discovered more elements, they realized that various elements
could be grouped together by their similar chemical behaviors. One such grouping includes lithium (Li),
sodium (Na), and potassium (K): These elements all are shiny, conduct heat and electricity well, and have
similar chemical properties. A second grouping includes calcium (Ca), strontium (Sr), and barium (Ba), which
also are shiny, good conductors of heat and electricity, and have chemical properties in common. However, the
specific properties of these two groupings are notably different from each other. For example: Li, Na, and K are
much more reactive than are Ca, Sr, and Ba; Li, Na, and K form compounds with oxygen in a ratio of two of their
atoms to one oxygen atom, whereas Ca, Sr, and Ba form compounds with one of their atoms to one oxygen
atom. Fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine (I) also exhibit similar properties to each other, but
these properties are drastically different from those of any of the elements above.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 99
2.5 • The Periodic Table 85
DimitriMendeleevin Russia (1869) and LotharMeyerin Germany (1870) independently recognized that there
was a periodic relationship among the properties of the elements known at that time. Both published tables
with the elements arranged according to increasing atomic mass. But Mendeleev went one step further than
Meyer: He used his table to predict the existence of elements that would have the properties similar to
aluminum and silicon, but were yet unknown. The discoveries of gallium (1875) and germanium (1886)
provided great support for Mendeleev’s work. Although Mendeleev and Meyer had a long dispute over priority,
Mendeleev’s contributions to the development of the periodic table are now more widely recognized (Figure
2.25).
FIGURE2.25 (a) Dimitri Mendeleev is widely credited with creating (b) the first periodic table of the elements.
(credit a: modification of work by Serge Lachinov; credit b: modification of work by “Den fjättrade ankan”/Wikimedia
Commons)
By the twentieth century, it became apparent that the periodic relationship involved atomic numbers rather
than atomic masses. The modern statement of this relationship, theperiodic law, is as follows:the properties
of the elements are periodic functions of their atomic numbers. A modernperiodic tablearranges the
elements in increasing order of their atomic numbers and groups atoms with similar properties in the same
vertical column (Figure 2.26). Each box represents an element and contains its atomic number, symbol,
average atomic mass, and (sometimes) name. The elements are arranged in seven horizontal rows, called
periodsorseries, and 18 vertical columns, calledgroups. Groups are labeled at the top of each column. In the
United States, the labels traditionally were numerals with capital letters. However, IUPAC recommends that the
numbers 1 through 18 be used, and these labels are more common. For the table to fit on a single page, parts of
two of the rows, a total of 14 columns, are usually written below the main body of the table.
PAGE: 100
86 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
FIGURE2.26 Elements in the periodic table are organized according to their properties.
Even after the periodic nature of elements and the table itself were widely accepted, gaps remained.
Mendeleev had predicted, and others including Henry Moseley had later confirmed, that there should be
elements below Manganese in Group 7. German chemists Ida Tacke and Walter Noddack set out to find the
elements, a quest being pursued by scientists around the world. Their method was unique in that they did not
only consider the properties of manganese, but also the elements horizontally adjacent to the missing
elements 43 and 75 on the table. Thus, by investigating ores containing minerals of ruthenium (Ru), tungsten
(W), osmium (Os), and so on, they were able to identify naturally occurring elements that helped complete the
table. Rhenium, one of their discoveries, was one of the last natural elements to be discovered and is the last
stable element to be discovered. (Francium, the last natural element to be discovered, was identified by
Marguerite Perey in 1939.)
Many elements differ dramatically in their chemical and physical properties, but some elements are similar in
their behaviors. For example, many elements appear shiny, are malleable (able to be deformed without
breaking) and ductile (can be drawn into wires), and conduct heat and electricity well. Other elements are not
shiny, malleable, or ductile, and are poor conductors of heat and electricity. We can sort the elements into large
classes with common properties:metals(elements that are shiny, malleable, good conductors of heat and
electricity—shaded yellow);nonmetals(elements that appear dull, poor conductors of heat and
electricity—shaded green); andmetalloids(elements that conduct heat and electricity moderately well, and
possess some properties of metals and some properties of nonmetals—shaded purple).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 101
2.5 • The Periodic Table 87
The elements can also be classified into themain-group elements(orrepresentative elements) in the
3
columns labeled 1, 2, and 13–18; thetransition metalsin the columns labeled 3–12 ; andinner transition
metalsin the two rows at the bottom of the table (the top-row elements are calledlanthanidesand the bottom-
row elements areactinides;Figure 2.27). The elements can be subdivided further by more specific properties,
such as the composition of the compounds they form. For example, the elements in group 1 (the first column)
form compounds that consist of one atom of the element and one atom of hydrogen. These elements (except
hydrogen) are known asalkali metals, and they all have similar chemical properties. The elements in group 2
(the second column) form compounds consisting of one atom of the element and two atoms of hydrogen: These
are calledalkaline earth metals, with similar properties among members of that group. Other groups with
specific names are thepnictogens(group 15),chalcogens(group 16),halogens(group 17), and thenoble
gases(group 18, also known asinert gases). The groups can also be referred to by the first element of the
group: For example, the chalcogens can be called the oxygen group or oxygen family. Hydrogen is a unique,
nonmetallic element with properties similar to both group 1 and group 17 elements. For that reason, hydrogen
may be shown at the top of both groups, or by itself.
FIGURE2.27 The periodic table organizes elements with similar properties into groups.
LINK TO LEARNING
Click on thislink(https://openstax.org/l/16Periodic)for an interactive periodic table, which you can use to
explore the properties of the elements (includes podcasts and videos of each element). You may also want to
try thisone(https://openstax.org/l/16Periodic2)that shows photos of all the elements.
EXAMPLE 2.7
Naming Groups of Elements
Atoms of each of the following elements are essential for life. Give the group name for the following elements:
(a) chlorine
3 Per the IUPAC definition, group 12 elements are not transition metals, though they are often referred to as such. Additional details
on this group’s elements are provided in a chapter on transition metals and coordination chemistry.
PAGE: 102
88 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
(b) calcium
(c) sodium
(d) sulfur
Solution
The family names are as follows:
(a) halogen
(b) alkaline earth metal
(c) alkali metal
(d) chalcogen
Check Your Learning
Give the group name for each of the following elements:
(a) krypton
(b) selenium
(c) barium
(d) lithium
Answer:
(a) noble gas; (b) chalcogen; (c) alkaline earth metal; (d) alkali metal
As you will learn in your further study of chemistry, elements in groups often behave in a somewhat similar
manner. This is partly due to the number of electrons in their outer shell and their similar readiness to bond.
These shared properties can have far-ranging implications in nature, science, and medicine. For example,
when Gertrude Elion and George Hitchens were investigating ways to interrupt cell and virus replication to
fight diseases, they utilized the similarity between sulfur and oxygen (both in Group 16) and their capacity to
bond in similar ways. Elion focused on purines, which are key components of DNA and which contain oxygen.
She found that by introducing sulfur-based compounds (called purine analogues) that mimic the structure of
purines, molecules within DNA would bond to the analogues rather than the "regular" DNA purine. With the
normal DNA bonding and structure altered, Elion successfully interrupted cell replication. At its core, the
strategy worked because of the similarity between sulfur and oxygen. Her discovery led directly to important
treatments for leukemia. Overall, Elion's work with George Hitchens not only led to more treatments, but also
changed the entire methodology of drug development. By using specific elements and compounds to target
specific aspects of tumor cells, viruses, and bacteria, they laid the groundwork for many of today's most
common and important medicines, used to help millions of people each year. They were awarded the Nobel
Prize in 1988.
In studying the periodic table, you might have noticed something about the atomic masses of some of the
elements. Element 43 (technetium), element 61 (promethium), and most of the elements with atomic number
84 (polonium) and higher have their atomic mass given in square brackets. This is done for elements that
consist entirely of unstable, radioactive isotopes (you will learn more about radioactivity in the nuclear
chemistry chapter). An average atomic weight cannot be determined for these elements because their
radioisotopes may vary significantly in relative abundance, depending on the source, or may not even exist in
nature. The number in square brackets is the atomic mass number (an approximate atomic mass) of the most
stable isotope of that element.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 103
2.6 • Ionic and Molecular Compounds 89
2.6 Ionic and Molecular Compounds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define ionic and molecular (covalent) compounds
• Predict the type of compound formed from elements based on their location within the periodic table
• Determine formulas for simple ionic compounds
In ordinary chemical reactions, the nucleus of each atom (and thus the identity of the element) remains
unchanged. Electrons, however, can be added to atoms by transfer from other atoms, lost by transfer to other
atoms, or shared with other atoms. The transfer and sharing of electrons among atoms govern the chemistry of
the elements. During the formation of some compounds, atoms gain or lose electrons, and form electrically
charged particles called ions (Figure 2.28).
FIGURE2.28 (a) A sodium atom (Na) has equal numbers of protons and electrons (11) and is uncharged. (b) A
sodium cation (Na+) has lost an electron, so it has one more proton (11) than electrons (10), giving it an overall
positive charge, signified by a superscripted plus sign.
You can use the periodic table to predict whether an atom will form an anion or a cation, and you can often
predict the charge of the resulting ion. Atoms of many main-group metals lose enough electrons to leave them
with the same number of electrons as an atom of the preceding noble gas. To illustrate, an atom of an alkali
metal (group 1) loses one electron and forms a cation with a 1+ charge; an alkaline earth metal (group 2) loses
two electrons and forms a cation with a 2+ charge, and so on. For example, a neutral calcium atom, with 20
protons and 20 electrons, readily loses two electrons. This results in a cation with 20 protons, 18 electrons, and
a 2+ charge. It has the same number of electrons as atoms of the preceding noble gas, argon, and is symbolized
Ca2+. The name of a metal ion is the same as the name of the metal atom from which it forms, so Ca2+is called
a calcium ion.
When atoms of nonmetal elements form ions, they generally gain enough electrons to give them the same
number of electrons as an atom of the next noble gas in the periodic table. Atoms of group 17 gain one electron
and form anions with a 1− charge; atoms of group 16 gain two electrons and form ions with a 2− charge, and so
on. For example, the neutral bromine atom, with 35 protons and 35 electrons, can gain one electron to provide
it with 36 electrons. This results in an anion with 35 protons, 36 electrons, and a 1− charge. It has the same
number of electrons as atoms of the next noble gas, krypton, and is symbolized Br−. (A discussion of the theory
supporting the favored status of noble gas electron numbers reflected in these predictive rules for ion
formation is provided in a later chapter of this text.)
Note the usefulness of the periodic table in predicting likely ion formation and charge (Figure 2.29). Moving
from the far left to the right on the periodic table, main-group elements tend to form cations with a charge
equal to the group number. That is, group 1 elements form 1+ ions; group 2 elements form 2+ ions, and so on.
Moving from the far right to the left on the periodic table, elements often form anions with a negative charge
PAGE: 104
90 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
equal to the number of groups moved left from the noble gases. For example, group 17 elements (one group
left of the noble gases) form 1− ions; group 16 elements (two groups left) form 2− ions, and so on. This trend
can be used as a guide in many cases, but its predictive value decreases when moving toward the center of the
periodic table. In fact, transition metals and some other metals often exhibit variable charges that are not
predictable by their location in the table. For example, copper can form ions with a 1+ or 2+ charge, and iron
can form ions with a 2+ or 3+ charge.
FIGURE2.29 Some elements exhibit a regular pattern of ionic charge when they form ions.
EXAMPLE 2.8
Composition of Ions
An ion found in some compounds used as antiperspirants contains 13 protons and 10 electrons. What is its
symbol?
Solution
Because the number of protons remains unchanged when an atom forms an ion, the atomic number of the
element must be 13. Knowing this lets us use the periodic table to identify the element as Al (aluminum). The
Al atom has lost three electrons and thus has three more positive charges (13) than it has electrons (10). This is
the aluminum cation, Al3+.
Check Your Learning
Give the symbol and name for the ion with 34 protons and 36 electrons.
Answer:
Se2−, the selenide ion
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 105
2.6 • Ionic and Molecular Compounds 91
EXAMPLE 2.9
Formation of Ions
Magnesium and nitrogen react to form an ionic compound. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a
cation, and the charges of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and name them.
Solution
Magnesium’s position in the periodic table (group 2) tells us that it is a metal. Metals form positive ions
(cations). A magnesium atom must lose two electrons to have the same number electrons as an atom of the
previous noble gas, neon. Thus, a magnesium atom will form a cation with two fewer electrons than protons
and a charge of 2+. The symbol for the ion is Mg2+, and it is called a magnesium ion.
Nitrogen’s position in the periodic table (group 15) reveals that it is a nonmetal. Nonmetals form negative ions
(anions). A nitrogen atom must gain three electrons to have the same number of electrons as an atom of the
following noble gas, neon. Thus, a nitrogen atom will form an anion with three more electrons than protons
and a charge of 3−. The symbol for the ion is N3−, and it is called a nitride ion.
Check Your Learning
Aluminum and carbon react to form an ionic compound. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a cation,
and the charges of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and name them.
Answer:
Al will form a cation with a charge of 3+: Al3+, an aluminum ion. Carbon will form an anion with a charge of 4−:
C4−, a carbide ion.
The ions that we have discussed so far are calledmonatomic ions, that is, they are ions formed from only one
atom. We also find manypolyatomic ions. These ions, which act as discrete units, are electrically charged
molecules (a group of bonded atoms with an overall charge). Some of the more important polyatomic ions are
listed inTable 2.5.Oxyanionsare polyatomic ions that contain one or more oxygen atoms. At this point in your
study of chemistry, you should memorize the names, formulas, and charges of the most common polyatomic
ions. Because you will use them repeatedly, they will soon become familiar.
Common Polyatomic Ions
Name Formula Related Acid Formula
ammonium
hydronium
peroxide
hydroxide
acetate acetic acid CH COOH
3
cyanide CN− hydrocyanic acid HCN
azide hydrazoic acid HN
3
carbonate carbonic acid H CO
2 3
TABLE2.5
PAGE: 106
92 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Name Formula Related Acid Formula
bicarbonate
nitrate nitric acid HNO
3
nitrite nitrous acid HNO
2
sulfate sulfuric acid H SO
2 4
hydrogen sulfate
sulfite sulfurous acid H SO
2 3
hydrogen sulfite
phosphate phosphoric acid H PO
3 4
hydrogen phosphate
dihydrogen phosphate
perchlorate perchloric acid HClO
4
chlorate chloric acid HClO
3
chlorite chlorous acid HClO
2
hypochlorite ClO− hypochlorous acid HClO
chromate chromic acid H CrO
2 4
dichromate dichromic acid H Cr O
2 2 7
permanganate permanganic acid HMnO
4
TABLE2.5
Note that there is a system for naming some polyatomic ions;-ateand-iteare suffixes designating polyatomic
ions containing more or fewer oxygen atoms.Per-(short for “hyper”) andhypo-(meaning “under”) are
prefixes meaning more oxygen atoms than-ateand fewer oxygen atoms than-ite, respectively. For example,
perchlorate is chlorate is chlorite is and hypochlorite is ClO−. Unfortunately, the
number of oxygen atoms corresponding to a given suffix or prefix is not consistent; for example, nitrate is
while sulfate is This will be covered in more detail in the next module on nomenclature.
The nature of the attractive forces that hold atoms or ions together within a compound is the basis for
classifying chemical bonding. When electrons are transferred and ions form,ionic bondsresult. Ionic bonds
are electrostatic forces of attraction, that is, the attractive forces experienced between objects of opposite
electrical charge (in this case, cations and anions). When electrons are “shared” and molecules form,covalent
bondsresult. Covalent bonds are the attractive forces between the positively charged nuclei of the bonded
atoms and one or more pairs of electrons that are located between the atoms. Compounds are classified as
ionic or molecular (covalent) on the basis of the bonds present in them.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 107
2.6 • Ionic and Molecular Compounds 93
Ionic Compounds
When an element composed of atoms that readily lose electrons (a metal) reacts with an element composed of
atoms that readily gain electrons (a nonmetal), a transfer of electrons usually occurs, producing ions. The
compound formed by this transfer is stabilized by the electrostatic attractions (ionic bonds) between the ions
of opposite charge present in the compound. For example, when each sodium atom in a sample of sodium
metal (group 1) gives up one electron to form a sodium cation, Na+, and each chlorine atom in a sample of
chlorine gas (group 17) accepts one electron to form a chloride anion, Cl−, the resulting compound, NaCl, is
composed of sodium ions and chloride ions in the ratio of one Na+ion for each Cl−ion. Similarly, each calcium
atom (group 2) can give up two electrons and transfer one to each of two chlorine atoms to form CaCl , which is
2
composed of Ca2+and Cl−ions in the ratio of one Ca2+ion to two Cl−ions.
A compound that contains ions and is held together by ionic bonds is called anionic compound. The periodic
table can help us recognize many of the compounds that are ionic: When a metal is combined with one or more
nonmetals, the compound is usually ionic. This guideline works well for predicting ionic compound formation
for most of the compounds typically encountered in an introductory chemistry course. However, it is not
always true (for example, aluminum chloride, AlCl , is not ionic).
3
You can often recognize ionic compounds because of their properties. Ionic compounds are solids that
typically melt at high temperatures and boil at even higher temperatures. For example, sodium chloride melts
at 801 °C and boils at 1413 °C. (As a comparison, the molecular compound water melts at 0 °C and boils at 100
°C.) In solid form, an ionic compound is not electrically conductive because its ions are unable to flow
(“electricity” is the flow of charged particles). When molten, however, it can conduct electricity because its ions
are able to move freely through the liquid (Figure 2.30).
FIGURE2.30 Sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and conducts electricity when molten. (credit: modification of work
by Mark Blaser and Matt Evans)
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16moltensalt)to see a mixture of salts melt and conduct electricity.
In every ionic compound, the total number of positive charges of the cations equals the total number of
negative charges of the anions. Thus, ionic compounds are electrically neutral overall, even though they
contain positive and negative ions. We can use this observation to help us write the formula of an ionic
compound. The formula of an ionic compound must have a ratio of ions such that the numbers of positive and
negative charges are equal.
EXAMPLE 2.10
Predicting the Formula of an Ionic Compound
The gemstone sapphire (Figure 2.31) is mostly a compound of aluminum and oxygen that contains aluminum
PAGE: 108
94 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
cations, Al3+, and oxygen anions, O2−. What is the formula of this compound?
FIGURE2.31 Although pure aluminum oxide is colorless, trace amounts of iron and titanium give blue sapphire its
characteristic color. (credit: modification of work by Stanislav Doronenko)
Solution
Because the ionic compound must be electrically neutral, it must have the same number of positive and
negative charges. Two aluminum ions, each with a charge of 3+, would give us six positive charges, and three
oxide ions, each with a charge of 2−, would give us six negative charges. The formula would be Al O .
2 3
Check Your Learning
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the sodium cation, Na+, and the sulfide anion, S2−.
Answer:
Na S
2
Many ionic compounds contain polyatomic ions (Table 2.5) as the cation, the anion, or both. As with simple
ionic compounds, these compounds must also be electrically neutral, so their formulas can be predicted by
treating the polyatomic ions as discrete units. We use parentheses in a formula to indicate a group of atoms
that behave as a unit. For example, the formula for calcium phosphate, one of the minerals in our bones, is
Ca (PO ) . This formula indicates that there are three calcium ions (Ca2+) for every two phosphate
3 42
groups. The groups are discrete units, each consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen atoms,
and having an overall charge of 3−. The compound is electrically neutral, and its formula shows a total count of
three Ca, two P, and eight O atoms.
EXAMPLE 2.11
Predicting the Formula of a Compound with a Polyatomic Anion
Baking powder contains calcium dihydrogen phosphate, an ionic compound composed of the ions Ca2+and
What is the formula of this compound?
Solution
The positive and negative charges must balance, and this ionic compound must be electrically neutral. Thus,
we must have two negative charges to balance the 2+ charge of the calcium ion. This requires a ratio of one
Ca2+ion to two ions. We designate this by enclosing the formula for the dihydrogen phosphate ion in
parentheses and adding a subscript 2. The formula is Ca(H PO ) .
2 42
Check Your Learning
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the lithium ion and the peroxide ion, (Hint:
Use the periodic table to predict the sign and the charge on the lithium ion.)
Answer:
Li O
2 2
Because an ionic compound is not made up of single, discrete molecules, it may not be properly symbolized
using amolecularformula. Instead, ionic compounds must be symbolized by a formula indicating therelative
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 109
2.6 • Ionic and Molecular Compounds 95
numbersof its constituent ions. For compounds containing only monatomic ions (such as NaCl) and for many
compounds containing polyatomic ions (such as CaSO ), these formulas are just the empirical formulas
4
introduced earlier in this chapter. However, the formulas for some ionic compounds containing polyatomic
ions are not empirical formulas. For example, the ionic compound sodium oxalate is comprised of Na+and
ions combined in a 2:1 ratio, and its formula is written as Na C O . The subscripts in this formula are
2 2 4
not the smallest-possible whole numbers, as each can be divided by 2 to yield the empirical formula, NaCO .
2
This is not the accepted formula for sodium oxalate, however, as it does not accurately represent the
compound’s polyatomic anion,
Molecular Compounds
Many compounds do not contain ions but instead consist solely of discrete, neutral molecules. These
molecular compounds(covalent compounds) result when atoms share, rather than transfer (gain or lose),
electrons. Covalent bonding is an important and extensive concept in chemistry, and it will be treated in
considerable detail in a later chapter of this text. We can often identify molecular compounds on the basis of
their physical properties. Under normal conditions, molecular compounds often exist as gases, low-boiling
liquids, and low-melting solids, although many important exceptions exist.
Whereas ionic compounds are usually formed when a metal and a nonmetal combine, covalent compounds
are usually formed by a combination of nonmetals. Thus, the periodic table can help us recognize many of the
compounds that are covalent. While we can use the positions of a compound’s elements in the periodic table to
predict whether it is ionic or covalent at this point in our study of chemistry, you should be aware that this is a
very simplistic approach that does not account for a number of interesting exceptions. Shades of gray exist
between ionic and molecular compounds, and you’ll learn more about those later.
EXAMPLE 2.12
Predicting the Type of Bonding in Compounds
Predict whether the following compounds are ionic or molecular:
(a) KI, the compound used as a source of iodine in table salt
(b) H O , the bleach and disinfectant hydrogen peroxide
2 2
(c) CHCl , the anesthetic chloroform
3
(d) Li CO , a source of lithium in antidepressants
2 3
Solution
(a) Potassium (group 1) is a metal, and iodine (group 17) is a nonmetal; KI is predicted to be ionic.
(b) Hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and oxygen (group 16) is a nonmetal; H O is predicted to be molecular.
2 2
(c) Carbon (group 14) is a nonmetal, hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and chlorine (group 17) is a nonmetal;
CHCl is predicted to be molecular.
3
(d) Lithium (group 1) is a metal, and carbonate is a polyatomic ion; Li CO is predicted to be ionic.
2 3
Check Your Learning
Using the periodic table, predict whether the following compounds are ionic or covalent:
(a) SO
2
(b) CaF
2
(c) N H
2 4
(d) Al (SO )
2 43
PAGE: 110
96 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Answer:
(a) molecular; (b) ionic; (c) molecular; (d) ionic
2.7 Chemical Nomenclature
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive names for common types of inorganic compounds using a systematic approach
Nomenclature, a collection of rules for naming things, is important in science and in many other situations.
This module describes an approach that is used to name simple ionic and molecular compounds, such as
NaCl, CaCO , and N O . The simplest of these arebinary compounds, those containing only two elements, but
3 2 4
we will also consider how to name ionic compounds containing polyatomic ions, and one specific, very
important class of compounds known asacids(subsequent chapters in this text will focus on these compounds
in great detail). We will limit our attention here to inorganic compounds, compounds that are composed
principally of elements other than carbon, and will follow the nomenclature guidelines proposed by IUPAC.
The rules for organic compounds, in which carbon is the principle element, will be treated in a later chapter on
organic chemistry.
Ionic Compounds
To name an inorganic compound, we need to consider the answers to several questions. First, is the compound
ionic or molecular? If the compound is ionic, does the metal form ions of only one type (fixed charge) or more
than one type (variable charge)? Are the ions monatomic or polyatomic? If the compound is molecular, does it
contain hydrogen? If so, does it also contain oxygen? From the answers we derive, we place the compound in
an appropriate category and then name it accordingly.
Compounds Containing Only Monatomic Ions
The name of a binary compound containing monatomic ions consists of the name of the cation (the name of
the metal) followed by the name of the anion (the name of the nonmetallic element with its ending replaced by
the suffix –ide). Some examples are given inTable 2.6.
Names of Some Ionic Compounds
NaCl, sodium chloride Na O, sodium oxide
2
KBr, potassium bromide CdS, cadmium sulfide
CaI , calcium iodide Mg N , magnesium nitride
2 3 2
CsF, cesium fluoride Ca P , calcium phosphide
3 2
LiCl, lithium chloride Al C , aluminum carbide
4 3
TABLE2.6
Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions
Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions, i.e. by
naming first the cation and then the anion. Examples are shown inTable 2.7.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 111
2.7 • Chemical Nomenclature 97
Names of Some Polyatomic Ionic Compounds
KC H O , potassium acetate NH Cl, ammonium chloride
2 3 2 4
NaHCO , sodium bicarbonate CaSO , calcium sulfate
3 4
Al (CO ) , aluminum carbonate Mg (PO ) , magnesium phosphate
2 33 3 42
TABLE2.7
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Ionic Compounds in Your Cabinets
Every day you encounter and use a large number of ionic compounds. Some of these compounds, where
they are found, and what they are used for are listed inTable 2.8. Look at the label or ingredients list on the
various products that you use during the next few days, and see if you run into any of those in this table, or
find other ionic compounds that you could now name or write as a formula.
Everyday Ionic Compounds
Ionic Compound Use
NaCl, sodium chloride ordinary table salt
KI, potassium iodide added to “iodized” salt for thyroid health
NaF, sodium fluoride ingredient in toothpaste
NaHCO , sodium bicarbonate baking soda; used in cooking (and as antacid)
3
Na CO , sodium carbonate washing soda; used in cleaning agents
2 3
NaOCl, sodium hypochlorite active ingredient in household bleach
CaCO calcium carbonate ingredient in antacids
3
Mg(OH) , magnesium hydroxide ingredient in antacids
2
Al(OH) , aluminum hydroxide ingredient in antacids
3
NaOH, sodium hydroxide lye; used as drain cleaner
K PO , potassium phosphate food additive (many purposes)
3 4
MgSO , magnesium sulfate added to purified water
4
Na HPO , sodium hydrogen phosphate anti-caking agent; used in powdered products
2 4
TABLE2.8
PAGE: 112
98 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Ionic Compound Use
Na SO , sodium sulfite preservative
2 3
TABLE2.8
Compounds Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge
Most of the transition metals and some main group metals can form two or more cations with different
charges. Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the
first category, except the charge of the metal ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the
name of the metal. The charge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the
charge of the anion. For example, consider binary ionic compounds of iron and chlorine. Iron typically exhibits
a charge of either 2+ or 3+ (seeFigure 2.29), and the two corresponding compound formulas are FeCl and
2
FeCl . The simplest name, “iron chloride,” will, in this case, be ambiguous, as it does not distinguish between
3
these two compounds. In cases like this, the charge of the metal ion is included as a Roman numeral in
parentheses immediately following the metal name. These two compounds are then unambiguously named
iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively. Other examples are provided inTable 2.9.
Some Ionic Compounds with Variably Charged Metal Ions
Compound Name
FeCl iron(II) chloride
2
FeCl iron(III) chloride
3
Hg O mercury(I) oxide
2
HgO mercury(II) oxide
SnF tin(II) fluoride
2
SnF tin(IV) fluoride
4
TABLE2.9
Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes –icand –ousto designate metals with higher and lower charges,
respectively: Iron(III) chloride, FeCl , was previously called ferric chloride, and iron(II) chloride, FeCl , was
3 2
known as ferrous chloride. Though this naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific
community, it remains in use by some segments of industry. For example, you may see the wordsstannous
fluorideon a tube of toothpaste. This represents the formula SnF , which is more properly named tin(II)
2
fluoride. The other fluoride of tin is SnF , which was previously called stannic fluoride but is now named
4
tin(IV) fluoride.
Ionic Hydrates
Ionic compounds that contain water molecules as integral components of their crystals are calledhydrates.
The name for an ionic hydrate is derived by adding a term to the name for the anhydrous (meaning “not
hydrated”) compound that indicates the number of water molecules associated with each formula unit of the
compound. The added word begins with a Greek prefix denoting the number of water molecules (seeTable
2.10) and ends with “hydrate.” For example, the anhydrous compound copper(II) sulfate also exists as a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 113
2.7 • Chemical Nomenclature 99
hydrate containing five water molecules and named copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate. Washing soda is the
common name for a hydrate of sodium carbonate containing 10 water molecules; the systematic name is
sodium carbonate decahydrate.
Formulas for ionic hydrates are written by appending a vertically centered dot, a coefficient representing the
number of water molecules, and the formula for water. The two examples mentioned in the previous paragraph
are represented by the formulas
Nomenclature Prefixes
Number Prefix Number Prefix
1 (sometimes omitted) mono- 6 hexa-
2 di- 7 hepta-
3 tri- 8 octa-
4 tetra- 9 nona-
5 penta- 10 deca-
TABLE2.10
EXAMPLE 2.13
Naming Ionic Compounds
Name the following ionic compounds
(a) Fe S
2 3
(b) CuSe
(c) GaN
(d) MgSO ·7H O
4 2
(e) Ti (SO )
2 43
Solution
The anions in these compounds have a fixed negative charge (S2−, Se2−, N3−, and and the compounds
must be neutral. Because the total number of positive charges in each compound must equal the total number
of negative charges, the positive ions must be Fe3+, Cu2+, Ga3+, Mg2+, and Ti3+. These charges are used in the
names of the metal ions:
(a) iron(III) sulfide
(b) copper(II) selenide
(c) gallium(III) nitride
(d) magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
(e) titanium(III) sulfate
PAGE: 114
100 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
Check Your Learning
Write the formulas of the following ionic compounds:
(a) chromium(III) phosphide
(b) mercury(II) sulfide
(c) manganese(II) phosphate
(d) copper(I) oxide
(e) iron(III) chloride dihydrate
Answer:
(a) CrP; (b) HgS; (c) Mn (PO ) ; (d) Cu O; (e) FeCl ·2H O
3 42 2 3 2
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Erin Brockovich and Chromium Contamination
In the early 1990s, legal file clerk Erin Brockovich (Figure 2.32) discovered a high rate of serious illnesses
in the small town of Hinckley, California. Her investigation eventually linked the illnesses to groundwater
contaminated by Cr(VI) used by Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) to fight corrosion in a nearby natural gas
pipeline. As dramatized in the filmErin Brockovich(for which Julia Roberts won an Oscar), Erin and lawyer
Edward Masry sued PG&E for contaminating the water near Hinckley in 1993. The settlement they won in
1996—$333 million—was the largest amount ever awarded for a direct-action lawsuit in the US at that time.
FIGURE2.32 (a) Erin Brockovich found that Cr(VI), used by PG&E, had contaminated the Hinckley, California,
water supply. (b) The Cr(VI) ion is often present in water as the polyatomic ions chromate, (left), and
dichromate, (right).
Chromium compounds are widely used in industry, such as for chrome plating, in dye-making, as
preservatives, and to prevent corrosion in cooling tower water, as occurred near Hinckley. In the
environment, chromium exists primarily in either the Cr(III) or Cr(VI) forms. Cr(III), an ingredient of many
vitamin and nutritional supplements, forms compounds that are not very soluble in water, and it has low
toxicity. But Cr(VI) is much more toxic and forms compounds that are reasonably soluble in water.
Exposure to small amounts of Cr(VI) can lead to damage of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and immune
systems, as well as the kidneys, liver, blood, and skin.
Despite cleanup efforts, Cr(VI) groundwater contamination remains a problem in Hinckley and other
locations across the globe. A 2010 study by the Environmental Working Group found that of 35 US cities
tested, 31 had higher levels of Cr(VI) in their tap water than the public health goal of 0.02 parts per billion
set by the California Environmental Protection Agency.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 115
2.7 • Chemical Nomenclature 101
Molecular (Covalent) Compounds
The bonding characteristics of inorganic molecular compounds are different from ionic compounds, and they
are named using a different system as well. The charges of cations and anions dictate their ratios in ionic
compounds, so specifying the names of the ions provides sufficient information to determine chemical
formulas. However, because covalent bonding allows for significant variation in the combination ratios of the
atoms in a molecule, the names for molecular compounds must explicitly identify these ratios.
Compounds Composed of Two Elements
When two nonmetallic elements form a molecular compound, several combination ratios are often possible.
For example, carbon and oxygen can form the compounds CO and CO . Since these are different substances
2
with different properties, they cannot both have the same name (they cannot both be called carbon oxide). To
deal with this situation, we use a naming method that is somewhat similar to that used for ionic compounds,
but with added prefixes to specify the numbers of atoms of each element. The name of the more metallic
element (the one farther to the left and/or bottom of the periodic table) is first, followed by the name of the
more nonmetallic element (the one farther to the right and/or top) with its ending changed to the suffix –ide.
The numbers of atoms of each element are designated by the Greek prefixes shown inTable 2.10.
When only one atom of the first element is present, the prefixmono- is usually deleted from that part. Thus, CO
is named carbon monoxide, and CO is called carbon dioxide. When two vowels are adjacent, theain the Greek
2
prefix is usually dropped. Some other examples are shown inTable 2.11.
Names of Some Molecular Compounds Composed of Two Elements
Compound Name Compound Name
SO sulfur dioxide BCl boron trichloride
2 3
SO sulfur trioxide SF sulfur hexafluoride
3 6
NO nitrogen dioxide PF phosphorus pentafluoride
2 5
N O dinitrogen tetroxide P O tetraphosphorus decaoxide
2 4 4 10
N O dinitrogen pentoxide IF iodine heptafluoride
2 5 7
TABLE2.11
There are a few common names that you will encounter as you continue your study of chemistry. For example,
although NO is often called nitric oxide, its proper name is nitrogen monoxide. Similarly, N O is known as
2
nitrous oxide even though our rules would specify the name dinitrogen monoxide. (And H O is usually called
2
water, not dihydrogen monoxide.) You should commit to memory the common names of compounds as you
encounter them.
EXAMPLE 2.14
Naming Covalent Compounds
Name the following covalent compounds:
(a) SF
6
(b) N O
2 3
(c) Cl O
2 7
PAGE: 116
102 2 • Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
(d) P O
4 6
Solution
Because these compounds consist solely of nonmetals, we use prefixes to designate the number of atoms of
each element:
(a) sulfur hexafluoride
(b) dinitrogen trioxide
(c) dichlorine heptoxide
(d) tetraphosphorus hexoxide
Check Your Learning
Write the formulas for the following compounds:
(a) phosphorus pentachloride
(b) dinitrogen monoxide
(c) iodine heptafluoride
(d) carbon tetrachloride
Answer:
(a) PCl ; (b) N O; (c) IF ; (d) CCl
5 2 7 4
LINK TO LEARNING
The followingwebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16chemcompname)provides practice with naming chemical
compounds and writing chemical formulas. You can choose binary, polyatomic, and variable charge ionic
compounds, as well as molecular compounds.
Binary Acids
Some compounds containing hydrogen are members of an important class of substances known as acids. The
chemistry of these compounds is explored in more detail in later chapters of this text, but for now, it will
suffice to note that many acids release hydrogen ions, H+, when dissolved in water. To denote this distinct
chemical property, a mixture of water with an acid is given a name derived from the compound’s name. If the
compound is abinary acid(comprised of hydrogen and one other nonmetallic element):
1. The word “hydrogen” is changed to the prefixhydro-
2. The other nonmetallic element name is modified by adding the suffix -ic
3. The word “acid” is added as a second word
For example, when the gas HCl (hydrogen chloride) is dissolved in water, the solution is calledhydrochloric
acid. Several other examples of this nomenclature are shown inTable 2.12.
Names of Some Simple Acids
Name of Gas Name of Acid
HF(g), hydrogen fluoride HF(aq), hydrofluoric acid
HCl(g), hydrogen chloride HCl(aq), hydrochloric acid
TABLE2.12
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 117
2.7 • Chemical Nomenclature 103
Name of Gas Name of Acid
HBr(g), hydrogen bromide HBr(aq), hydrobromic acid
HI(g), hydrogen iodide HI(aq), hydroiodic acid
H S(g), hydrogen sulfide H S(aq), hydrosulfuric acid
2 2
TABLE2.12
Oxyacids
Many compounds containing three or more elements (such as organic compounds or coordination
compounds) are subject to specialized nomenclature rules that you will learn later. However, we will briefly
discuss the important compounds known asoxyacids, compounds that contain hydrogen, oxygen, and at least
one other element, and are bonded in such a way as to impart acidic properties to the compound (you will
learn the details of this in a later chapter). Typical oxyacids consist of hydrogen combined with a polyatomic,
oxygen-containing ion. To name oxyacids:
1. Omit “hydrogen”
2. Start with the root name of the anion
3. Replace –atewith –ic, or –itewith –ous
4. Add “acid”
For example, consider H CO (which you might be tempted to call “hydrogen carbonate”). To name this
2 3
correctly, “hydrogen” is omitted; the –ateof carbonate is replace with –ic; and acid is added—so its name is
carbonic acid. Other examples are given inTable 2.13. There are some exceptions to the general naming
method (e.g., H SO is called sulfuric acid, not sulfic acid, and H SO is sulfurous, not sulfous, acid).
2 4 2 3
Names of Common Oxyacids
Formula Anion Name Acid Name
HC H O acetate acetic acid
2 3 2
HNO nitrate nitric acid
3
HNO nitrite nitrous acid
2
HClO perchlorate perchloric acid
4
H CO carbonate carbonic acid
2 3
H SO sulfate sulfuric acid
2 4
H SO sulfite sulfurous acid
2 3
H PO phosphate phosphoric acid
3 4
TABLE2.13
PAGE: 118
104 2 • Key Terms
Key Terms
actinide inner transition metal in the bottom of the inner transition metal (also, lanthanide or
bottom two rows of the periodic table actinide) element in the bottom two rows; if in the
alkali metal element in group 1 first row, also called lanthanide, or if in the
alkaline earth metal element in group 2 second row, also called actinide
alpha particle (α particle) positively charged ion electrically charged atom or molecule (contains
particle consisting of two protons and two unequal numbers of protons and electrons)
neutrons ionic bond electrostatic forces of attraction
anion negatively charged atom or molecule between the oppositely charged ions of an ionic
(contains more electrons than protons) compound
atomic mass average mass of atoms of an element, ionic compound compound composed of cations
expressed in amu and anions combined in ratios, yielding an
atomic mass unit (amu) (also, unified atomic mass electrically neutral substance
unit, u, or Dalton, Da) unit of mass equal to of isomers compounds with the same chemical
the mass of a12C atom formula but different structures
atomic number (Z) number of protons in the isotopes atoms that contain the same number of
nucleus of an atom protons but different numbers of neutrons
binary acid compound that contains hydrogen and lanthanide inner transition metal in the top of the
one other element, bonded in a way that imparts bottom two rows of the periodic table
acidic properties to the compound (ability to law of constant composition (also, law of definite
release H+ions when dissolved in water) proportions) all samples of a pure compound
binary compound compound containing two contain the same elements in the same
different elements. proportions by mass
cation positively charged atom or molecule law of definite proportions (also, law of constant
(contains fewer electrons than protons) composition) all samples of a pure compound
chalcogen element in group 16 contain the same elements in the same
chemical symbol one-, two-, or three-letter proportions by mass
abbreviation used to represent an element or its law of multiple proportions when two elements
atoms react to form more than one compound, a fixed
covalent bond attractive force between the nuclei mass of one element will react with masses of the
of a molecule’s atoms and pairs of electrons other element in a ratio of small whole numbers
between the atoms main-group element (also, representative element)
covalent compound (also, molecular compound) element in groups 1, 2, and 13–18
composed of molecules formed by atoms of two mass number (A) sum of the numbers of neutrons
or more different elements and protons in the nucleus of an atom
Dalton (Da) alternative unit equivalent to the metal element that is shiny, malleable, good
atomic mass unit conductor of heat and electricity
Dalton’s atomic theory set of postulates that metalloid element that conducts heat and
established the fundamental properties of atoms electricity moderately well, and possesses some
electron negatively charged, subatomic particle of properties of metals and some properties of
relatively low mass located outside the nucleus nonmetals
empirical formula formula showing the molecular compound (also, covalent compound)
composition of a compound given as the simplest composed of molecules formed by atoms of two
whole-number ratio of atoms or more different elements
fundamental unit of charge (also called the molecular formula formula indicating the
elementary charge) equals the magnitude of the composition of a molecule of a compound and
charge of an electron (e) with e = 1.602 10−19C giving the actual number of atoms of each
group vertical column of the periodic table element in a molecule of the compound.
halogen element in group 17 monatomic ion ion composed of a single atom
hydrate compound containing one or more water neutron uncharged, subatomic particle located in
molecules bound within its crystals the nucleus
inert gas (also, noble gas) element in group 18 noble gas (also, inert gas) element in group 18
nomenclature system of rules for naming objects
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 119
2 • Key Equations 105
of interest atom
nonmetal element that appears dull, poor proton positively charged, subatomic particle
conductor of heat and electricity located in the nucleus
nucleus massive, positively charged center of an representative element (also, main-group
atom made up of protons and neutrons element) element in columns 1, 2, and 12–18
oxyacid compound that contains hydrogen, oxygen, series (also, period) horizontal row of the period
and one other element, bonded in a way that table
imparts acidic properties to the compound spatial isomers compounds in which the relative
(ability to release H+ions when dissolved in orientations of the atoms in space differ
water) structural formula shows the atoms in a molecule
oxyanion polyatomic anion composed of a central and how they are connected
atom bonded to oxygen atoms structural isomer one of two substances that have
period (also, series) horizontal row of the periodic the same molecular formula but different
table physical and chemical properties because their
periodic law properties of the elements are atoms are bonded differently
periodic function of their atomic numbers. transition metal element in groups 3–12 (more
periodic table table of the elements that places strictly defined, 3–11; see chapter on transition
elements with similar chemical properties close metals and coordination chemistry)
together unified atomic mass unit (u) alternative unit
pnictogen element in group 15 equivalent to the atomic mass unit
polyatomic ion ion composed of more than one
Key Equations
Summary
2.1Early Ideas in Atomic Theory dense, positively charged nucleus; the positively
charged particles within the nucleus are called
The ancient Greeks proposed that matter consists of
protons. Chadwick discovered that the nucleus also
extremely small particles called atoms. Dalton
contains neutral particles called neutrons. Soddy
postulated that each element has a characteristic
demonstrated that atoms of the same element can
type of atom that differs in properties from atoms of
differ in mass; these are called isotopes.
all other elements, and that atoms of different
elements can combine in fixed, small, whole- 2.3Atomic Structure and Symbolism
number ratios to form compounds. Samples of a
An atom consists of a small, positively charged
particular compound all have the same elemental
nucleus surrounded by electrons. The nucleus
proportions by mass. When two elements form
contains protons and neutrons; its diameter is about
different compounds, a given mass of one element
100,000 times smaller than that of the atom. The
will combine with masses of the other element in a
mass of one atom is usually expressed in atomic
small, whole-number ratio. During any chemical
mass units (amu), which is referred to as the atomic
change, atoms are neither created nor destroyed.
mass. An amu is defined as exactly of the mass of
2.2Evolution of Atomic Theory a carbon-12 atom and is equal to 1.6605 10−24g.
Although no one has actually seen the inside of an Protons are relatively heavy particles with a charge
atom, experiments have demonstrated much about of 1+ and a mass of 1.0073 amu. Neutrons are
atomic structure. Thomson’s cathode ray tube relatively heavy particles with no charge and a mass
showed that atoms contain small, negatively of 1.0087 amu. Electrons are light particles with a
charged particles called electrons. Millikan charge of 1− and a mass of 0.00055 amu. The
discovered that there is a fundamental electric number of protons in the nucleus is called the
charge—the charge of an electron. Rutherford’s gold atomic number (Z) and is the property that defines
foil experiment showed that atoms have a small, an atom’s elemental identity. The sum of the
PAGE: 120
106 2 • Summary
numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus is with the same number of electrons as in the
called the mass number and, expressed in amu, is preceding noble gas in the periodic table. By this
approximately equal to the mass of the atom. An means, a positively charged ion is formed. Similarly,
atom is neutral when it contains equal numbers of nonmetals (especially those in groups 16 and 17,
electrons and protons. and, to a lesser extent, those in Group 15) can gain
the number of electrons needed to provide atoms
Isotopes of an element are atoms with the same
with the same number of electrons as in the next
atomic number but different mass numbers;
noble gas in the periodic table. Thus, nonmetals
isotopes of an element, therefore, differ from each
tend to form negative ions. Positively charged ions
other only in the number of neutrons within the
are called cations, and negatively charged ions are
nucleus. When a naturally occurring element is
called anions. Ions can be either monatomic
composed of several isotopes, the atomic mass of the
(containing only one atom) or polyatomic
element represents the average of the masses of the
(containing more than one atom).
isotopes involved. A chemical symbol identifies the
atoms in a substance using symbols, which are one-, Compounds that contain ions are called ionic
two-, or three-letter abbreviations for the atoms. compounds. Ionic compounds generally form from
metals and nonmetals. Compounds that do not
2.4Chemical Formulas
contain ions, but instead consist of atoms bonded
A molecular formula uses chemical symbols and tightly together in molecules (uncharged groups of
subscripts to indicate the exact numbers of different atoms that behave as a single unit), are called
atoms in a molecule or compound. An empirical covalent compounds. Covalent compounds usually
formula gives the simplest, whole-number ratio of form from two nonmetals.
atoms in a compound. A structural formula
2.7Chemical Nomenclature
indicates the bonding arrangement of the atoms in
the molecule. Ball-and-stick and space-filling Chemists use nomenclature rules to clearly name
models show the geometric arrangement of atoms in compounds. Ionic and molecular compounds are
a molecule. Isomers are compounds with the same named using somewhat-different methods. Binary
molecular formula but different arrangements of ionic compounds typically consist of a metal and a
atoms. nonmetal. The name of the metal is written first,
followed by the name of the nonmetal with its
2.5The Periodic Table
ending changed to –ide. For example, K O is called
2
The discovery of the periodic recurrence of similar potassium oxide. If the metal can form ions with
properties among the elements led to the different charges, a Roman numeral in parentheses
formulation of the periodic table, in which the follows the name of the metal to specify its charge.
elements are arranged in order of increasing atomic Thus, FeCl 2 is iron(II) chloride and FeCl 3 is iron(III)
number in rows known as periods and columns chloride. Some compounds contain polyatomic ions;
known as groups. Elements in the same group of the the names of common polyatomic ions should be
periodic table have similar chemical properties. memorized. Molecular compounds can form
Elements can be classified as metals, metalloids, compounds with different ratios of their elements,
and nonmetals, or as a main-group elements, so prefixes are used to specify the numbers of atoms
transition metals, and inner transition metals. of each element in a molecule of the compound.
Groups are numbered 1–18 from left to right. The Examples include SF 6 , sulfur hexafluoride, and
elements in group 1 are known as the alkali metals; N 2 O 4 , dinitrogen tetroxide. Acids are an important
those in group 2 are the alkaline earth metals; those class of compounds containing hydrogen and having
in 15 are the pnictogens; those in 16 are the special nomenclature rules. Binary acids are named
chalcogens; those in 17 are the halogens; and those using the prefixhydro-, changing the –idesuffix to
in 18 are the noble gases. –ic, and adding “acid;” HCl is hydrochloric acid.
Oxyacids are named by changing the ending of the
2.6Ionic and Molecular Compounds
anion (–ateto –icand –iteto –ous), and adding
Metals (particularly those in groups 1 and 2) tend to “acid;” H 2 CO 3 is carbonic acid.
lose the number of electrons that would leave them
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 121
2 • Exercises 107
Exercises
2.1Early Ideas in Atomic Theory
1. In the following drawing, the green spheres represent atoms of a certain element. The purple spheres
represent atoms of another element. If the spheres of different elements touch, they are part of a single
unit of a compound. The following chemical change represented by these spheres may violate one of the
ideas of Dalton’s atomic theory. Which one?
2. Which postulate of Dalton’s theory is consistent with the following observation concerning the weights of
reactants and products? When 100 grams of solid calcium carbonate is heated, 44 grams of carbon dioxide
and 56 grams of calcium oxide are produced.
3. Identify the postulate of Dalton’s theory that is violated by the following observations: 59.95% of one
sample of titanium dioxide is titanium; 60.10% of a different sample of titanium dioxide is titanium.
4. Samples of compound X, Y, and Z are analyzed, with results shown here.
Compound Description Mass of Carbon Mass of Hydrogen
clear, colorless, liquid
X 1.776 g 0.148 g
with strong odor
clear, colorless, liquid
Y 1.974 g 0.329 g
with strong odor
clear, colorless, liquid
Z 7.812 g 0.651 g
with strong odor
Do these data provide example(s) of the law of definite proportions, the law of multiple proportions, neither, or
both? What do these data tell you about compounds X, Y, and Z?
2.2Evolution of Atomic Theory
5. The existence of isotopes violates one of the original ideas of Dalton’s atomic theory. Which one?
6. How are electrons and protons similar? How are they different?
7. How are protons and neutrons similar? How are they different?
8. Predict and test the behavior of α particles fired at a “plum pudding” model atom.
(a) Predict the paths taken by α particles that are fired at atoms with a Thomson’s plum pudding model
structure. Explain why you expect the α particles to take these paths.
(b) If α particles of higher energy than those in (a) are fired at plum pudding atoms, predict how their paths
will differ from the lower-energy α particle paths. Explain your reasoning.
(c) Now test your predictions from (a) and (b). Open theRutherford Scattering simulation
(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetScatter)and select the “Plum Pudding Atom” tab. Set “Alpha Particles
Energy” to “min,” and select “show traces.” Click on the gun to start firing α particles. Does this match your
prediction from (a)? If not, explain why the actual path would be that shown in the simulation. Hit the
pause button, or “Reset All.” Set “Alpha Particles Energy” to “max,” and start firing α particles. Does this
match your prediction from (b)? If not, explain the effect of increased energy on the actual paths as shown
in the simulation.
PAGE: 122
108 2 • Exercises
9. Predict and test the behavior of α particles fired at a Rutherford atom model.
(a) Predict the paths taken by α particles that are fired at atoms with a Rutherford atom model structure.
Explain why you expect the α particles to take these paths.
(b) If α particles of higher energy than those in (a) are fired at Rutherford atoms, predict how their paths
will differ from the lower-energy α particle paths. Explain your reasoning.
(c) Predict how the paths taken by the α particles will differ if they are fired at Rutherford atoms of
elements other than gold. What factor do you expect to cause this difference in paths, and why?
(d) Now test your predictions from (a), (b), and (c). Open theRutherford Scattering simulation
(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetScatter)and select the “Rutherford Atom” tab. Due to the scale of the
simulation, it is best to start with a small nucleus, so select “20” for both protons and neutrons, “min” for
energy, show traces, and then start firing α particles. Does this match your prediction from (a)? If not,
explain why the actual path would be that shown in the simulation. Pause or reset, set energy to “max,”
and start firing α particles. Does this match your prediction from (b)? If not, explain the effect of increased
energy on the actual path as shown in the simulation. Pause or reset, select “40” for both protons and
neutrons, “min” for energy, show traces, and fire away. Does this match your prediction from (c)? If not,
explain why the actual path would be that shown in the simulation. Repeat this with larger numbers of
protons and neutrons. What generalization can you make regarding the type of atom and effect on the path
of α particles? Be clear and specific.
2.3Atomic Structure and Symbolism
10. In what way are isotopes of a given element always different? In what way(s) are they always the same?
11. Write the symbol for each of the following ions:
(a) the ion with a 1+ charge, atomic number 55, and mass number 133
(b) the ion with 54 electrons, 53 protons, and 74 neutrons
(c) the ion with atomic number 15, mass number 31, and a 3− charge
(d) the ion with 24 electrons, 30 neutrons, and a 3+ charge
12. Write the symbol for each of the following ions:
(a) the ion with a 3+ charge, 28 electrons, and a mass number of 71
(b) the ion with 36 electrons, 35 protons, and 45 neutrons
(c) the ion with 86 electrons, 142 neutrons, and a 4+ charge
(d) the ion with a 2+ charge, atomic number 38, and mass number 87
13. Open theBuild an Atom simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomBld)and click on the Atom icon.
(a) Pick any one of the first 10 elements that you would like to build and state its symbol.
(b) Drag protons, neutrons, and electrons onto the atom template to make an atom of your element.
State the numbers of protons, neutrons, and electrons in your atom, as well as the net charge and mass
number.
(c) Click on “Net Charge” and “Mass Number,” check your answers to (b), and correct, if needed.
(d) Predict whether your atom will be stable or unstable. State your reasoning.
(e) Check the “Stable/Unstable” box. Was your answer to (d) correct? If not, first predict what you can do to
make a stable atom of your element, and then do it and see if it works. Explain your reasoning.
14. Open theBuild an Atom simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomBld).
(a) Drag protons, neutrons, and electrons onto the atom template to make a neutral atom of Oxygen-16
and give the isotope symbol for this atom.
(b) Now add two more electrons to make an ion and give the symbol for the ion you have created.
15. Open theBuild an Atom simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomBld).
(a) Drag protons, neutrons, and electrons onto the atom template to make a neutral atom of Lithium-6 and
give the isotope symbol for this atom.
(b) Now remove one electron to make an ion and give the symbol for the ion you have created.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 123
2 • Exercises 109
16. Determine the number of protons, neutrons, and electrons in the following isotopes that are used in
medical diagnoses:
(a) atomic number 9, mass number 18, charge of 1−
(b) atomic number 43, mass number 99, charge of 7+
(c) atomic number 53, atomic mass number 131, charge of 1−
(d) atomic number 81, atomic mass number 201, charge of 1+
(e) Name the elements in parts (a), (b), (c), and (d).
17. The following are properties of isotopes of two elements that are essential in our diet. Determine the
number of protons, neutrons and electrons in each and name them.
(a) atomic number 26, mass number 58, charge of 2+
(b) atomic number 53, mass number 127, charge of 1−
18. Give the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in neutral atoms of each of the following isotopes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
19. Give the number of protons, electrons, and neutrons in neutral atoms of each of the following isotopes:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
20. Click on thesite(http://openstax.org/l/16PhetAtomMass)and select the “Mix Isotopes” tab, hide the
“Percent Composition” and “Average Atomic Mass” boxes, and then select the element boron.
(a) Write the symbols of the isotopes of boron that are shown as naturally occurring in significant
amounts.
(b) Predict the relative amounts (percentages) of these boron isotopes found in nature. Explain the
reasoning behind your choice.
(c) Add isotopes to the black box to make a mixture that matches your prediction in (b). You may drag
isotopes from their bins or click on “More” and then move the sliders to the appropriate amounts.
(d) Reveal the “Percent Composition” and “Average Atomic Mass” boxes. How well does your mixture
match with your prediction? If necessary, adjust the isotope amounts to match your prediction.
(e) Select “Nature’s” mix of isotopes and compare it to your prediction. How well does your prediction
compare with the naturally occurring mixture? Explain. If necessary, adjust your amounts to make them
match “Nature’s” amounts as closely as possible.
21. RepeatExercise 2.20using an element that has three naturally occurring isotopes.
22. An element has the following natural abundances and isotopic masses: 90.92% abundance with 19.99
amu, 0.26% abundance with 20.99 amu, and 8.82% abundance with 21.99 amu. Calculate the average
atomic mass of this element.
23. Average atomic masses listed by IUPAC are based on a study of experimental results. Bromine has two
isotopes,79Br and81Br, whose masses (78.9183 and 80.9163 amu, respectively) and abundances (50.69%
and 49.31%, respectively) were determined in earlier experiments. Calculate the average atomic mass of
bromine based on these experiments.
24. Variations in average atomic mass may be observed for elements obtained from different sources. Lithium
provides an example of this. The isotopic composition of lithium from naturally occurring minerals is
7.5%6Li and 92.5%7Li, which have masses of 6.01512 amu and 7.01600 amu, respectively. A commercial
source of lithium, recycled from a military source, was 3.75%6Li (and the rest7Li). Calculate the average
atomic mass values for each of these two sources.
PAGE: 124
110 2 • Exercises
25. The average atomic masses of some elements may vary, depending upon the sources of their ores.
Naturally occurring boron consists of two isotopes with accurately known masses (10B, 10.0129 amu and
11B, 11.00931 amu). The actual atomic mass of boron can vary from 10.807 to 10.819, depending on
whether the mineral source is from Turkey or the United States. Calculate the percent abundances leading
to the two values of the average atomic masses of boron from these two countries.
26. The18O:16O abundance ratio in some meteorites is greater than that used to calculate the average atomic
mass of oxygen on earth. Is the average mass of an oxygen atom in these meteorites greater than, less
than, or equal to that of a terrestrial oxygen atom?
2.4Chemical Formulas
27. Explain why the symbol for an atom of the element oxygen and the formula for a molecule of oxygen differ.
28. Explain why the symbol for the element sulfur and the formula for a molecule of sulfur differ.
29. Write the molecular and empirical formulas of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 125
2 • Exercises 111
30. Write the molecular and empirical formulas of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
31. Determine the empirical formulas for the following compounds:
(a) caffeine, C H N O
8 10 4 2
(b) sucrose, C H O
12 22 11
(c) hydrogen peroxide, H O
2 2
(d) glucose, C H O
6 12 6
(e) ascorbic acid (vitamin C), C H O
6 8 6
32. Determine the empirical formulas for the following compounds:
(a) acetic acid, C H O
2 4 2
(b) citric acid, C H O
6 8 7
(c) hydrazine, N H
2 4
(d) nicotine, C H N
10 14 2
(e) butane, C H
4 10
33. Write the empirical formulas for the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 126
112 2 • Exercises
34. Open theBuild a Molecule simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16molbuilding)and select the “Larger
Molecules” tab. Select an appropriate atom’s “Kit” to build a molecule with two carbon and six hydrogen
atoms. Drag atoms into the space above the “Kit” to make a molecule. A name will appear when you have
made an actual molecule that exists (even if it is not the one you want). You can use the scissors tool to
separate atoms if you would like to change the connections. Click on “3D” to see the molecule, and look at
both the space-filling and ball-and-stick possibilities.
(a) Draw the structural formula of this molecule and state its name.
(b) Can you arrange these atoms in any way to make a different compound?
35. Use theBuild a Molecule simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16molbuilding)to repeatExercise 2.34, but
build a molecule with two carbons, six hydrogens, and one oxygen.
(a) Draw the structural formula of this molecule and state its name.
(b) Can you arrange these atoms to make a different molecule? If so, draw its structural formula and state
its name.
(c) How are the molecules drawn in (a) and (b) the same? How do they differ? What are they called (the
type of relationship between these molecules, not their names).?
36. Use theBuild a Molecule simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16molbuilding)to repeatExercise 2.34, but
build a molecule with three carbons, seven hydrogens, and one chlorine.
(a) Draw the structural formula of this molecule and state its name.
(b) Can you arrange these atoms to make a different molecule? If so, draw its structural formula and state
its name.
(c) How are the molecules drawn in (a) and (b) the same? How do they differ? What are they called (the
type of relationship between these molecules, not their names)?
2.5The Periodic Table
37. Using the periodic table, classify each of the following elements as a metal or a nonmetal, and then further
classify each as a main-group (representative) element, transition metal, or inner transition metal:
(a) uranium
(b) bromine
(c) strontium
(d) neon
(e) gold
(f) americium
(g) rhodium
(h) sulfur
(i) carbon
(j) potassium
38. Using the periodic table, classify each of the following elements as a metal or a nonmetal, and then further
classify each as a main-group (representative) element, transition metal, or inner transition metal:
(a) cobalt
(b) europium
(c) iodine
(d) indium
(e) lithium
(f) oxygen
(g) cadmium
(h) terbium
(i) rhenium
39. Using the periodic table, identify the lightest member of each of the following groups:
(a) noble gases
(b) alkaline earth metals
(c) alkali metals
(d) chalcogens
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 127
2 • Exercises 113
40. Using the periodic table, identify the heaviest member of each of the following groups:
(a) alkali metals
(b) chalcogens
(c) noble gases
(d) alkaline earth metals
41. Use the periodic table to give the name and symbol for each of the following elements:
(a) the noble gas in the same period as germanium
(b) the alkaline earth metal in the same period as selenium
(c) the halogen in the same period as lithium
(d) the chalcogen in the same period as cadmium
42. Use the periodic table to give the name and symbol for each of the following elements:
(a) the halogen in the same period as the alkali metal with 11 protons
(b) the alkaline earth metal in the same period with the neutral noble gas with 18 electrons
(c) the noble gas in the same row as an isotope with 30 neutrons and 25 protons
(d) the noble gas in the same period as gold
43. Write a symbol for each of the following neutral isotopes. Include the atomic number and mass number
for each.
(a) the alkali metal with 11 protons and a mass number of 23
(b) the noble gas element with 75 neutrons in its nucleus and 54 electrons in the neutral atom
(c) the isotope with 33 protons and 40 neutrons in its nucleus
(d) the alkaline earth metal with 88 electrons and 138 neutrons
44. Write a symbol for each of the following neutral isotopes. Include the atomic number and mass number
for each.
(a) the chalcogen with a mass number of 125
(b) the halogen whose longest-lived isotope is radioactive
(c) the noble gas, used in lighting, with 10 electrons and 10 neutrons
(d) the lightest alkali metal with three neutrons
2.6Ionic and Molecular Compounds
45. Using the periodic table, predict whether the following chlorides are ionic or covalent: KCl, NCl , ICl,
3
MgCl , PCl , and CCl .
2 5 4
46. Using the periodic table, predict whether the following chlorides are ionic or covalent: SiCl , PCl , CaCl ,
4 3 2
CsCl, CuCl , and CrCl .
2 3
47. For each of the following compounds, state whether it is ionic or covalent. If it is ionic, write the symbols
for the ions involved:
(a) NF
3
(b) BaO
(c) (NH ) CO
42 3
(d) Sr(H PO )
2 42
(e) IBr
(f) Na O
2
48. For each of the following compounds, state whether it is ionic or covalent, and if it is ionic, write the
symbols for the ions involved:
(a) KClO
4
(b) Mg(C H O )
2 3 22
(c) H S
2
(d) Ag S
2
(e) N Cl
2 4
(f) Co(NO )
32
PAGE: 128
114 2 • Exercises
49. For each of the following pairs of ions, write the formula of the compound they will form:
(a) Ca2+, S2−
(b)
(c) Al3+, Br−
(d) Na+,
(e) Mg2+,
50. For each of the following pairs of ions, write the formula of the compound they will form:
(a) K+, O2−
(b)
(c) Al3+, O2−
(d) Na+,
(e) Ba2+,
2.7Chemical Nomenclature
51. Name the following compounds:
(a) CsCl
(b) BaO
(c) K S
2
(d) BeCl
2
(e) HBr
(f) AlF
3
52. Name the following compounds:
(a) NaF
(b) Rb O
2
(c) BCl
3
(d) H Se
2
(e) P O
4 6
(f) ICl
3
53. Write the formulas of the following compounds:
(a) rubidium bromide
(b) magnesium selenide
(c) sodium oxide
(d) calcium chloride
(e) hydrogen fluoride
(f) gallium phosphide
(g) aluminum bromide
(h) ammonium sulfate
54. Write the formulas of the following compounds:
(a) lithium carbonate
(b) sodium perchlorate
(c) barium hydroxide
(d) ammonium carbonate
(e) sulfuric acid
(f) calcium acetate
(g) magnesium phosphate
(h) sodium sulfite
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 129
2 • Exercises 115
55. Write the formulas of the following compounds:
(a) chlorine dioxide
(b) dinitrogen tetraoxide
(c) potassium phosphide
(d) silver(I) sulfide
(e) aluminum fluoride trihydrate
(f) silicon dioxide
56. Write the formulas of the following compounds:
(a) barium chloride
(b) magnesium nitride
(c) sulfur dioxide
(d) nitrogen trichloride
(e) dinitrogen trioxide
(f) tin(IV) chloride
57. Each of the following compounds contains a metal that can exhibit more than one ionic charge. Name
these compounds:
(a) Cr O
2 3
(b) FeCl
2
(c) CrO
3
(d) TiCl
4
(e) CoCl ·6H O
2 2
(f) MoS
2
58. Each of the following compounds contains a metal that can exhibit more than one ionic charge. Name
these compounds:
(a) NiCO
3
(b) MoO
3
(c) Co(NO )
32
(d) V O
2 5
(e) MnO
2
(f) Fe O
2 3
59. The following ionic compounds are found in common household products. Write the formulas for each
compound:
(a) potassium phosphate
(b) copper(II) sulfate
(c) calcium chloride
(d) titanium(IV) oxide
(e) ammonium nitrate
(f) sodium bisulfate (the common name for sodium hydrogen sulfate)
60. The following ionic compounds are found in common household products. Name each of the compounds:
(a) Ca(H PO )
2 42
(b) FeSO
4
(c) CaCO
3
(d) MgO
(e) NaNO
2
(f) KI
61. What are the IUPAC names of the following compounds?
(a) manganese dioxide
(b) mercurous chloride (Hg Cl )
2 2
(c) ferric nitrate [Fe(NO ) ]
33
(d) titanium tetrachloride
(e) cupric bromide (CuBr )
2
PAGE: 130
116 2 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 131
CHAPTER 3
Composition of Substances and
Solutions
Figure3.1 The water in a swimming pool is a complex mixture of substances whose relative amounts must be
carefully maintained to ensure the health and comfort of people using the pool. (credit: modification of work by Vic
Brincat)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1Formula Mass and the Mole Concept
3.2Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas
3.3Molarity
3.4Other Units for Solution Concentrations
INTRODUCTION Swimming pools have long been a popular means of recreation, exercise, and physical
therapy. Since it is impractical to refill large pools with fresh water on a frequent basis, pool water is regularly
treated with chemicals to prevent the growth of harmful bacteria and algae. Proper pool maintenance requires
regular additions of various chemical compounds in carefully measured amounts. For example, the relative
amount of calcium ion, Ca2+, in the water should be maintained within certain limits to prevent eye irritation
and avoid damage to the pool bed and plumbing. To maintain proper calcium levels, calcium cations are added
to the water in the form of an ionic compound that also contains anions; thus, it is necessary to know both the
relative amount of Ca2+in the compound and the volume of water in the pool in order to achieve the proper
calcium level. Quantitative aspects of the composition of substances (such as the calcium-containing
compound) and mixtures (such as the pool water) are the subject of this chapter.
PAGE: 132
118 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
3.1 Formula Mass and the Mole Concept
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate formula masses for covalent and ionic compounds
• Define the amount unit mole and the related quantity Avogadro’s number Explain the relation between mass,
moles, and numbers of atoms or molecules, and perform calculations deriving these quantities from one
another
Many argue that modern chemical science began when scientists started exploring the quantitative as well as
the qualitative aspects of chemistry. For example, Dalton’s atomic theory was an attempt to explain the results
of measurements that allowed him to calculate the relative masses of elements combined in various
compounds. Understanding the relationship between the masses of atoms and the chemical formulas of
compounds allows us to quantitatively describe the composition of substances.
Formula Mass
An earlier chapter of this text described the development of the atomic mass unit, the concept of average
atomic masses, and the use of chemical formulas to represent the elemental makeup of substances. These
ideas can be extended to calculate theformula massof a substance by summing the average atomic masses of
all the atoms represented in the substance’s formula.
Formula Mass for Covalent Substances
For covalent substances, the formula represents the numbers and types of atoms composing a single molecule
of the substance; therefore, the formula mass may be correctly referred to as a molecular mass. Consider
chloroform (CHCl ), a covalent compound once used as a surgical anesthetic and now primarily used in the
3
production of tetrafluoroethylene, the building block for the "anti-stick" polymer, Teflon. The molecular
formula of chloroform indicates that a single molecule contains one carbon atom, one hydrogen atom, and
three chlorine atoms. The average molecular mass of a chloroform molecule is therefore equal to the sum of
the average atomic masses of these atoms.Figure 3.2outlines the calculations used to derive the molecular
mass of chloroform, which is 119.37 amu.
FIGURE3.2 The average mass of a chloroform molecule, CHCl , is 119.37 amu, which is the sum of the average
3
atomic masses of each of its constituent atoms. The model shows the molecular structure of chloroform.
Likewise, the molecular mass of an aspirin molecule, C H O , is the sum of the atomic masses of nine carbon
9 8 4
atoms, eight hydrogen atoms, and four oxygen atoms, which amounts to 180.15 amu (Figure 3.3).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 133
3.1 • Formula Mass and the Mole Concept 119
FIGURE3.3 The average mass of an aspirin molecule is 180.15 amu. The model shows the molecular structure of
aspirin, C H O .
9 8 4
EXAMPLE 3.1
Computing Molecular Mass for a Covalent Compound
Ibuprofen, C H O , is a covalent compound and the active ingredient in several popular nonprescription
13 18 2
pain medications, such as Advil and Motrin. What is the molecular mass (amu) for this compound?
Solution
Molecules of this compound are composed of 13 carbon atoms, 18 hydrogen atoms, and 2 oxygen atoms.
Following the approach described above, the average molecular mass for this compound is therefore:
Check Your Learning
Acetaminophen, C H NO , is a covalent compound and the active ingredient in several popular
8 9 2
nonprescription pain medications, such as Tylenol. What is the molecular mass (amu) for this compound?
Answer:
151.16 amu
Formula Mass for Ionic Compounds
Ionic compounds are composed of discrete cations and anions combined in ratios to yield electrically neutral
bulk matter. The formula mass for an ionic compound is calculated in the same way as the formula mass for
covalent compounds: by summing the average atomic masses of all the atoms in the compound’s formula.
Keep in mind, however, that the formula for an ionic compound does not represent the composition of a
discrete molecule, so it may not correctly be referred to as the “molecular mass.”
As an example, consider sodium chloride, NaCl, the chemical name for common table salt. Sodium chloride is
an ionic compound composed of sodium cations, Na+, and chloride anions, Cl−, combined in a 1:1 ratio. The
formula mass for this compound is computed as 58.44 amu (seeFigure 3.4).
PAGE: 134
120 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
FIGURE3.4 Table salt, NaCl, contains an array of sodium and chloride ions combined in a 1:1 ratio. Its formula
mass is 58.44 amu.
Note that the average masses of neutral sodium and chlorine atoms were used in this computation, rather than
the masses for sodium cations and chlorine anions. This approach is perfectly acceptable when computing the
formula mass of an ionic compound. Even though a sodium cation has a slightly smaller mass than a sodium
atom (since it is missing an electron), this difference will be offset by the fact that a chloride anion is slightly
more massive than a chloride atom (due to the extra electron). Moreover, the mass of an electron is negligibly
small with respect to the mass of a typical atom. Even when calculating the mass of an isolated ion, the missing
or additional electrons can generally be ignored, since their contribution to the overall mass is negligible,
reflected only in the nonsignificant digits that will be lost when the computed mass is properly rounded. The
few exceptions to this guideline are very light ions derived from elements with precisely known atomic
masses.
EXAMPLE 3.2
Computing Formula Mass for an Ionic Compound
Aluminum sulfate, Al (SO ) , is an ionic compound that is used in the manufacture of paper and in various
2 43
water purification processes. What is the formula mass (amu) of this compound?
Solution
The formula for this compound indicates it contains Al3+and SO 2−ions combined in a 2:3 ratio. For purposes
4
of computing a formula mass, it is helpful to rewrite the formula in the simpler format, Al S O . Following the
2 3 12
approach outlined above, the formula mass for this compound is calculated as follows:
Check Your Learning
Calcium phosphate, Ca (PO ) , is an ionic compound and a common anti-caking agent added to food products.
3 42
What is the formula mass (amu) of calcium phosphate?
Answer:
310.18 amu
The Mole
The identity of a substance is defined not only by the types of atoms or ions it contains, but by the quantity of
each type of atom or ion. For example, water, H O, and hydrogen peroxide, H O , are alike in that their
2 2 2
respective molecules are composed of hydrogen and oxygen atoms. However, because a hydrogen peroxide
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 135
3.1 • Formula Mass and the Mole Concept 121
molecule contains two oxygen atoms, as opposed to the water molecule, which has only one, the two
substances exhibit very different properties. Today, sophisticated instruments allow the direct measurement
of these defining microscopic traits; however, the same traits were originally derived from the measurement of
macroscopic properties (the masses and volumes of bulk quantities of matter) using relatively simple tools
(balances and volumetric glassware). This experimental approach required the introduction of a new unit for
amount of substances, themole, which remains indispensable in modern chemical science.
Themoleis an amount unit similar to familiar units like pair, dozen, gross, etc. It provides a specific measure
ofthe numberof atoms or molecules in a sample of matter. One Latin connotation for the word “mole” is “large
mass” or “bulk,” which is consistent with its use as the name for this unit. The mole provides a link between an
easily measured macroscopic property, bulk mass, and an extremely important fundamental property,
number of atoms, molecules, and so forth. Amoleof substance is that amount in which there are 6.02214076
1023discrete entities (atoms or molecules). This large number is a fundamental constant known as
Avogadro’s number (N )or the Avogadro constant in honor of Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro. This
A
constant is properly reported with an explicit unit of “per mole,” a conveniently rounded version being 6.022
1023/mol.
Consistent with its definition as an amount unit, 1 mole of any element contains the same number of atoms as
1 mole of any other element. The masses of 1 mole of different elements, however, are different, since the
masses of the individual atoms are drastically different. Themolar massof an element (or compound) is the
mass in grams of 1 mole of that substance, a property expressed in units of grams per mole (g/mol) (seeFigure
3.5).
FIGURE3.5 Each sample contains 6.022 1023atoms —1.00 mol of atoms. From left to right (top row): 65.4 g
zinc, 12.0 g carbon, 24.3 g magnesium, and 63.5 g copper. From left to right (bottom row): 32.1 g sulfur, 28.1 g
silicon, 207 g lead, and 118.7 g tin. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
The molar mass of any substance is numerically equivalent to its atomic or formula weight in amu. Per the
amu definition, a single12C atom weighs 12 amu (its atomic mass is 12 amu). A mole of12C weighs 12 g (its
molar mass is 12 g/mol). This relationship holds for all elements, since their atomic masses are measured
relative to that of the amu-reference substance,12C. Extending this principle, the molar mass of a compound in
grams is likewise numerically equivalent to its formula mass in amu (Figure 3.6).
PAGE: 136
122 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
FIGURE3.6 Each sample contains 6.02 1023molecules or formula units—1.00 mol of the compound or element.
Clock-wise from the upper left: 130.2 g of C H OH (1-octanol, formula mass 130.2 amu), 454.4 g of HgI
8 17 2
(mercury(II) iodide, formula mass 454.4 amu), 32.0 g of CH OH (methanol, formula mass 32.0 amu) and 256.5 g of
3
S (sulfur, formula mass 256.5 amu). (credit: Sahar Atwa)
8
Element Average Atomic Mass (amu) Molar Mass (g/mol) Atoms/Mole
C 12.01 12.01 6.022 1023
H 1.008 1.008 6.022 1023
O 16.00 16.00 6.022 1023
Na 22.99 22.99 6.022 1023
Cl 35.45 35.45 6.022 1023
While atomic mass and molar mass are numerically equivalent, keep in mind that they are vastly different in
terms of scale, as represented by the vast difference in the magnitudes of their respective units (amu versus g).
To appreciate the enormity of the mole, consider a small drop of water weighing about 0.03 g (seeFigure 3.7).
Although this represents just a tiny fraction of 1 mole of water (~18 g), it contains more water molecules than
can be clearly imagined. If the molecules were distributed equally among the roughly seven billion people on
earth, each person would receive more than 100 billion molecules.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 137
3.1 • Formula Mass and the Mole Concept 123
FIGURE3.7 The number of molecules in a single droplet of water is roughly 100 billion times greater than the
number of people on earth. (credit: “tanakawho”/Wikimedia commons)
LINK TO LEARNING
The mole is used in chemistry to represent 6.022 1023of something, but it can be difficult to conceptualize
such a large number. Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16molevideo)and then complete the “Think”
questions that follow. Explore more about the mole by reviewing the information under “Dig Deeper.”
The relationships between formula mass, the mole, and Avogadro’s number can be applied to compute various
quantities that describe the composition of substances and compounds, as demonstrated in the next several
example problems.
EXAMPLE 3.3
Deriving Moles from Grams for an Element
According to nutritional guidelines from the US Department of Agriculture, the estimated average requirement
for dietary potassium is 4.7 g. What is the estimated average requirement of potassium in moles?
Solution
The mass of K is provided, and the corresponding amount of K in moles is requested. Referring to the periodic
table, the atomic mass of K is 39.10 amu, and so its molar mass is 39.10 g/mol. The given mass of K (4.7 g) is a
bit more than one-tenth the molar mass (39.10 g), so a reasonable “ballpark” estimate of the number of moles
would be slightly greater than 0.1 mol.
The molar amount of a substance may be calculated by dividing its mass (g) by its molar mass (g/mol):
The factor-label method supports this mathematical approach since the unit “g” cancels and the answer has
units of “mol:”
PAGE: 138
124 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
The calculated magnitude (0.12 mol K) is consistent with our ballpark expectation, since it is a bit greater than
0.1 mol.
Check Your Learning
Beryllium is a light metal used to fabricate transparent X-ray windows for medical imaging instruments. How
many moles of Be are in a thin-foil window weighing 3.24 g?
Answer:
0.360 mol
EXAMPLE 3.4
Deriving Grams from Moles for an Element
A liter of air contains 9.2 10−4mol argon. What is the mass of Ar in a liter of air?
Solution
The molar amount of Ar is provided and must be used to derive the corresponding mass in grams. Since the
amount of Ar is less than 1 mole, the mass will be less than the mass of 1 mole of Ar, approximately 40 g. The
molar amount in question is approximately one-one thousandth (~10−3) of a mole, and so the corresponding
mass should be roughly one-one thousandth of the molar mass (~0.04 g):
In this case, logic dictates (and the factor-label method supports) multiplying the provided amount (mol) by
the molar mass (g/mol):
The result is in agreement with our expectations, around 0.04 g Ar.
Check Your Learning
What is the mass of 2.561 mol of gold?
Answer:
504.4 g
EXAMPLE 3.5
Deriving Number of Atoms from Mass for an Element
Copper is commonly used to fabricate electrical wire (Figure 3.8). How many copper atoms are in 5.00 g of
copper wire?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 139
3.1 • Formula Mass and the Mole Concept 125
FIGURE3.8 Copper wire is composed of many, many atoms of Cu. (credit: Emilian Robert Vicol)
Solution
The number of Cu atoms in the wire may be conveniently derived from its mass by a two-step computation:
first calculating the molar amount of Cu, and then using Avogadro’s number (N ) to convert this molar amount
A
to number of Cu atoms:
Considering that the provided sample mass (5.00 g) is a little less than one-tenth the mass of 1 mole of Cu (~64
g), a reasonable estimate for the number of atoms in the sample would be on the order of one-tenthN , or
A
approximately 1022Cu atoms. Carrying out the two-step computation yields:
The factor-label method yields the desired cancellation of units, and the computed result is on the order of
1022as expected.
Check Your Learning
A prospector panning for gold in a river collects 15.00 g of pure gold. How many Au atoms are in this quantity
of gold?
Answer:
4.586 1022Au atoms
EXAMPLE 3.6
Deriving Moles from Grams for a Compound
Our bodies synthesize protein from amino acids. One of these amino acids is glycine, which has the molecular
formula C H O N. How many moles of glycine molecules are contained in 28.35 g of glycine?
2 5 2
Solution
Derive the number of moles of a compound from its mass following the same procedure used for an element in
Example 3.3:
PAGE: 140
126 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
The molar mass of glycine is required for this calculation, and it is computed in the same fashion as its
molecular mass. One mole of glycine, C H O N, contains 2 moles of carbon, 5 moles of hydrogen, 2 moles of
2 5 2
oxygen, and 1 mole of nitrogen:
The provided mass of glycine (~28 g) is a bit more than one-third the molar mass (~75 g/mol), so the computed
result is expected to be a bit greater than one-third of a mole (~0.33 mol). Dividing the compound’s mass by its
molar mass yields:
This result is consistent with the rough estimate.
Check Your Learning
How many moles of sucrose, C H O , are in a 25-g sample of sucrose?
12 22 11
Answer:
0.073 mol
EXAMPLE 3.7
Deriving Grams from Moles for a Compound
Vitamin C is a covalent compound with the molecular formula C H O . The recommended daily dietary
6 8 6
allowance of vitamin C for children aged 4–8 years is 1.42 10−4mol. What is the mass of this allowance in
grams?
Solution
As for elements, the mass of a compound can be derived from its molar amount as shown:
The molar mass for this compound is computed to be 176.124 g/mol. The given number of moles is a very
small fraction of a mole (~10−4or one-ten thousandth); therefore, the corresponding mass is expected to be
about one-ten thousandth of the molar mass (~0.02 g). Performing the calculation yields:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 141
3.1 • Formula Mass and the Mole Concept 127
This is consistent with the anticipated result.
Check Your Learning
What is the mass of 0.443 mol of hydrazine, N H ?
2 4
Answer:
14.2 g
EXAMPLE 3.8
Deriving the Number of Atoms and Molecules from the Mass of a Compound
A packet of an artificial sweetener contains 40.0 mg of saccharin (C H NO S), which has the structural
7 5 3
formula:
Given that saccharin has a molar mass of 183.18 g/mol, how many saccharin molecules are in a 40.0-mg
(0.0400-g) sample of saccharin? How many carbon atoms are in the same sample?
Solution
The number of molecules in a given mass of compound is computed by first deriving the number of moles, as
demonstrated inExample 3.6, and then multiplying by Avogadro’s number:
Using the provided mass and molar mass for saccharin yields:
The compound’s formula shows that each molecule contains seven carbon atoms, and so the number of C
atoms in the provided sample is:
Check Your Learning
How many C H molecules are contained in 9.213 g of this compound? How many hydrogen atoms?
4 10
Answer:
9.545 1022molecules C H ; 9.545 1023atoms H
4 10
PAGE: 142
128 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Counting Neurotransmitter Molecules in the Brain
The brain is the control center of the central nervous system (Figure 3.9). It sends and receives signals to and
from muscles and other internal organs to monitor and control their functions; it processes stimuli detected
by sensory organs to guide interactions with the external world; and it houses the complex physiological
processes that give rise to our intellect and emotions. The broad field of neuroscience spans all aspects of the
structure and function of the central nervous system, including research on the anatomy and physiology of the
brain. Great progress has been made in brain research over the past few decades, and the BRAIN Initiative, a
federal initiative announced in 2013, aims to accelerate and capitalize on these advances through the
concerted efforts of various industrial, academic, and government agencies (more details available at
www.whitehouse.gov/share/brain-initiative).
FIGURE3.9 (a) A typical human brain weighs about 1.5 kg and occupies a volume of roughly 1.1 L. (b) Information
is transmitted in brain tissue and throughout the central nervous system by specialized cells called neurons
(micrograph shows cells at 1600× magnification).
Specialized cells called neurons transmit information between different parts of the central nervous system by
way of electrical and chemical signals. Chemical signaling occurs at the interface between different neurons
when one of the cells releases molecules (called neurotransmitters) that diffuse across the small gap between
the cells (called the synapse) and bind to the surface of the other cell. These neurotransmitter molecules are
stored in small intracellular structures called vesicles that fuse to the cell membrane and then break open to
release their contents when the neuron is appropriately stimulated. This process is called exocytosis (see
Figure 3.10). One neurotransmitter that has been very extensively studied is dopamine, C H NO . Dopamine
8 11 2
is involved in various neurological processes that impact a wide variety of human behaviors. Dysfunctions in
the dopamine systems of the brain underlie serious neurological diseases such as Parkinson’s and
schizophrenia.
FIGURE3.10 (a) Chemical signals are transmitted from neurons to other cells by the release of neurotransmitter
molecules into the small gaps (synapses) between the cells. (b) Dopamine, C H NO , is a neurotransmitter
8 11 2
involved in a number of neurological processes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 143
3.2 • Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas 129
One important aspect of the complex processes related to dopamine signaling is the number of
neurotransmitter molecules released during exocytosis. Since this number is a central factor in determining
neurological response (and subsequent human thought and action), it is important to know how this number
changes with certain controlled stimulations, such as the administration of drugs. It is also important to
understand the mechanism responsible for any changes in the number of neurotransmitter molecules
released—for example, some dysfunction in exocytosis, a change in the number of vesicles in the neuron, or a
change in the number of neurotransmitter molecules in each vesicle.
Significant progress has been made recently in directly measuring the number of dopamine molecules stored
in individual vesicles and the amount actually released when the vesicle undergoes exocytosis. Using
miniaturized probes that can selectively detect dopamine molecules in very small amounts, scientists have
determined that the vesicles of a certain type of mouse brain neuron contain an average of 30,000 dopamine
molecules per vesicle (about mol or 50 zmol). Analysis of these neurons from mice subjected to
various drug therapies shows significant changes in the average number of dopamine molecules contained in
individual vesicles, increasing or decreasing by up to three-fold, depending on the specific drug used. These
studies also indicate that not all of the dopamine in a given vesicle is released during exocytosis, suggesting
1
that it may be possible to regulate the fraction released using pharmaceutical therapies.
3.2 Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compute the percent composition of a compound
• Determine the empirical formula of a compound
• Determine the molecular formula of a compound
The previous section discussed the relationship between the bulk mass of a substance and the number of
atoms or molecules it contains (moles). Given the chemical formula of the substance, one may determine the
amount of the substance (moles) from its mass, and vice versa. But what if the chemical formula of a substance
is unknown? In this section, these same principles will be applied to derive the chemical formulas of unknown
substances from experimental mass measurements.
Percent Composition
The elemental makeup of a compound defines its chemical identity, and chemical formulas are the most
succinct way of representing this elemental makeup. When a compound’s formula is unknown, measuring the
mass of each of its constituent elements is often the first step in the process of determining the formula
experimentally. The results of these measurements permit the calculation of the compound’spercent
composition, defined as the percentage by mass of each element in the compound. For example, consider a
gaseous compound composed solely of carbon and hydrogen. The percent composition of this compound
could be represented as follows:
If analysis of a 10.0-g sample of this gas showed it to contain 2.5 g H and 7.5 g C, the percent composition
would be calculated to be 25% H and 75% C:
1 Omiatek, Donna M., Amanda J. Bressler, Ann-Sofie Cans, Anne M. Andrews, Michael L. Heien, and Andrew G. Ewing. “The Real
Catecholamine Content of Secretory Vesicles in the CNS Revealed by Electrochemical Cytometry.”Scientific Report3 (2013): 1447,
accessed January 14, 2015, doi:10.1038/srep01447.
PAGE: 144
130 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
EXAMPLE 3.9
Calculation of Percent Composition
Analysis of a 12.04-g sample of a liquid compound composed of carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen showed it to
contain 7.34 g C, 1.85 g H, and 2.85 g N. What is the percent composition of this compound?
Solution
To calculate percent composition, divide the experimentally derived mass of each element by the overall mass
of the compound, and then convert to a percentage:
The analysis results indicate that the compound is 61.0% C, 15.4% H, and 23.7% N by mass.
Check Your Learning
A 24.81-g sample of a gaseous compound containing only carbon, oxygen, and chlorine is determined to
contain 3.01 g C, 4.00 g O, and 17.81 g Cl. What is this compound’s percent composition?
Answer:
12.1% C, 16.1% O, 71.79% Cl
Determining Percent Composition from Molecular or Empirical Formulas
Percent composition is also useful for evaluating the relative abundance of a given element in different
compounds of known formulas. As one example, consider the common nitrogen-containing fertilizers
ammonia (NH ), ammonium nitrate (NH NO ), and urea (CH N O). The element nitrogen is the active
3 4 3 4 2
ingredient for agricultural purposes, so the mass percentage of nitrogen in the compound is a practical and
economic concern for consumers choosing among these fertilizers. For these sorts of applications, the percent
composition of a compound is easily derived from its formula mass and the atomic masses of its constituent
elements. A molecule of NH contains one N atom weighing 14.01 amu and three H atoms weighing a total of (3
3
1.008 amu) = 3.024 amu. The formula mass of ammonia is therefore (14.01 amu + 3.024 amu) = 17.03 amu,
and its percent composition is:
This same approach may be taken considering a pair of molecules, a dozen molecules, or a mole of molecules,
etc. The latter amount is most convenient and would simply involve the use of molar masses instead of atomic
and formula masses, as demonstratedExample 3.10. As long as the molecular or empirical formula of the
compound in question is known, the percent composition may be derived from the atomic or molar masses of
the compound's elements.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 145
3.2 • Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas 131
EXAMPLE 3.10
Determining Percent Composition from a Molecular Formula
Aspirin is a compound with the molecular formula C H O . What is its percent composition?
9 8 4
Solution
To calculate the percent composition, the masses of C, H, and O in a known mass of C H O are needed. It is
9 8 4
convenient to consider 1 mol of C H O and use its molar mass (180.159 g/mole, determined from the
9 8 4
chemical formula) to calculate the percentages of each of its elements:
Note that these percentages sum to equal 100.00% when appropriately rounded.
Check Your Learning
To three significant digits, what is the mass percentage of iron in the compound Fe O ?
2 3
Answer:
69.9% Fe
Determination of Empirical Formulas
As previously mentioned, the most common approach to determining a compound’s chemical formula is to
first measure the masses of its constituent elements. However, keep in mind that chemical formulas represent
the relativenumbers, not masses, of atoms in the substance. Therefore, any experimentally derived data
involving mass must be used to derive the corresponding numbers of atoms in the compound. This is
accomplished using molar masses to convert the mass of each element to a number of moles. These molar
amounts are used to compute whole-number ratios that can be used to derive the empirical formula of the
substance. Consider a sample of compound determined to contain 1.71 g C and 0.287 g H. The corresponding
numbers of atoms (in moles) are:
Thus, this compound may be represented by the formula C H . Per convention, formulas contain whole-
0.142 0.284
number subscripts, which can be achieved by dividing each subscript by the smaller subscript:
(Recall that subscripts of “1” are not written but rather assumed if no other number is present.)
The empirical formula for this compound is thus CH . This may or not be the compound’smolecular formula
2
PAGE: 146
132 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
as well; however, additional information is needed to make that determination (as discussed later in this
section).
Consider as another example a sample of compound determined to contain 5.31 g Cl and 8.40 g O. Following
the same approach yields a tentative empirical formula of:
In this case, dividing by the smallest subscript still leaves us with a decimal subscript in the empirical formula.
To convert this into a whole number, multiply each of the subscripts by two, retaining the same atom ratio and
yielding Cl O as the final empirical formula.
2 7
In summary, empirical formulas are derived from experimentally measured element masses by:
1. Deriving the number of moles of each element from its mass
2. Dividing each element’s molar amount by the smallest molar amount to yield subscripts for a tentative
empirical formula
3. Multiplying all coefficients by an integer, if necessary, to ensure that the smallest whole-number ratio of
subscripts is obtained
Figure 3.11outlines this procedure in flow chart fashion for a substance containing elements A and X.
FIGURE3.11 The empirical formula of a compound can be derived from the masses of all elements in the sample.
EXAMPLE 3.11
Determining a Compound’s Empirical Formula from the Masses of Its Elements
A sample of the black mineral hematite (Figure 3.12), an oxide of iron found in many iron ores, contains 34.97
g of iron and 15.03 g of oxygen. What is the empirical formula of hematite?
FIGURE3.12 Hematite is an iron oxide that is used in jewelry. (credit: Mauro Cateb)
Solution
This problem provides the mass in grams of each element. Begin by finding the moles of each:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 147
3.2 • Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas 133
Next, derive the iron-to-oxygen molar ratio by dividing by the lesser number of moles:
The ratio is 1.000 mol of iron to 1.500 mol of oxygen (Fe O ). Finally, multiply the ratio by two to get the
1 1.5
smallest possible whole number subscripts while still maintaining the correct iron-to-oxygen ratio:
The empirical formula is Fe O .
2 3
Check Your Learning
What is the empirical formula of a compound if a sample contains 0.130 g of nitrogen and 0.370 g of oxygen?
Answer:
N O
2 5
LINK TO LEARNING
For additional worked examples illustrating the derivation of empirical formulas, watch the briefvideo
(http://openstax.org/l/16empforms)clip.
Deriving Empirical Formulas from Percent Composition
Finally, with regard to deriving empirical formulas, consider instances in which a compound’s percent
composition is available rather than the absolute masses of the compound’s constituent elements. In such
cases, the percent composition can be used to calculate the masses of elements present in any convenient
mass of compound; these masses can then be used to derive the empirical formula in the usual fashion.
EXAMPLE 3.12
Determining an Empirical Formula from Percent Composition
The bacterial fermentation of grain to produce ethanol forms a gas with a percent composition of 27.29% C
and 72.71% O (Figure 3.13). What is the empirical formula for this gas?
PAGE: 148
134 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
FIGURE3.13 An oxide of carbon is removed from these fermentation tanks through the large copper pipes at the
top. (credit: “Dual Freq”/Wikimedia Commons)
Solution
Since the scale for percentages is 100, it is most convenient to calculate the mass of elements present in a
sample weighing 100 g. The calculation is “most convenient” because, per the definition for percent
composition, the mass of a given element in grams is numerically equivalent to the element’s mass
percentage. This numerical equivalence results from the definition of the “percentage” unit, whose name is
derived from the Latin phraseper centummeaning “by the hundred.” Considering this definition, the mass
percentages provided may be more conveniently expressed as fractions:
The molar amounts of carbon and oxygen in a 100-g sample are calculated by dividing each element’s mass by
its molar mass:
Coefficients for the tentative empirical formula are derived by dividing each molar amount by the lesser of the
two:
Since the resulting ratio is one carbon to two oxygen atoms, the empirical formula is CO .
2
Check Your Learning
What is the empirical formula of a compound containing 40.0% C, 6.71% H, and 53.28% O?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 149
3.2 • Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas 135
Answer:
CH O
2
Derivation of Molecular Formulas
Recall that empirical formulas are symbols representing therelativenumbers of a compound’s elements.
Determining theabsolutenumbers of atoms that compose a single molecule of a covalent compound requires
knowledge of both its empirical formula and its molecular mass or molar mass. These quantities may be
determined experimentally by various measurement techniques. Molecular mass, for example, is often
derived from the mass spectrum of the compound (see discussion of this technique in the previous chapter on
atoms and molecules). Molar mass can be measured by a number of experimental methods, many of which
will be introduced in later chapters of this text.
Molecular formulas are derived by comparing the compound’s molecular or molar mass to itsempirical
formula mass. As the name suggests, an empirical formula mass is the sum of the average atomic masses of all
the atoms represented in an empirical formula. If the molecular (or molar) mass of the substance is known, it
may be divided by the empirical formula mass to yield the number of empirical formula units per molecule (n):
The molecular formula is then obtained by multiplying each subscript in the empirical formula byn, as shown
by the generic empirical formula A B :
x y
For example, consider a covalent compound whose empirical formula is determined to be CH O. The empirical
2
formula mass for this compound is approximately 30 amu (the sum of 12 amu for one C atom, 2 amu for two H
atoms, and 16 amu for one O atom). If the compound’s molecular mass is determined to be 180 amu, this
indicates that molecules of this compound contain six times the number of atoms represented in the empirical
formula:
Molecules of this compound are then represented by molecular formulas whose subscripts are six times
greater than those in the empirical formula:
Note that this same approach may be used when the molar mass (g/mol) instead of the molecular mass (amu)
is used. In this case,one moleof empirical formula units and molecules is considered, as opposed to single
units and molecules.
EXAMPLE 3.13
Determination of the Molecular Formula for Nicotine
Nicotine, an alkaloid in the nightshade family of plants that is mainly responsible for the addictive nature of
cigarettes, contains 74.02% C, 8.710% H, and 17.27% N. If 40.57 g of nicotine contains 0.2500 mol nicotine,
what is the molecular formula?
Solution
Determining the molecular formula from the provided data will require comparison of the compound’s
empirical formula mass to its molar mass. As the first step, use the percent composition to derive the
compound’s empirical formula. Assuming a convenient, a 100-g sample of nicotine yields the following molar
amounts of its elements:
PAGE: 150
136 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
Next, calculate the molar ratios of these elements relative to the least abundant element, N.
The C-to-N and H-to-N molar ratios are adequately close to whole numbers, and so the empirical formula is
C H N. The empirical formula mass for this compound is therefore 81.13 amu/formula unit, or 81.13 g/mol
5 7
formula unit.
Calculate the molar mass for nicotine from the given mass and molar amount of compound:
Comparing the molar mass and empirical formula mass indicates that each nicotine molecule contains two
formula units:
Finally, derive the molecular formula for nicotine from the empirical formula by multiplying each subscript by
two:
Check Your Learning
What is the molecular formula of a compound with a percent composition of 49.47% C, 5.201% H, 28.84% N,
and 16.48% O, and a molecular mass of 194.2 amu?
Answer:
C H N O
8 10 4 2
3.3 Molarity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the fundamental properties of solutions
• Calculate solution concentrations using molarity
• Perform dilution calculations using the dilution equation
Preceding sections of this chapter focused on the composition of substances: samples of matter that contain
only one type of element or compound. However, mixtures—samples of matter containing two or more
substances physically combined—are more commonly encountered in nature than are pure substances.
Similar to a pure substance, the relative composition of a mixture plays an important role in determining its
properties. The relative amount of oxygen in a planet’s atmosphere determines its ability to sustain aerobic
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 151
3.3 • Molarity 137
life. The relative amounts of iron, carbon, nickel, and other elements in steel (a mixture known as an “alloy”)
determine its physical strength and resistance to corrosion. The relative amount of the active ingredient in a
medicine determines its effectiveness in achieving the desired pharmacological effect. The relative amount of
sugar in a beverage determines its sweetness (seeFigure 3.14). This section will describe one of the most
common ways in which the relative compositions of mixtures may be quantified.
FIGURE3.14 Sugar is one of many components in the complex mixture known as coffee. The amount of sugar in a
given amount of coffee is an important determinant of the beverage’s sweetness. (credit: Jane Whitney)
Solutions
Solutions have previously been defined as homogeneous mixtures, meaning that the composition of the
mixture (and therefore its properties) is uniform throughout its entire volume. Solutions occur frequently in
nature and have also been implemented in many forms of manmade technology. A more thorough treatment
of solution properties is provided in the chapter on solutions and colloids, but provided here is an introduction
to some of the basic properties of solutions.
The relative amount of a given solution component is known as itsconcentration. Often, though not always, a
solution contains one component with a concentration that is significantly greater than that of all other
components. This component is called thesolventand may be viewed as the medium in which the other
components are dispersed, ordissolved. Solutions in which water is the solvent are, of course, very common
on our planet. A solution in which water is the solvent is called anaqueous solution.
Asoluteis a component of a solution that is typically present at a much lower concentration than the solvent.
Solute concentrations are often described with qualitative terms such asdilute(of relatively low
concentration) andconcentrated(of relatively high concentration).
Concentrations may be quantitatively assessed using a wide variety of measurement units, each convenient for
particular applications.Molarity (M)is a useful concentration unit for many applications in chemistry.
Molarity is defined as the number of moles of solute in exactly 1 liter (1 L) of the solution:
EXAMPLE 3.14
Calculating Molar Concentrations
A 355-mL soft drink sample contains 0.133 mol of sucrose (table sugar). What is the molar concentration of
sucrose in the beverage?
PAGE: 152
138 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
Solution
Since the molar amount of solute and the volume of solution are both given, the molarity can be calculated
using the definition of molarity. Per this definition, the solution volume must be converted from mL to L:
Check Your Learning
A teaspoon of table sugar contains about 0.01 mol sucrose. What is the molarity of sucrose if a teaspoon of
sugar has been dissolved in a cup of tea with a volume of 200 mL?
Answer:
0.05M
EXAMPLE 3.15
Deriving Moles and Volumes from Molar Concentrations
How much sugar (mol) is contained in a modest sip (~10 mL) of the soft drink fromExample 3.14?
Solution
Rearrange the definition of molarity to isolate the quantity sought, moles of sugar, then substitute the value for
molarity derived inExample 3.14, 0.375M:
Check Your Learning
What volume (mL) of the sweetened tea described inExample 3.14contains the same amount of sugar (mol) as
10 mL of the soft drink in this example?
Answer:
80 mL
EXAMPLE 3.16
Calculating Molar Concentrations from the Mass of Solute
Distilled white vinegar (Figure 3.15) is a solution of acetic acid, CH CO H, in water. A 0.500-L vinegar solution
3 2
contains 25.2 g of acetic acid. What is the concentration of the acetic acid solution in units of molarity?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 153
3.3 • Molarity 139
FIGURE3.15 Distilled white vinegar is a solution of acetic acid in water.
Solution
As in previous examples, the definition of molarity is the primary equation used to calculate the quantity
sought. Since the mass of solute is provided instead of its molar amount, use the solute’s molar mass to obtain
the amount of solute in moles:
Check Your Learning
Calculate the molarity of 6.52 g of CoCl (128.9 g/mol) dissolved in an aqueous solution with a total volume of
2
75.0 mL.
Answer:
0.674M
EXAMPLE 3.17
Determining the Mass of Solute in a Given Volume of Solution
How many grams of NaCl are contained in 0.250 L of a 5.30-Msolution?
Solution
The volume and molarity of the solution are specified, so the amount (mol) of solute is easily computed as
demonstrated inExample 3.15:
PAGE: 154
140 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
Finally, this molar amount is used to derive the mass of NaCl:
Check Your Learning
How many grams of CaCl (110.98 g/mol) are contained in 250.0 mL of a 0.200-Msolution of calcium chloride?
2
Answer:
5.55 g CaCl
2
When performing calculations stepwise, as inExample 3.17, it is important to refrain from rounding any
intermediate calculation results, which can lead to rounding errors in the final result. InExample 3.17, the
molar amount of NaCl computed in the first step, 1.325 mol, would be properly rounded to 1.32 mol if it were
to be reported; however, although the last digit (5) is not significant, it must be retained as a guard digit in the
intermediate calculation. If the guard digit had not been retained, the final calculation for the mass of NaCl
would have been 77.1 g, a difference of 0.3 g.
In addition to retaining a guard digit for intermediate calculations, rounding errors may also be avoided by
performing computations in a single step (seeExample 3.18). This eliminates intermediate steps so that only
the final result is rounded.
EXAMPLE 3.18
Determining the Volume of Solution Containing a Given Mass of Solute
InExample 3.16, the concentration of acetic acid in white vinegar was determined to be 0.839M. What volume
of vinegar contains 75.6 g of acetic acid?
Solution
First, use the molar mass to calculate moles of acetic acid from the given mass:
Then, use the molarity of the solution to calculate the volume of solution containing this molar amount of
solute:
Combining these two steps into one yields:
Check Your Learning
What volume of a 1.50-MKBr solution contains 66.0 g KBr?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 155
3.3 • Molarity 141
Answer:
0.370 L
Dilution of Solutions
Dilutionis the process whereby the concentration of a solution is lessened by the addition of solvent. For
example, a glass of iced tea becomes increasingly diluted as the ice melts. The water from the melting ice
increases the volume of the solvent (water) and the overall volume of the solution (iced tea), thereby reducing
the relative concentrations of the solutes that give the beverage its taste (Figure 3.16).
FIGURE3.16 Both solutions contain the same mass of copper nitrate. The solution on the right is more dilute
because the copper nitrate is dissolved in more solvent. (credit: Mark Ott)
Dilution is also a common means of preparing solutions of a desired concentration. By adding solvent to a
measured portion of a more concentratedstock solution, a solution of lesser concentration may be prepared.
For example, commercial pesticides are typically sold as solutions in which the active ingredients are far more
concentrated than is appropriate for their application. Before they can be used on crops, the pesticides must
be diluted. This is also a very common practice for the preparation of a number of common laboratory
reagents.
A simple mathematical relationship can be used to relate the volumes and concentrations of a solution before
and after the dilution process. According to the definition of molarity, the number of moles of solute in a
solution (n) is equal to the product of the solution’s molarity (M) and its volume in liters (L):
Expressions like these may be written for a solution before and after it is diluted:
where the subscripts “1” and “2” refer to the solution before and after the dilution, respectively. Since the
dilution processdoes not change the amount of solute in the solution,n =n. Thus, these two equations may
1 2
be set equal to one another:
This relation is commonly referred to as the dilution equation. Although this equation uses molarity as the unit
of concentration and liters as the unit of volume, other units of concentration and volume may be used as long
as the units properly cancel per the factor-label method. Reflecting this versatility, the dilution equation is
often written in the more general form:
whereCandVare concentration and volume, respectively.
PAGE: 156
142 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
LINK TO LEARNING
Use thesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16Phetsolvents)to explore the relations between solute amount,
solution volume, and concentration and to confirm the dilution equation.
EXAMPLE 3.19
Determining the Concentration of a Diluted Solution
If 0.850 L of a 5.00-Msolution of copper nitrate, Cu(NO ) , is diluted to a volume of 1.80 L by the addition of
32
water, what is the molarity of the diluted solution?
Solution
The stock concentration,C, and volume,V, are provided as well as the volume of the diluted solution,V.
1 1 2
Rearrange the dilution equation to isolate the unknown property, the concentration of the diluted solution,C:
2
Since the stock solution is being diluted by more than two-fold (volume is increased from 0.85 L to 1.80 L), the
diluted solution’s concentration is expected to be less than one-half 5M. This ballpark estimate will be
compared to the calculated result to check for any gross errors in computation (for example, such as an
improper substitution of the given quantities). Substituting the given values for the terms on the right side of
this equation yields:
This result compares well to our ballpark estimate (it’s a bit less than one-half the stock concentration, 5M).
Check Your Learning
What is the concentration of the solution that results from diluting 25.0 mL of a 2.04-Msolution of CH OH to
3
500.0 mL?
Answer:
0.102MCH OH
3
EXAMPLE 3.20
Volume of a Diluted Solution
What volume of 0.12MHBr can be prepared from 11 mL (0.011 L) of 0.45MHBr?
Solution
Provided are the volume and concentration of a stock solution,V andC, and the concentration of the
1 1
resultant diluted solution,C. Find the volume of the diluted solution,V by rearranging the dilution equation
2 2
to isolateV:
2
Since the diluted concentration (0.12M) is slightly more than one-fourth the original concentration (0.45M),
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 157
3.3 • Molarity 143
the volume of the diluted solution is expected to be roughly four times the original volume, or around 44 mL.
Substituting the given values and solving for the unknown volume yields:
The volume of the 0.12-Msolution is 0.041 L (41 mL). The result is reasonable and compares well with the
rough estimate.
Check Your Learning
A laboratory experiment calls for 0.125MHNO . What volume of 0.125MHNO can be prepared from 0.250 L
3 3
of 1.88MHNO ?
3
Answer:
3.76 L
EXAMPLE 3.21
Volume of a Concentrated Solution Needed for Dilution
What volume of 1.59MKOH is required to prepare 5.00 L of 0.100MKOH?
Solution
Given are the concentration of a stock solution,C, and the volume and concentration of the resultant diluted
1
solution,V andC. Find the volume of the stock solution,V by rearranging the dilution equation to isolateV:
2 2 1 1
Since the concentration of the diluted solution 0.100Mis roughly one-sixteenth that of the stock solution (1.59
M), the volume of the stock solution is expected to be about one-sixteenth that of the diluted solution, or
around 0.3 liters. Substituting the given values and solving for the unknown volume yields:
Thus, 0.314 L of the 1.59-Msolution is needed to prepare the desired solution. This result is consistent with
the rough estimate.
Check Your Learning
What volume of a 0.575-Msolution of glucose, C H O , can be prepared from 50.00 mL of a 3.00-Mglucose
6 12 6
solution?
Answer:
0.261 L
PAGE: 158
144 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
3.4 Other Units for Solution Concentrations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the concentration units of mass percentage, volume percentage, mass-volume percentage, parts-per-
million (ppm), and parts-per-billion (ppb)
• Perform computations relating a solution’s concentration and its components’ volumes and/or masses using
these units
The previous section introduced molarity, a very useful measurement unit for evaluating the concentration of
solutions. However, molarity is only one measure of concentration. This section will describe some other units
of concentration that are commonly used in various applications, either for convenience or by convention.
Mass Percentage
Earlier in this chapter, percent composition was introduced as a measure of the relative amount of a given
element in a compound. Percentages are also commonly used to express the composition of mixtures,
including solutions. Themass percentageof a solution component is defined as the ratio of the component’s
mass to the solution’s mass, expressed as a percentage:
Mass percentage is also referred to by similar names such aspercent mass, percent weight, weight/weight
percent, and other variations on this theme. The most common symbol for mass percentage is simply the
percent sign, %, although more detailed symbols are often used including %mass, %weight, and (w/w)%. Use
of these more detailed symbols can prevent confusion of mass percentages with other types of percentages,
such as volume percentages (to be discussed later in this section).
Mass percentages are popular concentration units for consumer products. The label of a typical liquid bleach
bottle (Figure 3.17) cites the concentration of its active ingredient, sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl), as being
7.4%. A 100.0-g sample of bleach would therefore contain 7.4 g of NaOCl.
FIGURE3.17 Liquid bleach is an aqueous solution of sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl). This brand has a concentration
of 7.4% NaOCl by mass.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 159
3.4 • Other Units for Solution Concentrations 145
EXAMPLE 3.22
Calculation of Percent by Mass
A 5.0-g sample of spinal fluid contains 3.75 mg (0.00375 g) of glucose. What is the percent by mass of glucose
in spinal fluid?
Solution
The spinal fluid sample contains roughly 4 mg of glucose in 5000 mg of fluid, so the mass fraction of glucose
should be a bit less than one part in 1000, or about 0.1%. Substituting the given masses into the equation
defining mass percentage yields:
The computed mass percentage agrees with our rough estimate (it’s a bit less than 0.1%).
Note that while any mass unit may be used to compute a mass percentage (mg, g, kg, oz, and so on), the same
unit must be used for both the solute and the solution so that the mass units cancel, yielding a dimensionless
ratio. In this case, the solute mass unit in the numerator was converted from mg to g to match the units in the
denominator. Alternatively, the spinal fluid mass unit in the denominator could have been converted from g to
mg instead. As long as identical mass units are used for both solute and solution, the computed mass
percentage will be correct.
Check Your Learning
A bottle of a tile cleanser contains 135 g of HCl and 775 g of water. What is the percent by mass of HCl in this
cleanser?
Answer:
14.8%
EXAMPLE 3.23
Calculations using Mass Percentage
“Concentrated” hydrochloric acid is an aqueous solution of 37.2% HCl that is commonly used as a laboratory
reagent. The density of this solution is 1.19 g/mL. What mass of HCl is contained in 0.500 L of this solution?
Solution
The HCl concentration is near 40%, so a 100-g portion of this solution would contain about 40 g of HCl. Since
the solution density isn’t greatly different from that of water (1 g/mL), a reasonable estimate of the HCl mass in
500 g (0.5 L) of the solution is about five times greater than that in a 100 g portion, or 5 40 = 200 g. In order to
derive the mass of solute in a solution from its mass percentage, the mass of the solution must be known.
Using the solution density given, convert the solution’s volume to mass, and then use the given mass
percentage to calculate the solute mass. This mathematical approach is outlined in this flowchart:
For proper unit cancellation, the 0.500-L volume is converted into 500 mL, and the mass percentage is
expressed as a ratio, 37.2 g HCl/g solution:
PAGE: 160
146 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
This mass of HCl is consistent with our rough estimate of approximately 200 g.
Check Your Learning
What volume of concentrated HCl solution contains 125 g of HCl?
Answer:
282 mL
Volume Percentage
Liquid volumes over a wide range of magnitudes are conveniently measured using common and relatively
inexpensive laboratory equipment. The concentration of a solution formed by dissolving a liquid solute in a
liquid solvent is therefore often expressed as avolume percentage, %vol or (v/v)%:
EXAMPLE 3.24
Calculations using Volume Percentage
Rubbing alcohol (isopropanol) is usually sold as a 70%vol aqueous solution. If the density of isopropyl alcohol
is 0.785 g/mL, how many grams of isopropyl alcohol are present in a 355 mL bottle of rubbing alcohol?
Solution
Per the definition of volume percentage, the isopropanol volume is 70% of the total solution volume.
Multiplying the isopropanol volume by its density yields the requested mass:
Check Your Learning
Wine is approximately 12% ethanol (CH CH OH) by volume. Ethanol has a molar mass of 46.06 g/mol and a
3 2
density 0.789 g/mL. How many moles of ethanol are present in a 750-mL bottle of wine?
Answer:
1.5 mol ethanol
Mass-Volume Percentage
“Mixed” percentage units, derived from the mass of solute and the volume of solution, are popular for certain
biochemical and medical applications. Amass-volume percentis a ratio of a solute’s mass to the solution’s
volume expressed as a percentage. The specific units used for solute mass and solution volume may vary,
depending on the solution. For example, physiological saline solution, used to prepare intravenous fluids, has
a concentration of 0.9% mass/volume (m/v), indicating that the composition is 0.9 g of solute per 100 mL of
solution. The concentration of glucose in blood (commonly referred to as “blood sugar”) is also typically
expressed in terms of a mass-volume ratio. Though not expressed explicitly as a percentage, its concentration
is usually given in milligrams of glucose per deciliter (100 mL) of blood (Figure 3.18).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 161
3.4 • Other Units for Solution Concentrations 147
FIGURE3.18 “Mixed” mass-volume units are commonly encountered in medical settings. (a) The NaCl
concentration of physiological saline is 0.9% (m/v). (b) This device measures glucose levels in a sample of blood.
The normal range for glucose concentration in blood (fasting) is around 70–100 mg/dL. (credit a: modification of
work by “The National Guard”/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by Biswarup Ganguly)
Parts per Million and Parts per Billion
Very low solute concentrations are often expressed using appropriately small units such asparts per million
(ppm)orparts per billion (ppb). Like percentage (“part per hundred”) units, ppm and ppb may be defined in
terms of masses, volumes, or mixed mass-volume units. There are also ppm and ppb units defined with
respect to numbers of atoms and molecules.
The mass-based definitions of ppm and ppb are given here:
Both ppm and ppb are convenient units for reporting the concentrations of pollutants and other trace
contaminants in water. Concentrations of these contaminants are typically very low in treated and natural
waters, and their levels cannot exceed relatively low concentration thresholds without causing adverse effects
on health and wildlife. For example, the EPA has identified the maximum safe level of fluoride ion in tap water
to be 4 ppm. Inline water filters are designed to reduce the concentration of fluoride and several other trace-
level contaminants in tap water (Figure 3.19).
PAGE: 162
148 3 • Composition of Substances and Solutions
FIGURE3.19 (a) In some areas, trace-level concentrations of contaminants can render unfiltered tap water unsafe
for drinking and cooking. (b) Inline water filters reduce the concentration of solutes in tap water. (credit a:
modification of work by Jenn Durfey; credit b: modification of work by “vastateparkstaff”/Wikimedia commons)
EXAMPLE 3.25
Calculation of Parts per Million and Parts per Billion Concentrations
According to the EPA, when the concentration of lead in tap water reaches 15 ppb, certain remedial actions
must be taken. What is this concentration in ppm? At this concentration, what mass of lead (μg) would be
contained in a typical glass of water (300 mL)?
Solution
The definitions of the ppm and ppb units may be used to convert the given concentration from ppb to ppm.
Comparing these two unit definitions shows that ppm is 1000 times greater than ppb (1 ppm = 103ppb). Thus:
The definition of the ppb unit may be used to calculate the requested mass if the mass of the solution is
provided. Since the volume of solution (300 mL) is given, its density must be used to derive the corresponding
mass. Assume the density of tap water to be roughly the same as that of pure water (~1.00 g/mL), since the
concentrations of any dissolved substances should not be very large. Rearranging the equation defining the
ppb unit and substituting the given quantities yields:
Finally, convert this mass to the requested unit of micrograms:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 163
3.4 • Other Units for Solution Concentrations 149
Check Your Learning
A 50.0-g sample of industrial wastewater was determined to contain 0.48 mg of mercury. Express the mercury
concentration of the wastewater in ppm and ppb units.
Answer:
9.6 ppm, 9600 ppb
PAGE: 164
150 3 • Key Terms
Key Terms
aqueous solution solution for which water is the expressed as a percentage
solvent mass-volume percent ratio of solute mass to
Avogadro’s number (N ) experimentally solution volume, expressed as a percentage
A
determined value of the number of entities molar mass mass in grams of 1 mole of a
comprising 1 mole of substance, equal to 6.022 substance
1023mol−1 molarity (M) unit of concentration, defined as the
concentrated qualitative term for a solution number of moles of solute dissolved in 1 liter of
containing solute at a relatively high solution
concentration mole amount of substance containing the same
concentration quantitative measure of the relative number of atoms, molecules, ions, or other
amounts of solute and solvent present in a entities as the number of atoms in exactly 12
solution grams of12C
dilute qualitative term for a solution containing parts per billion (ppb) ratio of solute-to-solution
solute at a relatively low concentration mass multiplied by 109
dilution process of adding solvent to a solution in parts per million (ppm) ratio of solute-to-solution
order to lower the concentration of solutes mass multiplied by 106
dissolved describes the process by which solute percent composition percentage by mass of the
components are dispersed in a solvent various elements in a compound
empirical formula mass sum of average atomic solute solution component present in a
masses for all atoms represented in an empirical concentration less than that of the solvent
formula solvent solution component present in a
formula mass sum of the average masses for all concentration that is higher relative to other
atoms represented in a chemical formula; for components
covalent compounds, this is also the molecular volume percentage ratio of solute-to-solution
mass volume expressed as a percentage
mass percentage ratio of solute-to-solution mass
Key Equations
(A B ) = A B
x yn nx ny
CV =CV
1 1 2 2
Summary
3.1Formula Mass and the Mole Concept convenient amount unit for expressing very large
numbers of atoms or molecules is the mole.
The formula mass of a substance is the sum of the
Experimental measurements have determined the
average atomic masses of each atom represented in
number of entities composing 1 mole of substance
the chemical formula and is expressed in atomic
to be 6.022 1023, a quantity called Avogadro’s
mass units. The formula mass of a covalent
number. The mass in grams of 1 mole of substance
compound is also called the molecular mass. A
is its molar mass. Due to the use of the same
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 165
3 • Exercises 151
reference substance in defining the atomic mass in which other components, called solutes, are
unit and the mole, the formula mass (amu) and dissolved. An aqueous solution is one for which the
molar mass (g/mol) for any substance are solvent is water. The concentration of a solution is a
numerically equivalent (for example, one H O measure of the relative amount of solute in a given
2
molecule weighs approximately18 amu and 1 mole amount of solution. Concentrations may be
of H O molecules weighs approximately 18 g). measured using various units, with one very useful
2
unit being molarity, defined as the number of moles
3.2Determining Empirical and Molecular
of solute per liter of solution. The solute
Formulas
concentration of a solution may be decreased by
The chemical identity of a substance is defined by adding solvent, a process referred to as dilution. The
the types and relative numbers of atoms composing dilution equation is a simple relation between
its fundamental entities (molecules in the case of concentrations and volumes of a solution before and
covalent compounds, ions in the case of ionic after dilution.
compounds). A compound’s percent composition
3.4Other Units for Solution Concentrations
provides the mass percentage of each element in the
compound, and it is often experimentally In addition to molarity, a number of other solution
determined and used to derive the compound’s concentration units are used in various applications.
empirical formula. The empirical formula mass of a Percentage concentrations based on the solution
covalent compound may be compared to the components’ masses, volumes, or both are useful for
compound’s molecular or molar mass to derive a expressing relatively high concentrations, whereas
molecular formula. lower concentrations are conveniently expressed
using ppm or ppb units. These units are popular in
3.3Molarity
environmental, medical, and other fields where
Solutions are homogeneous mixtures. Many mole-based units such as molarity are not as
solutions contain one component, called the solvent, commonly used.
Exercises
3.1Formula Mass and the Mole Concept
1. What is the total mass (amu) of carbon in each of the following molecules?
(a) CH
4
(b) CHCl
3
(c) C H O
12 10 6
(d) CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
2. What is the total mass of hydrogen in each of the molecules?
(a) CH
4
(b) CHCl
3
(c) C H O
12 10 6
(d) CH CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 2 3
3. Calculate the molecular or formula mass of each of the following:
(a) P
4
(b) H O
2
(c) Ca(NO )
32
(d) CH CO H (acetic acid)
3 2
(e) C H O (sucrose, cane sugar)
12 22 11
PAGE: 166
152 3 • Exercises
4. Determine the molecular mass of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
5. Determine the molecular mass of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
6. Which molecule has a molecular mass of 28.05 amu?
(a)
(b)
(c)
7. Write a sentence that describes how to determine the number of moles of a compound in a known mass of
the compound using its molecular formula.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 167
3 • Exercises 153
8. Compare 1 mole of H , 1 mole of O , and 1 mole of F .
2 2 2
(a) Which has the largest number of molecules? Explain why.
(b) Which has the greatest mass? Explain why.
9. Which contains the greatest mass of oxygen: 0.75 mol of ethanol (C H OH), 0.60 mol of formic acid
2 5
(HCO H), or 1.0 mol of water (H O)? Explain why.
2 2
10. Which contains the greatest number of moles of oxygen atoms: 1 mol of ethanol (C H OH), 1 mol of formic
2 5
acid (HCO H), or 1 mol of water (H O)? Explain why.
2 2
11. How are the molecular mass and the molar mass of a compound similar and how are they different?
12. Calculate the molar mass of each of the following compounds:
(a) hydrogen fluoride, HF
(b) ammonia, NH
3
(c) nitric acid, HNO
3
(d) silver sulfate, Ag SO
2 4
(e) boric acid, B(OH)
3
13. Calculate the molar mass of each of the following:
(a) S
8
(b) C H
5 12
(c) Sc (SO )
2 43
(d) CH COCH (acetone)
3 3
(e) C H O (glucose)
6 12 6
14. Calculate the empirical or molecular formula mass and the molar mass of each of the following minerals:
(a) limestone, CaCO
3
(b) halite, NaCl
(c) beryl, Be Al Si O
3 2 6 18
(d) malachite, Cu (OH) CO
2 2 3
(e) turquoise, CuAl (PO ) (OH) (H O)
6 44 8 2 4
15. Calculate the molar mass of each of the following:
(a) the anesthetic halothane, C HBrClF
2 3
(b) the herbicide paraquat, C H N Cl
12 14 2 2
(c) caffeine, C H N O
8 10 4 2
(d) urea, CO(NH )
22
(e) a typical soap, C H CO Na
17 35 2
16. Determine the number of moles of compound and the number of moles of each type of atom in each of the
following:
(a) 25.0 g of propylene, C H
3 6
(b) 3.06 10−3g of the amino acid glycine, C H NO
2 5 2
(c) 25 lb of the herbicide Treflan, C H N O F (1 lb = 454 g)
13 16 2 4
(d) 0.125 kg of the insecticide Paris Green, Cu (AsO ) (CH CO )
4 32 3 22
(e) 325 mg of aspirin, C H (CO H)(CO CH )
6 4 2 2 3
17. Determine the mass of each of the following:
(a) 0.0146 mol KOH
(b) 10.2 mol ethane, C H
2 6
(c) 1.6 10−3mol Na SO
2 4
(d) 6.854 103mol glucose, C H O
6 12 6
(e) 2.86 mol Co(NH ) Cl
36 3
18. Determine the number of moles of the compound and determine the number of moles of each type of
atom in each of the following:
(a) 2.12 g of potassium bromide, KBr
(b) 0.1488 g of phosphoric acid, H PO
3 4
(c) 23 kg of calcium carbonate, CaCO
3
(d) 78.452 g of aluminum sulfate, Al (SO )
2 43
(e) 0.1250 mg of caffeine, C H N O
8 10 4 2
PAGE: 168
154 3 • Exercises
19. Determine the mass of each of the following:
(a) 2.345 mol LiCl
(b) 0.0872 mol acetylene, C H
2 2
(c) 3.3 10−2mol Na CO
2 3
(d) 1.23 103mol fructose, C H O
6 12 6
(e) 0.5758 mol FeSO (H O)
4 2 7
20. The approximate minimum daily dietary requirement of the amino acid leucine, C H NO , is 1.1 g. What
6 13 2
is this requirement in moles?
21. Determine the mass in grams of each of the following:
(a) 0.600 mol of oxygen atoms
(b) 0.600 mol of oxygen molecules, O
2
(c) 0.600 mol of ozone molecules, O
3
22. A 55-kg woman has 7.5 10−3mol of hemoglobin (molar mass = 64,456 g/mol) in her blood. How many
hemoglobin molecules is this? What is this quantity in grams?
23. Determine the number of atoms and the mass of zirconium, silicon, and oxygen found in 0.3384 mol of
zircon, ZrSiO , a semiprecious stone.
4
24. Determine which of the following contains the greatest mass of hydrogen: 1 mol of CH , 0.6 mol of C H , or
4 6 6
0.4 mol of C H .
3 8
25. Determine which of the following contains the greatest mass of aluminum: 122 g of AlPO , 266 g of Al Cl ,
4 2 6
or 225 g of Al S .
2 3
26. Diamond is one form of elemental carbon. An engagement ring contains a diamond weighing 1.25 carats
(1 carat = 200 mg). How many atoms are present in the diamond?
27. The Cullinan diamond was the largest natural diamond ever found (January 25, 1905). It weighed 3104
carats (1 carat = 200 mg). How many carbon atoms were present in the stone?
28. One 55-gram serving of a particular cereal supplies 270 mg of sodium, 11% of the recommended daily
allowance. How many moles and atoms of sodium are in the recommended daily allowance?
29. A certain nut crunch cereal contains 11.0 grams of sugar (sucrose, C H O ) per serving size of 60.0
12 22 11
grams. How many servings of this cereal must be eaten to consume 0.0278 moles of sugar?
30. A tube of toothpaste contains 0.76 g of sodium monofluorophosphate (Na PO F) in 100 mL.
2 3
(a) What mass of fluorine atoms in mg was present?
(b) How many fluorine atoms were present?
31. Which of the following represents the least number of molecules?
(a) 20.0 g of H O (18.02 g/mol)
2
(b) 77.0 g of CH (16.06 g/mol)
4
(c) 68.0 g of C H (42.08 g/mol)
3 6
(d) 100.0 g of N O (44.02 g/mol)
2
(e) 84.0 g of HF (20.01 g/mol)
3.2Determining Empirical and Molecular Formulas
32. What information is needed to determine the molecular formula of a compound from the empirical
formula?
33. Calculate the following to four significant figures:
(a) the percent composition of ammonia, NH
3
(b) the percent composition of photographic fixer solution (“hypo”), Na S O
2 2 3
(c) the percent of calcium ion in Ca (PO )
3 42
34. Determine the following to four significant figures:
(a) the percent composition of hydrazoic acid, HN
3
(b) the percent composition of TNT, C H (CH )(NO )
6 2 3 23
(c) the percent of SO 2–in Al (SO )
4 2 43
35. Determine the percent ammonia, NH , in Co(NH ) Cl , to three significant figures.
3 36 3
36. Determine the percent water in CuSO ∙5H O to three significant figures.
4 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 169
3 • Exercises 155
37. Determine the empirical formulas for compounds with the following percent compositions:
(a) 15.8% carbon and 84.2% sulfur
(b) 40.0% carbon, 6.7% hydrogen, and 53.3% oxygen
38. Determine the empirical formulas for compounds with the following percent compositions:
(a) 43.6% phosphorus and 56.4% oxygen
(b) 28.7% K, 1.5% H, 22.8% P, and 47.0% O
39. A compound of carbon and hydrogen contains 92.3% C and has a molar mass of 78.1 g/mol. What is its
molecular formula?
40. Dichloroethane, a compound that is often used for dry cleaning, contains carbon, hydrogen, and chlorine.
It has a molar mass of 99 g/mol. Analysis of a sample shows that it contains 24.3% carbon and 4.1%
hydrogen. What is its molecular formula?
41. Determine the empirical and molecular formula for chrysotile asbestos. Chrysotile has the following
percent composition: 28.03% Mg, 21.60% Si, 1.16% H, and 49.21% O. The molar mass for chrysotile is
520.8 g/mol.
42. Polymers are large molecules composed of simple units repeated many times. Thus, they often have
relatively simple empirical formulas. Calculate the empirical formulas of the following polymers:
(a) Lucite (Plexiglas); 59.9% C, 8.06% H, 32.0% O
(b) Saran; 24.8% C, 2.0% H, 73.1% Cl
(c) polyethylene; 86% C, 14% H
(d) polystyrene; 92.3% C, 7.7% H
(e) Orlon; 67.9% C, 5.70% H, 26.4% N
43. A major textile dye manufacturer developed a new yellow dye. The dye has a percent composition of
75.95% C, 17.72% N, and 6.33% H by mass with a molar mass of about 240 g/mol. Determine the
molecular formula of the dye.
3.3Molarity
44. Explain what changes and what stays the same when 1.00 L of a solution of NaCl is diluted to 1.80 L.
45. What information is needed to calculate the molarity of a sulfuric acid solution?
46. A 200-mL sample and a 400-mL sample of a solution of salt have the same molarity. In what ways are the
two samples identical? In what ways are these two samples different?
47. Determine the molarity for each of the following solutions:
(a) 0.444 mol of CoCl in 0.654 L of solution
2
(b) 98.0 g of phosphoric acid, H PO , in 1.00 L of solution
3 4
(c) 0.2074 g of calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , in 40.00 mL of solution
2
(d) 10.5 kg of Na SO ·10H O in 18.60 L of solution
2 4 2
(e) 7.0 10−3mol of I in 100.0 mL of solution
2
(f) 1.8 104mg of HCl in 0.075 L of solution
48. Determine the molarity of each of the following solutions:
(a) 1.457 mol KCl in 1.500 L of solution
(b) 0.515 g of H SO in 1.00 L of solution
2 4
(c) 20.54 g of Al(NO ) in 1575 mL of solution
33
(d) 2.76 kg of CuSO ·5H O in 1.45 L of solution
4 2
(e) 0.005653 mol of Br in 10.00 mL of solution
2
(f) 0.000889 g of glycine, C H NO , in 1.05 mL of solution
2 5 2
49. Consider this question: What is the mass of the solute in 0.500 L of 0.30Mglucose, C H O , used for
6 12 6
intravenous injection?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
50. Consider this question: What is the mass of solute in 200.0 L of a 1.556-Msolution of KBr?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
PAGE: 170
156 3 • Exercises
51. Calculate the number of moles and the mass of the solute in each of the following solutions:
(a) 2.00 L of 18.5MH SO , concentrated sulfuric acid
2 4
(b) 100.0 mL of 3.8 10−6MNaCN, the minimum lethal concentration of sodium cyanide in blood serum
(c) 5.50 L of 13.3MH CO, the formaldehyde used to “fix” tissue samples
2
(d) 325 mL of 1.8 10−6MFeSO , the minimum concentration of iron sulfate detectable by taste in
4
drinking water
52. Calculate the number of moles and the mass of the solute in each of the following solutions:
(a) 325 mL of 8.23 10−5MKI, a source of iodine in the diet
(b) 75.0 mL of 2.2 10−5MH SO , a sample of acid rain
2 4
(c) 0.2500 L of 0.1135MK CrO , an analytical reagent used in iron assays
2 4
(d) 10.5 L of 3.716M(NH ) SO , a liquid fertilizer
42 4
53. Consider this question: What is the molarity of KMnO in a solution of 0.0908 g of KMnO in 0.500 L of
4 4
solution?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
54. Consider this question: What is the molarity of HCl if 35.23 mL of a solution of HCl contain 0.3366 g of
HCl?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
55. Calculate the molarity of each of the following solutions:
(a) 0.195 g of cholesterol, C H O, in 0.100 L of serum, the average concentration of cholesterol in human
27 46
serum
(b) 4.25 g of NH in 0.500 L of solution, the concentration of NH in household ammonia
3 3
(c) 1.49 kg of isopropyl alcohol, C H OH, in 2.50 L of solution, the concentration of isopropyl alcohol in
3 7
rubbing alcohol
(d) 0.029 g of I in 0.100 L of solution, the solubility of I in water at 20 °C
2 2
56. Calculate the molarity of each of the following solutions:
(a) 293 g HCl in 666 mL of solution, a concentrated HCl solution
(b) 2.026 g FeCl in 0.1250 L of a solution used as an unknown in general chemistry laboratories
3
(c) 0.001 mg Cd2+in 0.100 L, the maximum permissible concentration of cadmium in drinking water
(d) 0.0079 g C H SNO in one ounce (29.6 mL), the concentration of saccharin in a diet soft drink.
7 5 3
57. There is about 1.0 g of calcium, as Ca2+, in 1.0 L of milk. What is the molarity of Ca2+in milk?
58. What volume of a 1.00-MFe(NO ) solution can be diluted to prepare 1.00 L of a solution with a
33
concentration of 0.250M?
59. If 0.1718 L of a 0.3556-MC H OH solution is diluted to a concentration of 0.1222M, what is the volume of
3 7
the resulting solution?
60. If 4.12 L of a 0.850M-H PO solution is be diluted to a volume of 10.00 L, what is the concentration of the
3 4
resulting solution?
61. What volume of a 0.33-MC H O solution can be diluted to prepare 25 mL of a solution with a
12 22 11
concentration of 0.025M?
62. What is the concentration of the NaCl solution that results when 0.150 L of a 0.556-Msolution is allowed to
evaporate until the volume is reduced to 0.105 L?
63. What is the molarity of the diluted solution when each of the following solutions is diluted to the given
final volume?
(a) 1.00 L of a 0.250-Msolution of Fe(NO ) is diluted to a final volume of 2.00 L
33
(b) 0.5000 L of a 0.1222-Msolution of C H OH is diluted to a final volume of 1.250 L
3 7
(c) 2.35 L of a 0.350-Msolution of H PO is diluted to a final volume of 4.00 L
3 4
(d) 22.50 mL of a 0.025-Msolution of C H O is diluted to 100.0 mL
12 22 11
64. What is the final concentration of the solution produced when 225.5 mL of a 0.09988-Msolution of
Na CO is allowed to evaporate until the solution volume is reduced to 45.00 mL?
2 3
65. A 2.00-L bottle of a solution of concentrated HCl was purchased for the general chemistry laboratory. The
solution contained 868.8 g of HCl. What is the molarity of the solution?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 171
3 • Exercises 157
66. An experiment in a general chemistry laboratory calls for a 2.00-Msolution of HCl. How many mL of 11.9
MHCl would be required to make 250 mL of 2.00MHCl?
67. What volume of a 0.20-MK SO solution contains 57 g of K SO ?
2 4 2 4
68. The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) places limits on the quantities of toxic substances that
may be discharged into the sewer system. Limits have been established for a variety of substances,
including hexavalent chromium, which is limited to 0.50 mg/L. If an industry is discharging hexavalent
chromium as potassium dichromate (K Cr O ), what is the maximum permissible molarity of that
2 2 7
substance?
3.4Other Units for Solution Concentrations
69. Consider this question: What mass of a concentrated solution of nitric acid (68.0% HNO by mass) is
3
needed to prepare 400.0 g of a 10.0% solution of HNO by mass?
3
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
70. What mass of a 4.00% NaOH solution by mass contains 15.0 g of NaOH?
71. What mass of solid NaOH (97.0% NaOH by mass) is required to prepare 1.00 L of a 10.0% solution of
NaOH by mass? The density of the 10.0% solution is 1.109 g/mL.
72. What mass of HCl is contained in 45.0 mL of an aqueous HCl solution that has a density of 1.19 g cm–3and
contains 37.21% HCl by mass?
73. The hardness of water (hardness count) is usually expressed in parts per million (by mass) of CaCO ,
3
which is equivalent to milligrams of CaCO per liter of water. What is the molar concentration of Ca2+ions
3
in a water sample with a hardness count of 175 mg CaCO /L?
3
74. The level of mercury in a stream was suspected to be above the minimum considered safe (1 part per
billion by weight). An analysis indicated that the concentration was 0.68 parts per billion. Assume a
density of 1.0 g/mL and calculate the molarity of mercury in the stream.
75. In Canada and the United Kingdom, devices that measure blood glucose levels provide a reading in
millimoles per liter. If a measurement of 5.3 mMis observed, what is the concentration of glucose
(C H O ) in mg/dL?
6 12 6
76. A throat spray is 1.40% by mass phenol, C H OH, in water. If the solution has a density of 0.9956 g/mL,
6 5
calculate the molarity of the solution.
77. Copper(I) iodide (CuI) is often added to table salt as a dietary source of iodine. How many moles of CuI are
contained in 1.00 lb (454 g) of table salt containing 0.0100% CuI by mass?
78. A cough syrup contains 5.0% ethyl alcohol, C H OH, by mass. If the density of the solution is 0.9928 g/mL,
2 5
determine the molarity of the alcohol in the cough syrup.
79. D5W is a solution used as an intravenous fluid. It is a 5.0% by mass solution of dextrose (C H O ) in
6 12 6
water. If the density of D5W is 1.029 g/mL, calculate the molarity of dextrose in the solution.
80. Find the molarity of a 40.0% by mass aqueous solution of sulfuric acid, H SO , for which the density is
2 4
1.3057 g/mL.
PAGE: 172
158 3 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 173
CHAPTER 4
Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Figure4.1 Many modern rocket fuels are solid mixtures of substances combined in carefully measured amounts
and ignited to yield a thrust-generating chemical reaction. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations
4.2Classifying Chemical Reactions
4.3Reaction Stoichiometry
4.4Reaction Yields
4.5Quantitative Chemical Analysis
INTRODUCTION Solid-fuel rockets are a central feature in the world’s space exploration programs, including
the new Space Launch System being developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA)
to replace the retired Space Shuttle fleet (Figure 4.1). The engines of these rockets rely on carefully prepared
solid mixtures of chemicals combined in precisely measured amounts. Igniting the mixture initiates a
vigorous chemical reaction that rapidly generates large amounts of gaseous products. These gases are ejected
from the rocket engine through its nozzle, providing the thrust needed to propel heavy payloads into space.
Both the nature of this chemical reaction and the relationships between the amounts of the substances being
consumed and produced by the reaction are critically important considerations that determine the success of
the technology. This chapter will describe how to symbolize chemical reactions using chemical equations, how
to classify some common chemical reactions by identifying patterns of reactivity, and how to determine the
quantitative relations between the amounts of substances involved in chemical reactions—that is, the reaction
stoichiometry.
PAGE: 174
160 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
4.1 Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive chemical equations from narrative descriptions of chemical reactions.
• Write and balance chemical equations in molecular, total ionic, and net ionic formats.
An earlier chapter of this text introduced the use of element symbols to represent individual atoms. When
atoms gain or lose electrons to yield ions, or combine with other atoms to form molecules, their symbols are
modified or combined to generate chemical formulas that appropriately represent these species. Extending
this symbolism to represent both the identities and the relative quantities of substances undergoing a
chemical (or physical) change involves writing and balancing achemical equation. Consider as an example
the reaction between one methane molecule (CH ) and two diatomic oxygen molecules (O ) to produce one
4 2
carbon dioxide molecule (CO ) and two water molecules (H O). The chemical equation representing this
2 2
process is provided in the upper half ofFigure 4.2, with space-filling molecular models shown in the lower half
of the figure.
FIGURE4.2 The reaction between methane and oxygen to yield carbon dioxide and water (shown at bottom) may
be represented by a chemical equation using formulas (top).
This example illustrates the fundamental aspects of any chemical equation:
1. The substances undergoing reaction are calledreactants, and their formulas are placed on the left side of
the equation.
2. The substances generated by the reaction are calledproducts, and their formulas are placed on the right
side of the equation.
3. Plus signs (+) separate individual reactant and product formulas, and an arrow separates the
reactant and product (left and right) sides of the equation.
4. The relative numbers of reactant and product species are represented bycoefficients(numbers placed
immediately to the left of each formula). A coefficient of 1 is typically omitted.
It is common practice to use the smallest possible whole-number coefficients in a chemical equation, as is
done in this example. Realize, however, that these coefficients represent therelativenumbers of reactants and
products, and, therefore, they may be correctly interpreted as ratios. Methane and oxygen react to yield carbon
dioxide and water in a 1:2:1:2 ratio. This ratio is satisfied if the numbers of these molecules are, respectively,
1-2-1-2, or 2-4-2-4, or 3-6-3-6, and so on (Figure 4.3). Likewise, these coefficients may be interpreted with
regard to any amount (number) unit, and so this equation may be correctly read in many ways, including:
• Onemethane molecule andtwooxygen molecules react to yieldonecarbon dioxide molecule andtwo
water molecules.
• One dozenmethane molecules andtwo dozenoxygen molecules react to yieldone dozencarbon dioxide
molecules andtwo dozenwater molecules.
• One moleof methane molecules and2 molesof oxygen molecules react to yield1 moleof carbon dioxide
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 175
4.1 • Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations 161
molecules and2 molesof water molecules.
FIGURE4.3 Regardless of the absolute numbers of molecules involved, the ratios between numbers of molecules
of each species that react (the reactants) and molecules of each species that form (the products) are the same and
are given by the chemical reaction equation.
Balancing Equations
The chemical equation described in section 4.1 isbalanced, meaning that equal numbers of atoms for each
element involved in the reaction are represented on the reactant and product sides. This is a requirement the
equation must satisfy to be consistent with the law of conservation of matter. It may be confirmed by simply
summing the numbers of atoms on either side of the arrow and comparing these sums to ensure they are
equal. Note that the number of atoms for a given element is calculated by multiplying the coefficient of any
formula containing that element by the element’s subscript in the formula. If an element appears in more than
one formula on a given side of the equation, the number of atoms represented in each must be computed and
then added together. For example, both product species in the example reaction, CO and H O, contain the
2 2
element oxygen, and so the number of oxygen atoms on the product side of the equation is
The equation for the reaction between methane and oxygen to yield carbon dioxide and water is confirmed to
be balanced per this approach, as shown here:
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
C 1 1 = 1 1 1 = 1 1 = 1, yes
H 4 1 = 4 2 2 = 4 4 = 4, yes
O 2 2 = 4 (1 2) + (2 1) = 4 4 = 4, yes
A balanced chemical equation often may be derived from a qualitative description of some chemical reaction
by a fairly simple approach known as balancing by inspection. Consider as an example the decomposition of
water to yield molecular hydrogen and oxygen. This process is represented qualitatively by anunbalanced
chemical equation:
Comparing the number of H and O atoms on either side of this equation confirms its imbalance:
PAGE: 176
162 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
H 1 2 = 2 1 2 = 2 2 = 2, yes
O 1 1 = 1 1 2 = 2 1 ≠ 2, no
The numbers of H atoms on the reactant and product sides of the equation are equal, but the numbers of O
atoms are not. To achieve balance, thecoefficientsof the equation may be changed as needed. Keep in mind, of
course, that theformula subscriptsdefine, in part, the identity of the substance, and so these cannot be
changed without altering the qualitative meaning of the equation. For example, changing the reactant formula
from H O to H O would yield balance in the number of atoms, but doing so also changes the reactant’s
2 2 2
identity (it’s now hydrogen peroxide and not water). The O atom balance may be achieved by changing the
coefficient for H O to 2.
2
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
H 2 2 = 4 1 2 = 2 4 ≠ 2, no
O 2 1 = 2 1 2 = 2 2 = 2, yes
The H atom balance was upset by this change, but it is easily reestablished by changing the coefficient for the
H product to 2.
2
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
H 2 2 = 4 2 2 = 4 4 = 4, yes
O 2 1 = 2 1 2 = 2 2 = 2, yes
These coefficients yield equal numbers of both H and O atoms on the reactant and product sides, and the
balanced equation is, therefore:
EXAMPLE 4.1
Balancing Chemical Equations
Write a balanced equation for the reaction of molecular nitrogen (N ) and oxygen (O ) to form dinitrogen
2 2
pentoxide.
Solution
First, write the unbalanced equation.
Next, count the number of each type of atom present in the unbalanced equation.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 177
4.1 • Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations 163
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
N 1 2 = 2 1 2 = 2 2 = 2, yes
O 1 2 = 2 1 5 = 5 2 ≠ 5, no
Though nitrogen is balanced, changes in coefficients are needed to balance the number of oxygen atoms. To
balance the number of oxygen atoms, a reasonable first attempt would be to change the coefficients for the O
2
and N O to integers that will yield 10 O atoms (the least common multiple for the O atom subscripts in these
2 5
two formulas).
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
N 1 2 = 2 2 2 = 4 2 ≠ 4, no
O 5 2 = 10 2 5 = 10 10 = 10, yes
The N atom balance has been upset by this change; it is restored by changing the coefficient for the reactant N
2
to 2.
Element Reactants Products Balanced?
N 2 2 = 4 2 2 = 4 4 = 4, yes
O 5 2 = 10 2 5 = 10 10 = 10, yes
The numbers of N and O atoms on either side of the equation are now equal, and so the equation is balanced.
Check Your Learning
Write a balanced equation for the decomposition of ammonium nitrate to form molecular nitrogen, molecular
oxygen, and water. (Hint: Balance oxygen last, since it is present in more than one molecule on the right side of
the equation.)
Answer:
It is sometimes convenient to use fractions instead of integers as intermediate coefficients in the process of
balancing a chemical equation. When balance is achieved, all the equation’s coefficients may then be
multiplied by a whole number to convert the fractional coefficients to integers without upsetting the atom
balance. For example, consider the reaction of ethane (C H ) with oxygen to yield H O and CO , represented by
2 6 2 2
the unbalanced equation:
Following the usual inspection approach, one might first balance C and H atoms by changing the coefficients
for the two product species, as shown:
This results in seven O atoms on the product side of the equation, an odd number—no integer coefficient can
be used with the O reactant to yield an odd number, so a fractional coefficient, is used instead to yield a
2
PAGE: 178
164 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
provisional balanced equation:
A conventional balanced equation with integer-only coefficients is derived by multiplying each coefficient by 2:
Finally with regard to balanced equations, recall that convention dictates use of thesmallest whole-number
coefficients. Although the equation for the reaction between molecular nitrogen and molecular hydrogen to
produce ammonia is, indeed, balanced,
the coefficients are not the smallest possible integers representing the relative numbers of reactant and
product molecules. Dividing each coefficient by the greatest common factor, 3, gives the preferred equation:
LINK TO LEARNING
Use this interactivetutorial(http://openstax.org/l/16BalanceEq)for additional practice balancing equations.
Additional Information in Chemical Equations
The physical states of reactants and products in chemical equations very often are indicated with a
parenthetical abbreviation following the formulas. Common abbreviations includesfor solids,lfor liquids,g
for gases, andaqfor substances dissolved in water (aqueous solutions, as introduced in the preceding
chapter). These notations are illustrated in the example equation here:
This equation represents the reaction that takes place when sodium metal is placed in water. The solid sodium
reacts with liquid water to produce molecular hydrogen gas and the ionic compound sodium hydroxide (a solid
in pure form, but readily dissolved in water).
Special conditions necessary for a reaction are sometimes designated by writing a word or symbol above or
below the equation’s arrow. For example, a reaction carried out by heating may be indicated by the uppercase
Greek letter delta (Δ) over the arrow.
Other examples of these special conditions will be encountered in more depth in later chapters.
Equations for Ionic Reactions
Given the abundance of water on earth, it stands to reason that a great many chemical reactions take place in
aqueous media. When ions are involved in these reactions, the chemical equations may be written with various
levels of detail appropriate to their intended use. To illustrate this, consider a reaction between ionic
compounds taking place in an aqueous solution. When aqueous solutions of CaCl and AgNO are mixed, a
2 3
reaction takes place producing aqueous Ca(NO ) and solid AgCl:
32
This balanced equation, derived in the usual fashion, is called amolecular equationbecause it doesn’t
explicitly represent the ionic species that are present in solution. When ionic compounds dissolve in water,
they maydissociateinto their constituent ions, which are subsequently dispersed homogenously throughout
the resulting solution (a thorough discussion of this important process is provided in the chapter on solutions).
Ionic compounds dissolved in water are, therefore, more realistically represented as dissociated ions, in this
case:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 179
4.1 • Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations 165
Unlike these three ionic compounds, AgCl does not dissolve in water to a significant extent, as signified by its
physical state notation,s.
Explicitly representing all dissolved ions results in acomplete ionic equation. In this particular case, the
formulas for the dissolved ionic compounds are replaced by formulas for their dissociated ions:
Examining this equation shows that two chemical species are present in identical form on both sides of the
arrow, Ca2+(aq) and Thesespectator ions—ions whose presence is required to maintain charge
neutrality—are neither chemically nor physically changed by the process, and so they may be eliminated from
the equation to yield a more succinct representation called anet ionic equation:
Following the convention of using the smallest possible integers as coefficients, this equation is then written:
This net ionic equation indicates that solid silver chloride may be produced from dissolved chloride and
silver(I) ions, regardless of the source of these ions. These molecular and complete ionic equations provide
additional information, namely, the ionic compounds used as sources of Cl−and Ag+.
EXAMPLE 4.2
Ionic and Molecular Equations
When carbon dioxide is dissolved in an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide, the mixture reacts to yield
aqueous sodium carbonate and liquid water. Write balanced molecular, complete ionic, and net ionic equations
for this process.
Solution
Begin by identifying formulas for the reactants and products and arranging them properly in chemical
equation form:
Balance is achieved easily in this case by changing the coefficient for NaOH to 2, resulting in the molecular
equation for this reaction:
The two dissolved ionic compounds, NaOH and Na CO , can be represented as dissociated ions to yield the
2 3
complete ionic equation:
Finally, identify the spectator ion(s), in this case Na+(aq), and remove it from each side of the equation to
generate the net ionic equation:
PAGE: 180
166 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Check Your Learning
Diatomic chlorine and sodium hydroxide (lye) are commodity chemicals produced in large quantities, along
with diatomic hydrogen, via the electrolysis of brine, according to the following unbalanced equation:
Write balanced molecular, complete ionic, and net ionic equations for this process.
Answer:
4.2 Classifying Chemical Reactions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define three common types of chemical reactions (precipitation, acid-base, and oxidation-reduction)
• Classify chemical reactions as one of these three types given appropriate descriptions or chemical equations
• Identify common acids and bases
• Predict the solubility of common inorganic compounds by using solubility rules
• Compute the oxidation states for elements in compounds
Humans interact with one another in various and complex ways, and we classify these interactions according
to common patterns of behavior. When two humans exchange information, we say they are communicating.
When they exchange blows with their fists or feet, we say they are fighting. Faced with a wide range of varied
interactions between chemical substances, scientists have likewise found it convenient (or even necessary) to
classify chemical interactions by identifying common patterns of reactivity. This module will provide an
introduction to three of the most prevalent types of chemical reactions: precipitation, acid-base, and
oxidation-reduction.
Precipitation Reactions and Solubility Rules
Aprecipitation reactionis one in which dissolved substances react to form one (or more) solid products.
Many reactions of this type involve the exchange of ions between ionic compounds in aqueous solution and are
sometimes referred to asdouble displacement,double replacement, ormetathesisreactions. These reactions
are common in nature and are responsible for the formation of coral reefs in ocean waters and kidney stones
in animals. They are used widely in industry for production of a number of commodity and specialty
chemicals. Precipitation reactions also play a central role in many chemical analysis techniques, including
spot tests used to identify metal ions andgravimetric methodsfor determining the composition of matter (see
the last module of this chapter).
The extent to which a substance may be dissolved in water, or any solvent, is quantitatively expressed as its
solubility, defined as the maximum concentration of a substance that can be achieved under specified
conditions. Substances with relatively large solubilities are said to besoluble. A substance willprecipitate
when solution conditions are such that its concentration exceeds its solubility. Substances with relatively low
solubilities are said to beinsoluble, and these are the substances that readily precipitate from solution. More
information on these important concepts is provided in a later chapter on solutions. For purposes of predicting
the identities of solids formed by precipitation reactions, one may simply refer to patterns of solubility that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 181
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 167
have been observed for many ionic compounds (Table 4.1).
contain these ions exceptions
NH +
4
group I cations:
Li+
Na+
none
K+
Rb+
Cs+
Cl-
Soluble Ionic Compounds
Br-
compounds with Ag+, Hg 2+, and Pb2+
2
I-
F- compounds with group 2 metal cations, Pb2+, and Fe3+
C H O -
2 3 2
HCO -
3
none
NO -
3
ClO -
3
SO 2- compounds with Ag+, Ba2+, Ca2+, Hg 2+, Pb2+and Sr2+
4 2
contain these ions exceptions
CO 2-
3
CrO 2-
4
Insoluble Ionic Compounds compounds with group 1 cations and NH +
PO 3- 4
4
S2-
OH- compounds with group 1 cations and Ba2+
TABLE4.1
A vivid example of precipitation is observed when solutions of potassium iodide and lead nitrate are mixed,
resulting in the formation of solid lead iodide:
This observation is consistent with the solubility guidelines: The only insoluble compound among all those
involved is lead iodide, one of the exceptions to the general solubility of iodide salts.
The net ionic equation representing this reaction is:
PAGE: 182
168 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Lead iodide is a bright yellow solid that was formerly used as an artist’s pigment known as iodine yellow
(Figure 4.4). The properties of pure PbI crystals make them useful for fabrication of X-ray and gamma ray
2
detectors.
FIGURE4.4 A precipitate of PbI forms when solutions containing Pb2+and I−are mixed. (credit: Der Kreole/
2
Wikimedia Commons)
The solubility guidelines inTable 4.1may be used to predict whether a precipitation reaction will occur when
solutions of soluble ionic compounds are mixed together. One merely needs to identify all the ions present in
the solution and then consider if possible cation/anion pairing could result in an insoluble compound. For
example, mixing solutions of silver nitrate and sodium chloride will yield a solution containing Ag+,
Na+, and Cl−ions. Aside from the two ionic compounds originally present in the solutions, AgNO and NaCl,
3
two additional ionic compounds may be derived from this collection of ions: NaNO and AgCl. The solubility
3
guidelines indicate all nitrate salts are soluble but that AgCl is one of insoluble. A precipitation reaction,
therefore, is predicted to occur, as described by the following equations:
EXAMPLE 4.3
Predicting Precipitation Reactions
Predict the result of mixing reasonably concentrated solutions of the following ionic compounds. If
precipitation is expected, write a balanced net ionic equation for the reaction.
(a) potassium sulfate and barium nitrate
(b) lithium chloride and silver acetate
(c) lead nitrate and ammonium carbonate
Solution
(a) The two possible products for this combination are KNO and BaSO . The solubility guidelines indicate
3 4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 183
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 169
BaSO is insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expected. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derived
4
in the manner detailed in the previous module, is
(b) The two possible products for this combination are LiC H O and AgCl. The solubility guidelines indicate
2 3 2
AgCl is insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expected. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derived
in the manner detailed in the previous module, is
(c) The two possible products for this combination are PbCO and NH NO . The solubility guidelines indicate
3 4 3
PbCO is insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expected. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derived
3
in the manner detailed in the previous module, is
Check Your Learning
Which solution could be used to precipitate the barium ion, Ba2+, in a water sample: sodium chloride, sodium
hydroxide, or sodium sulfate? What is the formula for the expected precipitate?
Answer:
sodium sulfate, BaSO
4
Acid-Base Reactions
Anacid-base reactionis one in which a hydrogen ion, H+, is transferred from one chemical species to another.
Such reactions are of central importance to numerous natural and technological processes, ranging from the
chemical transformations that take place within cells and the lakes and oceans, to the industrial-scale
production of fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, and other substances essential to society. The subject of acid-base
chemistry, therefore, is worthy of thorough discussion, and a full chapter is devoted to this topic later in the
text.
For purposes of this brief introduction, we will consider only the more common types of acid-base reactions
that take place in aqueous solutions. In this context, anacidis a substance that will dissolve in water to yield
hydronium ions, H O+. As an example, consider the equation shown here:
3
The process represented by this equation confirms that hydrogen chloride is an acid. When dissolved in water,
H O+ions are produced by a chemical reaction in which H+ions are transferred from HCl molecules to H O
3 2
molecules (Figure 4.5).
PAGE: 184
170 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
FIGURE4.5 When hydrogen chloride gas dissolves in water, (a) it reacts as an acid, transferring protons to water
molecules to yield (b) hydronium ions (and solvated chloride ions).
The nature of HCl is such that its reaction with water as just described is essentially 100% efficient: Virtually
every HCl molecule that dissolves in water will undergo this reaction. Acids that completely react in this
fashion are calledstrong acids, and HCl is one among just a handful of common acid compounds that are
classified as strong (Table 4.2). A far greater number of compounds behave asweak acidsand only partially
react with water, leaving a large majority of dissolved molecules in their original form and generating a
relatively small amount of hydronium ions. Weak acids are commonly encountered in nature, being the
substances partly responsible for the tangy taste of citrus fruits, the stinging sensation of insect bites, and the
unpleasant smells associated with body odor. A familiar example of a weak acid is acetic acid, the main
ingredient in food vinegars:
When dissolved in water under typical conditions, only about 1% of acetic acid molecules are present in the
ionized form, (Figure 4.6). (The use of a double-arrow in the equation above denotes the partial
reaction aspect of this process, a concept addressed fully in the chapters on chemical equilibrium.)
FIGURE4.6 (a) Fruits such as oranges, lemons, and grapefruit contain the weak acid citric acid. (b) Vinegars
contain the weak acid acetic acid. (credit a: modification of work by Scott Bauer; credit b: modification of work by
Brücke-Osteuropa/Wikimedia Commons)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 185
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 171
Common Strong Acids
Compound Formula Name in Aqueous Solution
HBr hydrobromic acid
HCl hydrochloric acid
HI hydroiodic acid
HNO nitric acid
3
HClO perchloric acid
4
H SO sulfuric acid
2 4
TABLE4.2
Abaseis a substance that will dissolve in water to yield hydroxide ions, OH−. The most common bases are
ionic compounds composed of alkali or alkaline earth metal cations (groups 1 and 2) combined with the
hydroxide ion—for example, NaOH and Ca(OH) . Unlike the acid compounds discussed previously, these
2
compounds do not react chemically with water; instead they dissolve and dissociate, releasing hydroxide ions
directly into the solution. For example, KOH and Ba(OH) dissolve in water and dissociate completely to
2
produce cations (K+and Ba2+, respectively) and hydroxide ions, OH−. These bases, along with other hydroxides
that completely dissociate in water, are consideredstrong bases.
Consider as an example the dissolution of lye (sodium hydroxide) in water:
This equation confirms that sodium hydroxide is a base. When dissolved in water, NaOH dissociates to yield
Na+and OH−ions. This is also true for any other ionic compound containing hydroxide ions. Since the
dissociation process is essentially complete when ionic compounds dissolve in water under typical conditions,
NaOH and other ionic hydroxides are all classified as strong bases.
Unlike ionic hydroxides, some compounds produce hydroxide ions when dissolved by chemically reacting with
water molecules. In all cases, these compounds react only partially and so are classified asweak bases. These
types of compounds are also abundant in nature and important commodities in various technologies. For
example, global production of the weak base ammonia is typically well over 100 metric tons annually, being
widely used as an agricultural fertilizer, a raw material for chemical synthesis of other compounds, and an
active ingredient in household cleaners (Figure 4.7). When dissolved in water, ammonia reacts partially to
yield hydroxide ions, as shown here:
This is, by definition, an acid-base reaction, in this case involving the transfer of H+ions from water molecules
to ammonia molecules. Under typical conditions, only about 1% of the dissolved ammonia is present as
ions.
PAGE: 186
172 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
FIGURE4.7 Ammonia is a weak base used in a variety of applications. (a) Pure ammonia is commonly applied as
an agricultural fertilizer. (b) Dilute solutions of ammonia are effective household cleansers. (credit a: modification of
work by National Resources Conservation Service; credit b: modification of work by pat00139)
Aneutralization reactionis a specific type of acid-base reaction in which the reactants are an acid and a base
(but not water), and the products are often asaltand water
To illustrate a neutralization reaction, consider what happens when a typical antacid such as milk of magnesia
(an aqueous suspension of solid Mg(OH) ) is ingested to ease symptoms associated with excess stomach acid
2
(HCl):
Note that in addition to water, this reaction produces a salt, magnesium chloride.
EXAMPLE 4.4
Writing Equations for Acid-Base Reactions
Write balanced chemical equations for the acid-base reactions described here:
(a) the weak acid hydrogen hypochlorite reacts with water
(b) a solution of barium hydroxide is neutralized with a solution of nitric acid
Solution
(a) The two reactants are provided, HOCl and H O. Since the substance is reported to be an acid, its reaction
2
with water will involve the transfer of H+from HOCl to H O to generate hydronium ions, H O+and hypochlorite
2 3
ions, OCl−.
A double-arrow is appropriate in this equation because it indicates the HOCl is a weak acid that has not reacted
completely.
(b) The two reactants are provided, Ba(OH) and HNO . Since this is a neutralization reaction, the two products
2 3
will be water and a salt composed of the cation of the ionic hydroxide (Ba2+) and the anion generated when the
acid transfers its hydrogen ion
Check Your Learning
Write the net ionic equation representing the neutralization of any strong acid with an ionic hydroxide. (Hint:
Consider the ions produced when a strong acid is dissolved in water.)
Answer:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 187
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 173
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Stomach Antacids
Our stomachs contain a solution of roughly 0.03MHCl, which helps us digest the food we eat. The burning
sensation associated with heartburn is a result of the acid of the stomach leaking through the muscular
valve at the top of the stomach into the lower reaches of the esophagus. The lining of the esophagus is not
protected from the corrosive effects of stomach acid the way the lining of the stomach is, and the results
can be very painful. When we have heartburn, it feels better if we reduce the excess acid in the esophagus
by taking an antacid. As you may have guessed, antacids are bases. One of the most common antacids is
calcium carbonate, CaCO . The reaction,
3
not only neutralizes stomach acid, it also produces CO (g), which may result in a satisfying belch.
2
Milk of Magnesia is a suspension of the sparingly soluble base magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH) . It works
2
according to the reaction:
The hydroxide ions generated in this equilibrium then go on to react with the hydronium ions from the
stomach acid, so that:
This reaction does not produce carbon dioxide, but magnesium-containing antacids can have a laxative
effect. Several antacids have aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) , as an active ingredient. The aluminum
3
hydroxide tends to cause constipation, and some antacids use aluminum hydroxide in concert with
magnesium hydroxide to balance the side effects of the two substances.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Culinary Aspects of Chemistry
Examples of acid-base chemistry are abundant in the culinary world. One example is the use of baking
soda, or sodium bicarbonate in baking. NaHCO is a base. When it reacts with an acid such as lemon juice,
3
buttermilk, or sour cream in a batter, bubbles of carbon dioxide gas are formed from decomposition of the
resulting carbonic acid, and the batter “rises.” Baking powder is a combination of sodium bicarbonate, and
one or more acid salts that react when the two chemicals come in contact with water in the batter.
Many people like to put lemon juice or vinegar, both of which are acids, on cooked fish (Figure 4.8). It turns
out that fish have volatile amines (bases) in their systems, which are neutralized by the acids to yield
involatile ammonium salts. This reduces the odor of the fish, and also adds a “sour” taste that we seem to
enjoy.
PAGE: 188
174 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
FIGURE4.8 A neutralization reaction takes place between citric acid in lemons or acetic acid in vinegar, and
the bases in the flesh of fish.
Pickling is a method used to preserve vegetables using a naturally produced acidic environment. The
vegetable, such as a cucumber, is placed in a sealed jar submerged in a brine solution. The brine solution
favors the growth of beneficial bacteria and suppresses the growth of harmful bacteria. The beneficial
bacteria feed on starches in the cucumber and produce lactic acid as a waste product in a process called
fermentation. The lactic acid eventually increases the acidity of the brine to a level that kills any harmful
bacteria, which require a basic environment. Without the harmful bacteria consuming the cucumbers they
are able to last much longer than if they were unprotected. A byproduct of the pickling process changes the
flavor of the vegetables with the acid making them taste sour.
LINK TO LEARNING
Explore the microscopicview(http://openstax.org/l/16AcidsBases)of strong and weak acids and bases.
Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
Earth’s atmosphere contains about 20% molecular oxygen, O , a chemically reactive gas that plays an essential
2
role in the metabolism of aerobic organisms and in many environmental processes that shape the world. The
termoxidationwas originally used to describe chemical reactions involving O , but its meaning has evolved to
2
refer to a broad and important reaction class known asoxidation-reduction (redox) reactions. A few examples
of such reactions will be used to develop a clear picture of this classification.
Some redox reactions involve the transfer of electrons between reactant species to yield ionic products, such
as the reaction between sodium and chlorine to yield sodium chloride:
It is helpful to view the process with regard to each individual reactant, that is, to represent the fate of each
reactant in the form of an equation called ahalf-reaction:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 189
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 175
These equations show that Na atomslose electronswhile Cl atoms (in the Cl molecule)gain electrons, the “s”
2
subscripts for the resulting ions signifying they are present in the form of a solid ionic compound. For redox
reactions of this sort, the loss and gain of electrons define the complementary processes that occur:
In this reaction, then, sodium isoxidizedand chlorine undergoesreduction. Viewed from a more active
perspective, sodium functions as areducing agent (reductant), since it provides electrons to (or reduces)
chlorine. Likewise, chlorine functions as anoxidizing agent (oxidant), as it effectively removes electrons from
(oxidizes) sodium.
Some redox processes, however, do not involve the transfer of electrons. Consider, for example, a reaction
similar to the one yielding NaCl:
The product of this reaction is a covalent compound, so transfer of electrons in the explicit sense is not
involved. To clarify the similarity of this reaction to the previous one and permit an unambiguous definition of
redox reactions, a property calledoxidation numberhas been defined. Theoxidation number(oroxidation
state) of an element in a compound is the charge its atoms would possessif the compound were ionic. The
following guidelines are used to assign oxidation numbers to each element in a molecule or ion.
1. The oxidation number of an atom in an elemental substance is zero.
2. The oxidation number of a monatomic ion is equal to the ion’s charge.
3. Oxidation numbers for common nonmetals are usually assigned as follows:
◦ Hydrogen: +1 when combined with nonmetals, −1 when combined with metals
◦ Oxygen: −2 in most compounds, sometimes −1 (so-called peroxides, very rarely (so-called
superoxides, positive values when combined with F (values vary)
◦ Halogens: −1 for F always, −1 for other halogens except when combined with oxygen or other halogens
(positive oxidation numbers in these cases, varying values)
4. The sum of oxidation numbers for all atoms in a molecule or polyatomic ion equals the charge on the
molecule or ion.
Note: The proper convention for reporting charge is to write the number first, followed by the sign (e.g., 2+),
while oxidation number is written with the reversed sequence, sign followed by number (e.g., +2). This
convention aims to emphasize the distinction between these two related properties.
EXAMPLE 4.5
Assigning Oxidation Numbers
Follow the guidelines in this section of the text to assign oxidation numbers to all the elements in the following
species:
(a) H S
2
(b)
(c) Na SO
2 4
PAGE: 190
176 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Solution
(a) According to guideline 3, the oxidation number for H is +1.
Using this oxidation number and the compound’s formula, guideline 4 may then be used to calculate the
oxidation number for sulfur:
(b) Guideline 3 suggests the oxidation number for oxygen is −2.
Using this oxidation number and the ion’s formula, guideline 4 may then be used to calculate the oxidation
number for sulfur:
(c) For ionic compounds, it’s convenient to assign oxidation numbers for the cation and anion separately.
According to guideline 2, the oxidation number for sodium is +1.
Assuming the usual oxidation number for oxygen (−2 per guideline 3), the oxidation number for sulfur is
calculated as directed by guideline 4:
Check Your Learning
Assign oxidation states to the elements whose atoms are underlined in each of the following compounds or
ions:
(a) KNO
3
(b)AlH
3
(c)
(d)
Answer:
(a) N, +5; (b) Al, +3; (c) N, −3; (d) P, +5
Using the oxidation number concept, an all-inclusive definition of redox reaction has been established.
Oxidation-reduction (redox) reactionsare those in which one or more elements involved undergo a change
in oxidation number. (While the vast majority of redox reactions involve changes in oxidation number for two
or more elements, a few interesting exceptions to this rule do existExample 4.6.) Definitions for the
complementary processes of this reaction class are correspondingly revised as shown here:
Returning to the reactions used to introduce this topic, they may now both be identified as redox processes. In
the reaction between sodium and chlorine to yield sodium chloride, sodium is oxidized (its oxidation number
increases from 0 in Na to +1 in NaCl) and chlorine is reduced (its oxidation number decreases from 0 in Cl to
2
−1 in NaCl). In the reaction between molecular hydrogen and chlorine, hydrogen is oxidized (its oxidation
number increases from 0 in H to +1 in HCl) and chlorine is reduced (its oxidation number decreases from 0 in
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 191
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 177
Cl to −1 in HCl).
2
Several subclasses of redox reactions are recognized, includingcombustion reactionsin which the reductant
(also called afuel) and oxidant (often, but not necessarily, molecular oxygen) react vigorously and produce
significant amounts of heat, and often light, in the form of a flame. Solid rocket-fuel reactions such as the one
depicted inFigure 4.1are combustion processes. A typical propellant reaction in which solid aluminum is
oxidized by ammonium perchlorate is represented by this equation:
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch a briefvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16hybridrocket)showing the test firing of a small-scale, prototype,
hybrid rocket engine planned for use in the new Space Launch System being developed by NASA. The first
engines firing at
3 s (green flame) use a liquid fuel/oxidant mixture, and the second, more powerful engines firing at 4 s (yellow
flame) use a solid mixture.
Single-displacement (replacement) reactionsare redox reactions in which an ion in solution is displaced (or
replaced) via the oxidation of a metallic element. One common example of this type of reaction is the acid
oxidation of certain metals:
Metallic elements may also be oxidized by solutions of other metal salts; for example:
This reaction may be observed by placing copper wire in a solution containing a dissolved silver salt. Silver
ions in solution are reduced to elemental silver at the surface of the copper wire, and the resulting Cu2+ions
dissolve in the solution to yield a characteristic blue color (Figure 4.9).
FIGURE4.9 (a) A copper wire is shown next to a solution containing silver(I) ions. (b) Displacement of dissolved
silver ions by copper ions results in (c) accumulation of gray-colored silver metal on the wire and development of a
blue color in the solution, due to dissolved copper ions. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
EXAMPLE 4.6
Describing Redox Reactions
Identify which equations represent redox reactions, providing a name for the reaction if appropriate. For those
reactions identified as redox, name the oxidant and reductant.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
PAGE: 192
178 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Solution
Redox reactions are identified per definition if one or more elements undergo a change in oxidation number.
(a) This is not a redox reaction, since oxidation numbers remain unchanged for all elements.
(b) This is a redox reaction. Gallium is oxidized, its oxidation number increasing from 0 in Ga(l) to +3 in
GaBr (s). The reducing agent is Ga(l). Bromine is reduced, its oxidation number decreasing from 0 in Br (l) to
3 2
−1 in GaBr (s). The oxidizing agent is Br (l).
3 2
(c) This is a redox reaction. It is a particularly interesting process, as it involves the same element, oxygen,
undergoing both oxidation and reduction (a so-calleddisproportionation reaction). Oxygen is oxidized, its
oxidation number increasing from −1 in H O (aq) to 0 in O (g). Oxygen is also reduced, its oxidation number
2 2 2
decreasing from −1 in H O (aq) to −2 in H O(l). For disproportionation reactions, the same substance
2 2 2
functions as an oxidant and a reductant.
(d) This is not a redox reaction, since oxidation numbers remain unchanged for all elements.
(e) This is a redox reaction (combustion). Carbon is oxidized, its oxidation number increasing from −2 in
C H (g) to +4 in CO (g). The reducing agent (fuel) is C H (g). Oxygen is reduced, its oxidation number
2 4 2 2 4
decreasing from 0 in O (g) to −2 in H O(l). The oxidizing agent is O (g).
2 2 2
Check Your Learning
This equation describes the production of tin(II) chloride:
Is this a redox reaction? If so, provide a more specific name for the reaction if appropriate, and identify the
oxidant and reductant.
Answer:
Yes, a single-replacement reaction. Sn(s)is the reductant, HCl(g) is the oxidant.
Balancing Redox Reactions via the Half-Reaction Method
Redox reactions that take place in aqueous media often involve water, hydronium ions, and hydroxide ions as
reactants or products. Although these species are not oxidized or reduced, they do participate in chemical
change in other ways (e.g., by providing the elements required to form oxyanions). Equations representing
these reactions are sometimes very difficult to balance by inspection, so systematic approaches have been
developed to assist in the process. One very useful approach is to use the method of half-reactions, which
involves the following steps:
1. Write the two half-reactions representing the redox process.
2. Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen.
3. Balance oxygen atoms by adding H O molecules.
2
4. Balance hydrogen atoms by adding H+ions.
5. Balance charge by adding electrons.
6. If necessary, multiply each half-reaction’s coefficients by the smallest possible integers to yield equal
numbers of electrons in each.
7. Add the balanced half-reactions together and simplify by removing species that appear on both sides of the
equation.
8. For reactions occurring in basic media (excess hydroxide ions), carry out these additional steps:
a. Add OH−ions to both sides of the equation in numbers equal to the number of H+ions.
b. On the side of the equation containing both H+and OH−ions, combine these ions to yield water molecules.
c. Simplify the equation by removing any redundant water molecules.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 193
4.2 • Classifying Chemical Reactions 179
1
9. Finally, check to see that both the number of atoms and the total charges are balanced.
EXAMPLE 4.7
Balancing Redox Reactions in Acidic Solution
Write a balanced equation for the reaction between dichromate ion and iron(II) to yield iron(III) and
chromium(III) in acidic solution.
Solution
Step 1.
Write the two half-reactions.
Each half-reaction will contain one reactant and one product with one element in common.
Step 2.
Balance all elements except oxygen and hydrogen. The iron half-reaction is already balanced, but the
chromium half-reaction shows two Cr atoms on the left and one Cr atom on the right. Changing the
coefficient on the right side of the equation to 2 achieves balance with regard to Cr atoms.
Step 3.
Balance oxygen atoms by addingH Omolecules. The iron half-reaction does not contain O atoms. The
2
chromium half-reaction shows seven O atoms on the left and none on the right, so seven water molecules
are added to the right side.
Step 4.
Balance hydrogen atoms by addingH+ions. The iron half-reaction does not contain H atoms. The
chromium half-reaction shows 14 H atoms on the right and none on the left, so 14 hydrogen ions are
added to the left side.
Step 5.
Balance charge by adding electrons. The iron half-reaction shows a total charge of 2+ on the left side (1
Fe2+ion) and 3+ on the right side (1 Fe3+ion). Adding one electron to the right side brings that side’s total
charge to (3+) + (1−) = 2+, and charge balance is achieved.
The chromium half-reaction shows a total charge of (1 2−) + (14 1+) = 12+ on the left side
ion and 14 H+ions). The total charge on the right side is (2 3+) = 6 + (2 Cr3+ions). Adding six electrons to
1 The requirement of “charge balance” is just a specific type of “mass balance” in which the species in question are electrons. An
equation must represent equal numbers of electrons on the reactant and product sides, and so both atoms and charges must be
balanced.
PAGE: 194
180 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
the left side will bring that side’s total charge to (12+ + 6−) = 6+, and charge balance is achieved.
Step 6.
Multiply the two half-reactions so the number of electrons in one reaction equals the number of electrons
in the other reaction. To be consistent with mass conservation, and the idea that redox reactions involve
the transfer (not creation or destruction) of electrons, the iron half-reaction’s coefficient must be
multiplied by 6.
Step 7.
Add the balanced half-reactions and cancel species that appear on both sides of the equation.
Only the six electrons are redundant species. Removing them from each side of the equation yields the
simplified, balanced equation here:
A final check of atom and charge balance confirms the equation is balanced.
Reactants Products
Fe 6 6
Cr 2 2
O 7 7
H 14 14
charge 24+ 24+
Check Your Learning
In basic solution, molecular chlorine, Cl , reacts with hydroxide ions, OH−, to yield chloride ions, Cl−. and
2
chlorate ions, ClO −. HINT: This is adisproportionation reactionin which the element chlorine is both oxidized
3
and reduced. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
Answer:
4.3 Reaction Stoichiometry
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of stoichiometry as it pertains to chemical reactions
• Use balanced chemical equations to derive stoichiometric factors relating amounts of reactants and products
• Perform stoichiometric calculations involving mass, moles, and solution molarity
A balanced chemical equation provides a great deal of information in a very succinct format. Chemical
formulas provide the identities of the reactants and products involved in the chemical change, allowing
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 195
4.3 • Reaction Stoichiometry 181
classification of the reaction. Coefficients provide the relative numbers of these chemical species, allowing a
quantitative assessment of the relationships between the amounts of substances consumed and produced by
the reaction. These quantitative relationships are known as the reaction’sstoichiometry, a term derived from
the Greek wordsstoicheion(meaning “element”) andmetron(meaning “measure”). In this module, the use of
balanced chemical equations for various stoichiometric applications is explored.
The general approach to using stoichiometric relationships is similar in concept to the way people go about
many common activities. Food preparation, for example, offers an appropriate comparison. A recipe for
making eight pancakes calls for 1 cup pancake mix, cup milk, and one egg. The “equation” representing the
preparation of pancakes per this recipe is
If two dozen pancakes are needed for a big family breakfast, the ingredient amounts must be increased
proportionally according to the amounts given in the recipe. For example, the number of eggs required to
make 24 pancakes is
Balanced chemical equations are used in much the same fashion to determine the amount of one reactant
required to react with a given amount of another reactant, or to yield a given amount of product, and so forth.
The coefficients in the balanced equation are used to derivestoichiometric factorsthat permit computation of
the desired quantity. To illustrate this idea, consider the production of ammonia by reaction of hydrogen and
nitrogen:
This equation shows ammonia molecules are produced from hydrogen molecules in a 2:3 ratio, and
stoichiometric factors may be derived using any amount (number) unit:
These stoichiometric factors can be used to compute the number of ammonia molecules produced from a
given number of hydrogen molecules, or the number of hydrogen molecules required to produce a given
number of ammonia molecules. Similar factors may be derived for any pair of substances in any chemical
equation.
EXAMPLE 4.8
Moles of Reactant Required in a Reaction
How many moles of I are required to react with 0.429 mol of Al according to the following equation (seeFigure
2
4.10)?
FIGURE4.10 Aluminum and iodine react to produce aluminum iodide. The heat of the reaction vaporizes some of
the solid iodine as a purple vapor. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
Solution
Referring to the balanced chemical equation, the stoichiometric factor relating the two substances of interest
PAGE: 196
182 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
is The molar amount of iodine is derived by multiplying the provided molar amount of aluminum by
this factor:
Check Your Learning
How many moles of Ca(OH) are required to react with 1.36 mol of H PO to produce Ca (PO ) according to
2 3 4 3 42
the equation
Answer:
2.04 mol
EXAMPLE 4.9
Number of Product Molecules Generated by a Reaction
How many carbon dioxide molecules are produced when 0.75 mol of propane is combusted according to this
equation?
Solution
The approach here is the same as forExample 4.8, though the absolute number of molecules is requested, not
the number of moles of molecules. This will simply require use of the moles-to-numbers conversion factor,
Avogadro’s number.
The balanced equation shows that carbon dioxide is produced from propane in a 3:1 ratio:
Using this stoichiometric factor, the provided molar amount of propane, and Avogadro’s number,
Check Your Learning
How many NH molecules are produced by the reaction of 4.0 mol of Ca(OH) according to the following
3 2
equation:
Answer:
4.8 1024NH molecules
3
These examples illustrate the ease with which the amounts of substances involved in a chemical reaction of
known stoichiometry may be related. Directly measuring numbers of atoms and molecules is, however, not an
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 197
4.3 • Reaction Stoichiometry 183
easy task, and the practical application of stoichiometry requires that we use the more readily measured
property of mass.
EXAMPLE 4.10
Relating Masses of Reactants and Products
What mass of sodium hydroxide, NaOH, would be required to produce 16 g of the antacid milk of magnesia
[magnesium hydroxide, Mg(OH) ] by the following reaction?
2
Solution
The approach used previously inExample 4.8andExample 4.9is likewise used here; that is, we must derive an
appropriate stoichiometric factor from the balanced chemical equation and use it to relate the amounts of the
two substances of interest. In this case, however, masses (not molar amounts) are provided and requested, so
additional steps of the sort learned in the previous chapter are required. The calculations required are
outlined in this flowchart:
Check Your Learning
What mass of gallium oxide, Ga O , can be prepared from 29.0 g of gallium metal? The equation for the
2 3
reaction is
Answer:
39.0 g
EXAMPLE 4.11
Relating Masses of Reactants
What mass of oxygen gas, O , from the air is consumed in the combustion of 702 g of octane, C H , one of the
2 8 18
principal components of gasoline?
Solution
The approach required here is the same as for theExample 4.10, differing only in that the provided and
requested masses are both for reactant species.
PAGE: 198
184 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Check Your Learning
What mass of CO is required to react with 25.13 g of Fe O according to the equation
2 3
Answer:
13.22 g
These examples illustrate just a few instances of reaction stoichiometry calculations. Numerous variations on
the beginning and ending computational steps are possible depending upon what particular quantities are
provided and sought (volumes, solution concentrations, and so forth). Regardless of the details, all these
calculations share a common essential component: the use of stoichiometric factors derived from balanced
chemical equations.Figure 4.11provides a general outline of the various computational steps associated with
many reaction stoichiometry calculations.
FIGURE4.11 The flowchart depicts the various computational steps involved in most reaction stoichiometry
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 199
4.4 • Reaction Yields 185
calculations.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Airbags
Airbags (Figure 4.12) are a safety feature provided in most automobiles since the 1990s. The effective
operation of an airbag requires that it be rapidly inflated with an appropriate amount (volume) of gas when
the vehicle is involved in a collision. This requirement is satisfied in many automotive airbag systems
through use of explosive chemical reactions, one common choice being the decomposition of sodium
azide, NaN . When sensors in the vehicle detect a collision, an electrical current is passed through a
3
carefully measured amount of NaN to initiate its decomposition:
3
This reaction is very rapid, generating gaseous nitrogen that can deploy and fully inflate a typical airbag in
a fraction of a second (~0.03–0.1 s). Among many engineering considerations, the amount of sodium azide
used must be appropriate for generating enough nitrogen gas to fully inflate the air bag and ensure its
proper function. For example, a small mass (~100 g) of NaN will generate approximately 50 L of N .
3 2
FIGURE4.12 Airbags deploy upon impact to minimize serious injuries to passengers. (credit: Jon Seidman)
4.4 Reaction Yields
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concepts of theoretical yield and limiting reactants/reagents.
• Derive the theoretical yield for a reaction under specified conditions.
• Calculate the percent yield for a reaction.
The relative amounts of reactants and products represented in a balanced chemical equation are often
referred to asstoichiometric amounts. All the exercises of the preceding module involved stoichiometric
amounts of reactants. For example, when calculating the amount of product generated from a given amount of
reactant, it was assumed that any other reactants required were available in stoichiometric amounts (or
greater). In this module, more realistic situations are considered, in which reactants are not present in
stoichiometric amounts.
Limiting Reactant
Consider another food analogy, making grilled cheese sandwiches (Figure 4.13):
Stoichiometric amounts of sandwich ingredients for this recipe are bread and cheese slices in a 2:1 ratio.
PAGE: 200
186 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Provided with 28 slices of bread and 11 slices of cheese, one may prepare 11 sandwiches per the provided
recipe, using all the provided cheese and having six slices of bread left over. In this scenario, the number of
sandwiches prepared has beenlimitedby the number of cheese slices, and the bread slices have been
provided inexcess.
FIGURE4.13 Sandwich making can illustrate the concepts of limiting and excess reactants.
Consider this concept now with regard to a chemical process, the reaction of hydrogen with chlorine to yield
hydrogen chloride:
The balanced equation shows the hydrogen and chlorine react in a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio. If these reactants
are provided in any other amounts, one of the reactants will nearly always be entirely consumed, thus limiting
the amount of product that may be generated. This substance is thelimiting reactant, and the other substance
is theexcess reactant. Identifying the limiting and excess reactants for a given situation requires computing
the molar amounts of each reactant provided and comparing them to the stoichiometric amounts represented
in the balanced chemical equation. For example, imagine combining 3 moles of H and 2 moles of Cl . This
2 2
represents a 3:2 (or 1.5:1) ratio of hydrogen to chlorine present for reaction, which is greater than the
stoichiometric ratio of 1:1. Hydrogen, therefore, is present in excess, and chlorine is the limiting reactant.
Reaction of all the provided chlorine (2 mol) will consume 2 mol of the 3 mol of hydrogen provided, leaving 1
mol of hydrogen unreacted.
An alternative approach to identifying the limiting reactant involves comparing the amount of product
expected for the complete reaction of each reactant. Each reactant amount is used to separately calculate the
amount of product that would be formed per the reaction’s stoichiometry. The reactant yielding the lesser
amount of product is the limiting reactant. For the example in the previous paragraph, complete reaction of
the hydrogen would yield
Complete reaction of the provided chlorine would produce
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 201
4.4 • Reaction Yields 187
The chlorine will be completely consumed once 4 moles of HCl have been produced. Since enough hydrogen
was provided to yield 6 moles of HCl, there will be unreacted hydrogen remaining once this reaction is
complete. Chlorine, therefore, is the limiting reactant and hydrogen is the excess reactant (Figure 4.14).
FIGURE4.14 When H and Cl are combined in nonstoichiometric amounts, one of these reactants will limit the
2 2
amount of HCl that can be produced. This illustration shows a reaction in which hydrogen is present in excess and
chlorine is the limiting reactant.
LINK TO LEARNING
View this interactivesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16reactantprod)illustrating the concepts of limiting and
excess reactants.
EXAMPLE 4.12
Identifying the Limiting Reactant
Silicon nitride is a very hard, high-temperature-resistant ceramic used as a component of turbine blades in jet
engines. It is prepared according to the following equation:
Which is the limiting reactant when 2.00 g of Si and 1.50 g of N react?
2
Solution
Compute the provided molar amounts of reactants, and then compare these amounts to the balanced equation
to identify the limiting reactant.
The provided Si:N molar ratio is:
2
The stoichiometric Si:N ratio is:
2
PAGE: 202
188 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
Comparing these ratios shows that Si is provided in a less-than-stoichiometric amount, and so is the limiting
reactant.
Alternatively, compute the amount of product expected for complete reaction of each of the provided
reactants. The 0.0712 moles of silicon would yield
while the 0.0535 moles of nitrogen would produce
Since silicon yields the lesser amount of product, it is the limiting reactant.
Check Your Learning
Which is the limiting reactant when 5.00 g of H and 10.0 g of O react and form water?
2 2
Answer:
O
2
Percent Yield
The amount of product thatmay beproduced by a reaction under specified conditions, as calculated per the
stoichiometry of an appropriate balanced chemical equation, is called thetheoretical yieldof the reaction. In
practice, the amount of product obtained is called theactual yield, and it is often less than the theoretical yield
for a number of reasons. Some reactions are inherently inefficient, being accompanied byside reactionsthat
generate other products. Others are, by nature, incomplete (consider the partial reactions of weak acids and
bases discussed earlier in this chapter). Some products are difficult to collect without some loss, and so less
than perfect recovery will reduce the actual yield. The extent to which a reaction’s theoretical yield is achieved
is commonly expressed as itspercent yield:
Actual and theoretical yields may be expressed as masses or molar amounts (or any other appropriate
property; e.g., volume, if the product is a gas). As long as both yields are expressed using the same units, these
units will cancel when percent yield is calculated.
EXAMPLE 4.13
Calculation of Percent Yield
Upon reaction of 1.274 g of copper sulfate with excess zinc metal, 0.392 g copper metal was obtained
according to the equation:
What is the percent yield?
Solution
The provided information identifies copper sulfate as the limiting reactant, and so the theoretical yield is
found by the approach illustrated in the previous module, as shown here:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 203
4.4 • Reaction Yields 189
Using this theoretical yield and the provided value for actual yield, the percent yield is calculated to be
Check Your Learning
What is the percent yield of a reaction that produces 12.5 g of the gas Freon CF Cl from 32.9 g of CCl and
2 2 4
excess HF?
Answer:
48.3%
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Green Chemistry and Atom Economy
The purposeful design of chemical products and processes that minimize the use of environmentally
hazardous substances and the generation of waste is known asgreen chemistry. Green chemistry is a
philosophical approach that is being applied to many areas of science and technology, and its practice is
summarized by guidelines known as the “Twelve Principles of Green Chemistry” (see details at thiswebsite
(http://openstax.org/l/16greenchem)). One of the 12 principles is aimed specifically at maximizing the
efficiency of processes for synthesizing chemical products. Theatom economyof a process is a measure of this
efficiency, defined as the percentage by mass of the final product of a synthesis relative to the masses ofallthe
reactants used:
Though the definition of atom economy at first glance appears very similar to that for percent yield, be aware
that this property represents a difference in thetheoreticalefficiencies ofdifferentchemical processes. The
percent yield of a given chemical process, on the other hand, evaluates the efficiency of a process by
comparing the yield of product actually obtained to the maximum yield predicted by stoichiometry.
The synthesis of the common nonprescription pain medication, ibuprofen, nicely illustrates the success of a
green chemistry approach (Figure 4.15). First marketed in the early 1960s, ibuprofen was produced using a
six-step synthesis that required 514 g of reactants to generate each mole (206 g) of ibuprofen, an atom
economy of 40%. In the 1990s, an alternative process was developed by the BHC Company (now BASF
Corporation) that requires only three steps and has an atom economy of ~80%, nearly twice that of the original
process. The BHC process generates significantly less chemical waste; uses less-hazardous and recyclable
materials; and provides significant cost-savings to the manufacturer (and, subsequently, the consumer). In
recognition of the positive environmental impact of the BHC process, the company received the Environmental
Protection Agency’s Greener Synthetic Pathways Award in 1997.
PAGE: 204
190 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
FIGURE4.15 (a) Ibuprofen is a popular nonprescription pain medication commonly sold as 200 mg tablets. (b)
The BHC process for synthesizing ibuprofen requires only three steps and exhibits an impressive atom economy.
(credit a: modification of work by Derrick Coetzee)
4.5 Quantitative Chemical Analysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the fundamental aspects of titrations and gravimetric analysis.
• Perform stoichiometric calculations using typical titration and gravimetric data.
In the 18th century, the strength (actually the concentration) of vinegar samples was determined by noting the
amount of potassium carbonate, K CO , which had to be added, a little at a time, before bubbling ceased. The
2 3
greater the weight of potassium carbonate added to reach the point where the bubbling ended, the more
concentrated the vinegar.
We now know that the effervescence that occurred during this process was due to reaction with acetic acid,
CH CO H, the compound primarily responsible for the odor and taste of vinegar. Acetic acid reacts with
3 2
potassium carbonate according to the following equation:
The bubbling was due to the production of CO .
2
The test of vinegar with potassium carbonate is one type ofquantitative analysis—the determination of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 205
4.5 • Quantitative Chemical Analysis 191
amount or concentration of a substance in a sample. In the analysis of vinegar, the concentration of the solute
(acetic acid) was determined from the amount of reactant that combined with the solute present in a known
volume of the solution. In other types of chemical analyses, the amount of a substance present in a sample is
determined by measuring the amount of product that results.
Titration
The described approach to measuring vinegar strength was an early version of the analytical technique known
astitration analysis. A typical titration analysis involves the use of aburet(Figure 4.16) to make incremental
additions of a solution containing a known concentration of some substance (thetitrant) to a sample solution
containing the substance whose concentration is to be measured (theanalyte). The titrant and analyte
undergo a chemical reaction of known stoichiometry, and so measuring the volume of titrant solution required
for complete reaction with the analyte (theequivalence pointof the titration) allows calculation of the analyte
concentration. The equivalence point of a titration may be detected visually if a distinct change in the
appearance of the sample solution accompanies the completion of the reaction. The halt of bubble formation
in the classic vinegar analysis is one such example, though, more commonly, special dyes calledindicatorsare
added to the sample solutions to impart a change in color at or very near the equivalence point of the titration.
Equivalence points may also be detected by measuring some solution property that changes in a predictable
way during the course of the titration. Regardless of the approach taken to detect a titration’s equivalence
point, the volume of titrant actually measured is called theend point. Properly designed titration methods
typically ensure that the difference between the equivalence and end points is negligible. Though any type of
chemical reaction may serve as the basis for a titration analysis, the three described in this chapter
(precipitation, acid-base, and redox) are most common. Additional details regarding titration analysis are
provided in the chapter on acid-base equilibria.
FIGURE4.16 (a) A student fills a buret in preparation for a titration analysis. (b) A typical buret permits volume
measurements to the nearest 0.01 mL. (credit a: modification of work by Mark Blaser and Matt Evans; credit b:
modification of work by Mark Blaser and Matt Evans)
PAGE: 206
192 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
EXAMPLE 4.14
Titration Analysis
The end point in a titration of a 50.00-mL sample of aqueous HCl was reached by addition of 35.23 mL of 0.250
M NaOH titrant. The titration reaction is:
What is the molarity of the HCl?
Solution
As for all reaction stoichiometry calculations, the key issue is the relation between the molar amounts of the
chemical species of interest as depicted in the balanced chemical equation. The approach outlined in previous
modules of this chapter is followed, with additional considerations required, since the amounts of reactants
provided and requested are expressed as solution concentrations.
For this exercise, the calculation will follow the following outlined steps:
The molar amount of HCl is calculated to be:
Using the provided volume of HCl solution and the definition of molarity, the HCl concentration is:
Note: For these types of titration calculations, it is convenient to recognize that solution molarity is also equal
to the number ofmillimoles of solute permilliliter of solution:
Using this version of the molarity unit will shorten the calculation by eliminating two conversion factors:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 207
4.5 • Quantitative Chemical Analysis 193
Check Your Learning
A 20.00-mL sample of aqueous oxalic acid, H C O , was titrated with a 0.09113-Msolution of potassium
2 2 4
permanganate, KMnO (see net ionic equation below).
4
A volume of 23.24 mL was required to reach the end point. What is the oxalic acid molarity?
Answer:
0.2648M
Gravimetric Analysis
Agravimetric analysisis one in which a sample is subjected to some treatment that causes a change in the
physical state of the analyte that permits its separation from the other components of the sample. Mass
measurements of the sample, the isolated analyte, or some other component of the analysis system, used
along with the known stoichiometry of the compounds involved, permit calculation of the analyte
concentration. Gravimetric methods were the first techniques used for quantitative chemical analysis, and
they remain important tools in the modern chemistry laboratory.
The required change of state in a gravimetric analysis may be achieved by various physical and chemical
processes. For example, the moisture (water) content of a sample is routinely determined by measuring the
mass of a sample before and after it is subjected to a controlled heating process that evaporates the water. Also
common are gravimetric techniques in which the analyte is subjected to a precipitation reaction of the sort
described earlier in this chapter. The precipitate is typically isolated from the reaction mixture by filtration,
carefully dried, and then weighed (Figure 4.17). The mass of the precipitate may then be used, along with
relevant stoichiometric relationships, to calculate analyte concentration.
PAGE: 208
194 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
FIGURE4.17 Precipitate may be removed from a reaction mixture by filtration.
EXAMPLE 4.15
Gravimetric Analysis
A 0.4550-g solid mixture containing MgSO is dissolved in water and treated with an excess of Ba(NO ) ,
4 32
resulting in the precipitation of 0.6168 g of BaSO .
4
What is the concentration (mass percent) of MgSO in the mixture?
4
Solution
The plan for this calculation is similar to others used in stoichiometric calculations, the central step being the
connection between the moles of BaSO and MgSO through their stoichiometric factor. Once the mass of
4 4
MgSO is computed, it may be used along with the mass of the sample mixture to calculate the requested
4
percentage concentration.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 209
4.5 • Quantitative Chemical Analysis 195
The mass of MgSO that would yield the provided precipitate mass is
4
The concentration of MgSO in the sample mixture is then calculated to be
4
Check Your Learning
What is the percent of chloride ion in a sample if 1.1324 g of the sample produces 1.0881 g of AgCl when
treated with excess Ag+?
Answer:
23.76%
The elemental composition of hydrocarbons and related compounds may be determined via a gravimetric
method known ascombustion analysis. In a combustion analysis, a weighed sample of the compound is
heated to a high temperature under a stream of oxygen gas, resulting in its complete combustion to yield
gaseous products of known identities. The complete combustion of hydrocarbons, for example, will yield
carbon dioxide and water as the only products. The gaseous combustion products are swept through separate,
preweighed collection devices containing compounds that selectively absorb each product (Figure 4.18). The
mass increase of each device corresponds to the mass of the absorbed product and may be used in an
appropriate stoichiometric calculation to derive the mass of the relevant element.
FIGURE4.18 This schematic diagram illustrates the basic components of a combustion analysis device for
determining the carbon and hydrogen content of a sample.
PAGE: 210
196 4 • Stoichiometry of Chemical Reactions
EXAMPLE 4.16
Combustion Analysis
Polyethylene is a hydrocarbon polymer used to produce food-storage bags and many other flexible plastic
items. A combustion analysis of a 0.00126-g sample of polyethylene yields 0.00394 g of CO and 0.00161 g of
2
H O. What is the empirical formula of polyethylene?
2
Solution
The primary assumption in this exercise is that all the carbon in the sample combusted is converted to carbon
dioxide, and all the hydrogen in the sample is converted to water:
Note that a balanced equation is not necessary for the task at hand. To derive the empirical formula of the
compound, only the subscriptsxandyare needed.
First, calculate the molar amounts of carbon and hydrogen in the sample, using the provided masses of the
carbon dioxide and water, respectively. With these molar amounts, the empirical formula for the compound
may be written as described in the previous chapter of this text. An outline of this approach is given in the
following flow chart:
The empirical formula for the compound is then derived by identifying the smallest whole-number multiples
for these molar amounts. The H-to-C molar ratio is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 211
4.5 • Quantitative Chemical Analysis 197
and the empirical formula for polyethylene is CH .
2
Check Your Learning
A 0.00215-g sample of polystyrene, a polymer composed of carbon and hydrogen, produced 0.00726 g of CO
2
and 0.00148 g of H O in a combustion analysis. What is the empirical formula for polystyrene?
2
Answer:
CH
PAGE: 212
198 4 • Key Terms
Key Terms
acid substance that produces H O+when dissolved titration analysis to permit visual detection of the
3
in water end point
acid-base reaction reaction involving the transfer insoluble of relatively low solubility; dissolving
of a hydrogen ion between reactant species only to a slight extent
actual yield amount of product formed in a limiting reactant reactant present in an amount
reaction lower than required by the reaction
analyte chemical species of interest stoichiometry, thus limiting the amount of
balanced equation chemical equation with equal product generated
numbers of atoms for each element in the molecular equation chemical equation in which
reactant and product all reactants and products are represented as
base substance that produces OH−when dissolved neutral substances
in water net ionic equation chemical equation in which
buret device used for the precise delivery of only those dissolved ionic reactants and products
variable liquid volumes, such as in a titration that undergo a chemical or physical change are
analysis represented (excludes spectator ions)
chemical equation symbolic representation of a neutralization reaction reaction between an acid
chemical reaction and a base to produce salt and water
coefficient number placed in front of symbols or oxidation process in which an element’s oxidation
formulas in a chemical equation to indicate their number is increased by loss of electrons
relative amount oxidation number (also, oxidation state) the
combustion analysis gravimetric technique used charge each atom of an element would have in a
to determine the elemental composition of a compound if the compound were ionic
compound via the collection and weighing of its oxidation-reduction reaction (also, redox
gaseous combustion products reaction) reaction involving a change in oxidation
combustion reaction vigorous redox reaction number for one or more reactant elements
producing significant amounts of energy in the oxidizing agent (also, oxidant) substance that
form of heat and, sometimes, light brings about the oxidation of another substance,
complete ionic equation chemical equation in and in the process becomes reduced
which all dissolved ionic reactants and products, percent yield measure of the efficiency of a
including spectator ions, are explicitly reaction, expressed as a percentage of the
represented by formulas for their dissociated theoretical yield
ions precipitate insoluble product that forms from
end point measured volume of titrant solution that reaction of soluble reactants
yields the change in sample solution appearance precipitation reaction reaction that produces one
or other property expected for stoichiometric or more insoluble products; when reactants are
equivalence (seeequivalence point) ionic compounds, sometimes called double-
equivalence point volume of titrant solution displacement or metathesis
required to react completely with the analyte in a product substance formed by a chemical or
titration analysis; provides a stoichiometric physical change; shown on the right side of the
amount of titrant for the sample’s analyte arrow in a chemical equation
according to the titration reaction quantitative analysis the determination of the
excess reactant reactant present in an amount amount or concentration of a substance in a
greater than required by the reaction sample
stoichiometry reactant substance undergoing a chemical or
gravimetric analysis quantitative chemical physical change; shown on the left side of the
analysis method involving the separation of an arrow in a chemical equation
analyte from a sample by a physical or chemical reducing agent (also, reductant) substance that
process and subsequent mass measurements of brings about the reduction of another substance,
the analyte, reaction product, and/or sample and in the process becomes oxidized
half-reaction an equation that shows whether each reduction process in which an element’s oxidation
reactant loses or gains electrons in a reaction. number is decreased by gain of electrons
indicator substance added to the sample in a salt ionic compound that can be formed by the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 213
4 • Key Equations 199
reaction of an acid with a base that contains a of reactants and products of a chemical reaction
cation and an anion other than hydroxide or strong acid acid that reacts completely when
oxide dissolved in water to yield hydronium ions
single-displacement reaction (also, replacement) strong base base that reacts completely when
redox reaction involving the oxidation of an dissolved in water to yield hydroxide ions
elemental substance by an ionic species theoretical yield amount of product that may be
solubility the extent to which a substance may be produced from a given amount of reactant(s)
dissolved in water, or any solvent according to the reaction stoichiometry
soluble of relatively high solubility; dissolving to a titrant solution containing a known concentration
relatively large extent of substance that will react with the analyte in a
spectator ion ion that does not undergo a chemical titration analysis
or physical change during a reaction, but its titration analysis quantitative chemical analysis
presence is required to maintain charge method that involves measuring the volume of a
neutrality reactant solution required to completely react
stoichiometric factor ratio of coefficients in a with the analyte in a sample
balanced chemical equation, used in weak acid acid that reacts only to a slight extent
computations relating amounts of reactants and when dissolved in water to yield hydronium ions
products weak base base that reacts only to a slight extent
stoichiometry relationships between the amounts when dissolved in water to yield hydroxide ions
Key Equations
Summary
4.1Writing and Balancing Chemical some redox reactions that occur in aqueous
Equations solutions is simplified by using a systematic
approach called the half-reaction method.
Chemical equations are symbolic representations of
chemical and physical changes. Formulas for the 4.3Reaction Stoichiometry
substances undergoing the change (reactants) and
A balanced chemical equation may be used to
substances generated by the change (products) are
describe a reaction’s stoichiometry (the
separated by an arrow and preceded by integer
relationships between amounts of reactants and
coefficients indicating their relative numbers.
products). Coefficients from the equation are used to
Balanced equations are those whose coefficients
derive stoichiometric factors that subsequently may
result in equal numbers of atoms for each element
be used for computations relating reactant and
in the reactants and products. Chemical reactions in
product masses, molar amounts, and other
aqueous solution that involve ionic reactants or
quantitative properties.
products may be represented more realistically by
complete ionic equations and, more succinctly, by 4.4Reaction Yields
net ionic equations.
When reactions are carried out using less-than-
4.2Classifying Chemical Reactions stoichiometric quantities of reactants, the amount of
product generated will be determined by the
Chemical reactions are classified according to
limiting reactant. The amount of product generated
similar patterns of behavior. A large number of
by a chemical reaction is its actual yield. This yield
important reactions are included in three
is often less than the amount of product predicted by
categories: precipitation, acid-base, and oxidation-
the stoichiometry of the balanced chemical equation
reduction (redox). Precipitation reactions involve
representing the reaction (its theoretical yield). The
the formation of one or more insoluble products.
extent to which a reaction generates the theoretical
Acid-base reactions involve the transfer of hydrogen
amount of product is expressed as its percent yield.
ions between reactants. Redox reactions involve a
change in oxidation number for one or more
reactant elements. Writing balanced equations for
PAGE: 214
200 4 • Exercises
4.5Quantitative Chemical Analysis from the sample by a physical or chemical process,
determining its mass, and then calculating its
The stoichiometry of chemical reactions may serve
concentration in the sample based on the
as the basis for quantitative chemical analysis
stoichiometry of the relevant process. Combustion
methods. Titrations involve measuring the volume
analysis is a gravimetric method used to determine
of a titrant solution required to completely react
the elemental composition of a compound by
with a sample solution. This volume is then used to
collecting and weighing the gaseous products of its
calculate the concentration of analyte in the sample
combustion.
using the stoichiometry of the titration reaction.
Gravimetric analysis involves separating the analyte
Exercises
4.1Writing and Balancing Chemical Equations
1. What does it mean to say an equation is balanced? Why is it important for an equation to be balanced?
2. Consider molecular, complete ionic, and net ionic equations.
(a) What is the difference between these types of equations?
(b) In what circumstance would the complete and net ionic equations for a reaction be identical?
3. Balance the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
4. Balance the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
5. Write a balanced molecular equation describing each of the following chemical reactions.
(a) Solid calcium carbonate is heated and decomposes to solid calcium oxide and carbon dioxide gas.
(b) Gaseous butane, C H , reacts with diatomic oxygen gas to yield gaseous carbon dioxide and water
4 10
vapor.
(c) Aqueous solutions of magnesium chloride and sodium hydroxide react to produce solid magnesium
hydroxide and aqueous sodium chloride.
(d) Water vapor reacts with sodium metal to produce solid sodium hydroxide and hydrogen gas.
6. Write a balanced equation describing each of the following chemical reactions.
(a) Solid potassium chlorate, KClO , decomposes to form solid potassium chloride and diatomic oxygen
3
gas.
(b) Solid aluminum metal reacts with solid diatomic iodine to form solid Al I .
2 6
(c) When solid sodium chloride is added to aqueous sulfuric acid, hydrogen chloride gas and aqueous
sodium sulfate are produced.
(d) Aqueous solutions of phosphoric acid and potassium hydroxide react to produce aqueous potassium
dihydrogen phosphate and liquid water.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 215
4 • Exercises 201
7. Colorful fireworks often involve the decomposition of barium nitrate and potassium chlorate and the
reaction of the metals magnesium, aluminum, and iron with oxygen.
(a) Write the formulas of barium nitrate and potassium chlorate.
(b) The decomposition of solid potassium chlorate leads to the formation of solid potassium chloride and
diatomic oxygen gas. Write an equation for the reaction.
(c) The decomposition of solid barium nitrate leads to the formation of solid barium oxide, diatomic
nitrogen gas, and diatomic oxygen gas. Write an equation for the reaction.
(d) Write separate equations for the reactions of the solid metals magnesium, aluminum, and iron with
diatomic oxygen gas to yield the corresponding metal oxides. (Assume the iron oxide contains Fe3+ions.)
8. Fill in the blank with a single chemical formula for a covalent compound that will balance the equation:
9. Aqueous hydrogen fluoride (hydrofluoric acid) is used to etch glass and to analyze minerals for their
silicon content. Hydrogen fluoride will also react with sand (silicon dioxide).
(a) Write an equation for the reaction of solid silicon dioxide with hydrofluoric acid to yield gaseous silicon
tetrafluoride and liquid water.
(b) The mineral fluorite (calcium fluoride) occurs extensively in Illinois. Solid calcium fluoride can also be
prepared by the reaction of aqueous solutions of calcium chloride and sodium fluoride, yielding aqueous
sodium chloride as the other product. Write complete and net ionic equations for this reaction.
10. A novel process for obtaining magnesium from sea water involves several reactions. Write a balanced
chemical equation for each step of the process.
(a) The first step is the decomposition of solid calcium carbonate from seashells to form solid calcium
oxide and gaseous carbon dioxide.
(b) The second step is the formation of solid calcium hydroxide as the only product from the reaction of
the solid calcium oxide with liquid water.
(c) Solid calcium hydroxide is then added to the seawater, reacting with dissolved magnesium chloride to
yield solid magnesium hydroxide and aqueous calcium chloride.
(d) The solid magnesium hydroxide is added to a hydrochloric acid solution, producing dissolved
magnesium chloride and liquid water.
(e) Finally, the magnesium chloride is melted and electrolyzed to yield liquid magnesium metal and
diatomic chlorine gas.
11. From the balanced molecular equations, write the complete ionic and net ionic equations for the
following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
4.2Classifying Chemical Reactions
12. Use the following equations to answer the next four questions:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
(a) Which equation describes a physical change?
(b) Which equation identifies the reactants and products of a combustion reaction?
(c) Which equation is not balanced?
(d) Which is a net ionic equation?
PAGE: 216
202 4 • Exercises
13. Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents:
(a)
(b)
(c)
14. Indicate what type, or types, of reaction each of the following represents:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
15. Silver can be separated from gold because silver dissolves in nitric acid while gold does not. Is the
dissolution of silver in nitric acid an acid-base reaction or an oxidation-reduction reaction? Explain your
answer.
16. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the following compounds:
(a) NaI
(b) GdCl
3
(c) LiNO
3
(d) H Se
2
(e) Mg Si
2
(f) RbO , rubidium superoxide
2
(g) HF
17. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing
compounds are peroxides or superoxides.
(a) H PO
3 4
(b) Al(OH)
3
(c) SeO
2
(d) KNO
2
(e) In S
2 3
(f) P O
4 6
18. Determine the oxidation states of the elements in the compounds listed. None of the oxygen-containing
compounds are peroxides or superoxides.
(a) H SO
2 4
(b) Ca(OH)
2
(c) BrOH
(d) ClNO
2
(e) TiCl
4
(f) NaH
19. Classify the following as acid-base reactions or oxidation-reduction reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
20. Identify the atoms that are oxidized and reduced, the change in oxidation state for each, and the oxidizing
and reducing agents in each of the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 217
4 • Exercises 203
21. Complete and balance the following acid-base equations:
(a) HCl gas reacts with solid Ca(OH) (s).
2
(b) A solution of Sr(OH) is added to a solution of HNO .
2 3
22. Complete and balance the following acid-base equations:
(a) A solution of HClO is added to a solution of LiOH.
4
(b) Aqueous H SO reacts with NaOH.
2 4
(c) Ba(OH) reacts with HF gas.
2
23. Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible
oxidation state for the oxidized atoms.
(a)
(b) (single displacement)
(c)
(d) (products are a strong base and a diatomic gas)
24. Complete and balance the following oxidation-reduction reactions, which give the highest possible
oxidation state for the oxidized atoms.
(a)
(b)
(c)
25. Complete and balance the equations for the following acid-base neutralization reactions. If water is used
as a solvent, write the reactants and products as aqueous ions. In some cases, there may be more than one
correct answer, depending on the amounts of reactants used.
(a)
(b)
(c)
26. When heated to 700–800 °C, diamonds, which are pure carbon, are oxidized by atmospheric oxygen.
(They burn!) Write the balanced equation for this reaction.
27. The military has experimented with lasers that produce very intense light when fluorine combines
explosively with hydrogen. What is the balanced equation for this reaction?
28. Write the molecular, total ionic, and net ionic equations for the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
29. Great Lakes Chemical Company produces bromine, Br , from bromide salts such as NaBr, in Arkansas
2
brine by treating the brine with chlorine gas. Write a balanced equation for the reaction of NaBr with Cl .
2
30. In a common experiment in the general chemistry laboratory, magnesium metal is heated in air to
produce MgO. MgO is a white solid, but in these experiments it often looks gray, due to small amounts of
Mg N , a compound formed as some of the magnesium reacts with nitrogen. Write a balanced equation
3 2
for each reaction.
31. Lithium hydroxide may be used to absorb carbon dioxide in enclosed environments, such as manned
spacecraft and submarines. Write an equation for the reaction that involves 2 mol of LiOH per 1 mol of
CO . (Hint: Water is one of the products.)
2
32. Calcium propionate is sometimes added to bread to retard spoilage. This compound can be prepared by
the reaction of calcium carbonate, CaCO , with propionic acid, C H CO H, which has properties similar to
3 2 5 2
those of acetic acid. Write the balanced equation for the formation of calcium propionate.
33. Complete and balance the equations of the following reactions, each of which could be used to remove
hydrogen sulfide from natural gas:
(a)
(b)
34. Copper(II) sulfide is oxidized by molecular oxygen to produce gaseous sulfur trioxide and solid copper(II)
oxide. The gaseous product then reacts with liquid water to produce liquid dihydrogen sulfate as the only
product. Write the two equations which represent these reactions.
PAGE: 218
204 4 • Exercises
35. Write balanced chemical equations for the reactions used to prepare each of the following compounds
from the given starting material(s). In some cases, additional reactants may be required.
(a) solid ammonium nitrate from gaseous molecular nitrogen via a two-step process (first reduce the
nitrogen to ammonia, then neutralize the ammonia with an appropriate acid)
(b) gaseous hydrogen bromide from liquid molecular bromine via a one-step redox reaction
(c) gaseous H S from solid Zn and S via a two-step process (first a redox reaction between the starting
2
materials, then reaction of the product with a strong acid)
36. Calcium cyclamate Ca(C H NHSO ) is an artificial sweetener used in many countries around the world
6 11 32
but is banned in the United States. It can be purified industrially by converting it to the barium salt
through reaction of the acid C H NHSO H with barium carbonate, treatment with sulfuric acid (barium
6 11 3
sulfate is very insoluble), and then neutralization with calcium hydroxide. Write the balanced equations
for these reactions.
37. Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) (in acidic solution)
(e) (in basic solution)
(f) (in acidic solution)
(g) (in acidic solution)
(h) (in basic solution)
38. Complete and balance each of the following half-reactions (steps 2–5 in half-reaction method):
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) (in basic solution)
(e) (in acidic solution)
(f) (in acidic solution)
(g) (in basic solution)
(h) (in acidic solution)
39. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
40. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
41. Balance each of the following equations according to the half-reaction method:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 219
4 • Exercises 205
4.3Reaction Stoichiometry
42. Write the balanced equation, then outline the steps necessary to determine the information requested in each
of the following:
(a) The number of moles and the mass of chlorine, Cl , required to react with 10.0 g of sodium metal, Na, to
2
produce sodium chloride, NaCl.
(b) The number of moles and the mass of oxygen formed by the decomposition of 1.252 g of mercury(II) oxide.
(c) The number of moles and the mass of sodium nitrate, NaNO , required to produce 128 g of oxygen. (NaNO
3 2
is the other product.)
(d) The number of moles and the mass of carbon dioxide formed by the combustion of 20.0 kg of carbon in an
excess of oxygen.
(e) The number of moles and the mass of copper(II) carbonate needed to produce 1.500 kg of copper(II) oxide.
(CO is the other product.)
2
(f)
43. Determine the number of moles and the mass requested for each reaction inExercise 4.42.
44. Write the balanced equation, then outline the steps necessary to determine the information requested in each
of the following:
(a) The number of moles and the mass of Mg required to react with 5.00 g of HCl and produce MgCl and H .
2 2
(b) The number of moles and the mass of oxygen formed by the decomposition of 1.252 g of silver(I) oxide.
(c) The number of moles and the mass of magnesium carbonate, MgCO , required to produce 283 g of carbon
3
dioxide. (MgO is the other product.)
(d) The number of moles and the mass of water formed by the combustion of 20.0 kg of acetylene, C H , in an
2 2
excess of oxygen.
(e) The number of moles and the mass of barium peroxide, BaO , needed to produce 2.500 kg of barium oxide,
2
BaO (O is the other product.)
2
(f)
45. Determine the number of moles and the mass requested for each reaction inExercise 4.44.
46. H is produced by the reaction of 118.5 mL of a 0.8775-M solution of H PO according to the following
2 3 4
equation:
(a) Outline the steps necessary to determine the number of moles and mass of H .
2
(b) Perform the calculations outlined.
47. Gallium chloride is formed by the reaction of 2.6 L of a 1.44 M solution of HCl according to the following
equation:
(a) Outline the steps necessary to determine the number of moles and mass of gallium chloride.
(b) Perform the calculations outlined.
48. I is produced by the reaction of 0.4235 mol of CuCl according to the following equation:
2 2
(a) How many molecules of I are produced?
2
(b) What mass of I is produced?
2
49. Silver is often extracted from ores such as K[Ag(CN) ] and then recovered by the reaction
2
(a) How many molecules of Zn(CN) are produced by the reaction of 35.27 g of K[Ag(CN) ]?
2 2
(b) What mass of Zn(CN) is produced?
2
PAGE: 220
206 4 • Exercises
50. What mass of silver oxide, Ag O, is required to produce 25.0 g of silver sulfadiazine, AgC H N SO , from
2 10 9 4 2
the reaction of silver oxide and sulfadiazine?
51. Carborundum is silicon carbide, SiC, a very hard material used as an abrasive on sandpaper and in other
applications. It is prepared by the reaction of pure sand, SiO , with carbon at high temperature. Carbon
2
monoxide, CO, is the other product of this reaction. Write the balanced equation for the reaction, and
calculate how much SiO is required to produce 3.00 kg of SiC.
2
52. Automotive air bags inflate when a sample of sodium azide, NaN , is very rapidly decomposed.
3
What mass of sodium azide is required to produce 2.6 ft3(73.6 L) of nitrogen gas with a density of 1.25 g/
L?
53. Urea, CO(NH ) , is manufactured on a large scale for use in producing urea-formaldehyde plastics and as
22
a fertilizer. What is the maximum mass of urea that can be manufactured from the CO produced by
2
combustion of of carbon followed by the reaction?
54. In an accident, a solution containing 2.5 kg of nitric acid was spilled. Two kilograms of Na CO was quickly
2 3
spread on the area and CO was released by the reaction. Was sufficient Na CO used to neutralize all of
2 2 3
the acid?
55. A compact car gets 37.5 miles per gallon on the highway. If gasoline contains 84.2% carbon by mass and
has a density of 0.8205 g/mL, determine the mass of carbon dioxide produced during a 500-mile trip
(3.785 liters per gallon).
56. What volume of 0.750 M hydrochloric acid solution can be prepared from the HCl produced by the
reaction of 25.0 g of NaCl with excess sulfuric acid?
57. What volume of a 0.2089MKI solution contains enough KI to react exactly with the Cu(NO ) in 43.88 mL
32
of a 0.3842Msolution of Cu(NO ) ?
32
58. A mordant is a substance that combines with a dye to produce a stable fixed color in a dyed fabric. Calcium
acetate is used as a mordant. It is prepared by the reaction of acetic acid with calcium hydroxide.
What mass of Ca(OH) is required to react with the acetic acid in 25.0 mL of a solution having a density of
2
1.065 g/mL and containing 58.0% acetic acid by mass?
59. The toxic pigment called white lead, Pb (OH) (CO ) , has been replaced in white paints by rutile, TiO .
3 2 32 2
How much rutile (g) can be prepared from 379 g of an ore that contains 88.3% ilmenite (FeTiO ) by mass?
3
4.4Reaction Yields
60. The following quantities are placed in a container: 1.5 1024atoms of hydrogen, 1.0 mol of sulfur, and
88.0 g of diatomic oxygen.
(a) What is the total mass in grams for the collection of all three elements?
(b) What is the total number of moles of atoms for the three elements?
(c) If the mixture of the three elements formed a compound with molecules that contain two hydrogen
atoms, one sulfur atom, and four oxygen atoms, which substance is consumed first?
(d) How many atoms of each remaining element would remain unreacted in the change described in (c)?
61. What is the limiting reactant in a reaction that produces sodium chloride from 8 g of sodium and 8 g of
diatomic chlorine?
62. Which of the postulates of Dalton's atomic theory explains why we can calculate a theoretical yield for a
chemical reaction?
63. A student isolated 25 g of a compound following a procedure that would theoretically yield 81 g. What was
his percent yield?
64. A sample of 0.53 g of carbon dioxide was obtained by heating 1.31 g of calcium carbonate. What is the
percent yield for this reaction?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 221
4 • Exercises 207
65. Freon-12, CCl F , is prepared from CCl by reaction with HF. The other product of this reaction is HCl.
2 2 4
Outline the steps needed to determine the percent yield of a reaction that produces 12.5 g of CCl F from
2 2
32.9 g of CCl . Freon-12 has been banned and is no longer used as a refrigerant because it catalyzes the
4
decomposition of ozone and has a very long lifetime in the atmosphere. Determine the percent yield.
66. Citric acid, C H O , a component of jams, jellies, and fruity soft drinks, is prepared industrially via
6 8 7
fermentation of sucrose by the moldAspergillus niger. The equation representing this reaction is
What mass of citric acid is produced from exactly 1 metric ton (1.000 103kg) of sucrose if the yield is
92.30%?
67. Toluene, C H CH , is oxidized by air under carefully controlled conditions to benzoic acid, C H CO H,
6 5 3 6 5 2
which is used to prepare the food preservative sodium benzoate, C H CO Na. What is the percent yield of
6 5 2
a reaction that converts 1.000 kg of toluene to 1.21 kg of benzoic acid?
68. In a laboratory experiment, the reaction of 3.0 mol of H with 2.0 mol of I produced 1.0 mol of HI.
2 2
Determine the theoretical yield in grams and the percent yield for this reaction.
69. Outline the steps needed to solve the following problem, then do the calculations. Ether, (C H ) O, which
2 52
was originally used as an anesthetic but has been replaced by safer and more effective medications, is
prepared by the reaction of ethanol with sulfuric acid.
2C H OH + H SO ⟶ (C H ) O + H SO ·H O
2 5 2 4 2 52 2 4 2
What is the percent yield of ether if 1.17 L (d = 0.7134 g/mL) is isolated from the reaction of 1.500 L of
C H OH
2 5
(d = 0.7894 g/mL)?
70. Outline the steps needed to determine the limiting reactant when 30.0 g of propane, C H , is burned with
3 8
75.0 g of oxygen.
Determine the limiting reactant.
71. Outline the steps needed to determine the limiting reactant when 0.50 mol of Cr and 0.75 mol of H PO
3 4
react according to the following chemical equation.
Determine the limiting reactant.
72. What is the limiting reactant when 1.50 g of lithium and 1.50 g of nitrogen combine to form lithium
nitride, a component of advanced batteries, according to the following unbalanced equation?
73. Uranium can be isolated from its ores by dissolving it as UO (NO ) , then separating it as solid
2 32
UO (C O )·3H O. Addition of 0.4031 g of sodium oxalate, Na C O , to a solution containing 1.481 g of
2 2 4 2 2 2 4
uranyl nitrate, UO (NO ) , yields 1.073 g of solid UO (C O )·3H O.
2 32 2 2 4 2
Na C O + UO (NO ) + 3H O ⟶ UO (C O )·3H O + 2NaNO
2 2 4 2 32 2 2 2 4 2 3
Determine the limiting reactant and the percent yield of this reaction.
74. How many molecules of C H Cl can be prepared from 15 C H molecules and 8 Cl molecules?
2 4 2 2 4 2
75. How many molecules of the sweetener saccharin can be prepared from 30 C atoms, 25 H atoms, 12 O
atoms, 8 S atoms, and 14 N atoms?
76. The phosphorus pentoxide used to produce phosphoric acid for cola soft drinks is prepared by burning
phosphorus in oxygen.
(a) What is the limiting reactant when 0.200 mol of P and 0.200 mol of O react according to
4 2
(b) Calculate the percent yield if 10.0 g of P O is isolated from the reaction.
4 10
PAGE: 222
208 4 • Exercises
77. Would you agree to buy 1 trillion (1,000,000,000,000) gold atoms for $5? Explain why or why not. Find the
current price of gold at http://money.cnn.com/data/commodities/
4.5Quantitative Chemical Analysis
78. What volume of 0.0105-M HBr solution is required to titrate 125 mL of a 0.0100-MCa(OH) solution?
2
79. Titration of a 20.0-mL sample of acid rain required 1.7 mL of 0.0811MNaOH to reach the end point. If we
assume that the acidity of the rain is due to the presence of sulfuric acid, what was the concentration of
sulfuric acid in this sample of rain?
80. What is the concentration of NaCl in a solution if titration of 15.00 mL of the solution with 0.2503MAgNO
3
requires 20.22 mL of the AgNO solution to reach the end point?
3
81. In a common medical laboratory determination of the concentration of free chloride ion in blood serum, a
serum sample is titrated with a Hg(NO ) solution.
32
What is the Cl−concentration in a 0.25-mL sample of normal serum that requires 1.46 mL of 8.25 10−4
MHg(NO ) (aq) to reach the end point?
32
82. Potatoes can be peeled commercially by soaking them in a 3-M to 6-M solution of sodium hydroxide, then
removing the loosened skins by spraying them with water. Does a sodium hydroxide solution have a
suitable concentration if titration of 12.00 mL of the solution requires 30.6 mL of 1.65 M HCI to reach the
end point?
83. A sample of gallium bromide, GaBr , weighing 0.165 g was dissolved in water and treated with silver
3
nitrate, AgNO , resulting in the precipitation of 0.299 g AgBr. Use these data to compute the %Ga (by mass)
3
GaBr .
3
84. The principal component of mothballs is naphthalene, a compound with a molecular mass of about 130
amu, containing only carbon and hydrogen. A 3.000-mg sample of naphthalene burns to give 10.3 mg of
CO . Determine its empirical and molecular formulas.
2
85. A 0.025-g sample of a compound composed of boron and hydrogen, with a molecular mass of ~28 amu,
burns spontaneously when exposed to air, producing 0.063 g of B O . What are the empirical and
2 3
molecular formulas of the compound?
86. Sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), NaHCO , can be purified by dissolving it in hot water (60 °C), filtering
3
to remove insoluble impurities, cooling to 0 °C to precipitate solid NaHCO , and then filtering to remove
3
the solid, leaving soluble impurities in solution. Any NaHCO that remains in solution is not recovered.
3
The solubility of NaHCO in hot water of 60 °C is 164 g/L. Its solubility in cold water of 0 °C is 69 g/L. What
3
is the percent yield of NaHCO when it is purified by this method?
3
87. What volume of 0.600MHCl is required to react completely with 2.50 g of sodium hydrogen carbonate?
88. What volume of 0.08892MHNO is required to react completely with 0.2352 g of potassium hydrogen
3
phosphate?
89. What volume of a 0.3300-Msolution of sodium hydroxide would be required to titrate 15.00 mL of 0.1500
Moxalic acid?
90. What volume of a 0.00945-Msolution of potassium hydroxide would be required to titrate 50.00 mL of a
sample of acid rain with a H SO concentration of 1.23 10−4M.
2 4
91. A sample of solid calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , is allowed to stand in water until a saturated solution is
2
formed. A titration of 75.00 mL of this solution with 5.00 10−2MHCl requires 36.6 mL of the acid to
reach the end point.
What is the molarity?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 223
4 • Exercises 209
92. What mass of Ca(OH) will react with 25.0 g of butanoic to form the preservative calcium butanoate
2
according to the equation?
93. How many milliliters of a 0.1500-Msolution of KOH will be required to titrate 40.00 mL of a 0.0656-M
solution of H PO ?
3 4
94. Potassium hydrogen phthalate, KHC H O , or KHP, is used in many laboratories, including general
8 4 4
chemistry laboratories, to standardize solutions of base. KHP is one of only a few stable solid acids that
can be dried by warming and weighed. A 0.3420-g sample of KHC H O reacts with 35.73 mL of a NaOH
8 4 4
solution in a titration. What is the molar concentration of the NaOH?
95. The reaction of WCl with Al at ~400 °C gives black crystals of a compound containing only tungsten and
6
chlorine. A sample of this compound, when reduced with hydrogen, gives 0.2232 g of tungsten metal and
hydrogen chloride, which is absorbed in water. Titration of the hydrochloric acid thus produced requires
46.2 mL of 0.1051MNaOH to reach the end point. What is the empirical formula of the black tungsten
chloride?
PAGE: 224
210 4 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 225
CHAPTER 5
Thermochemistry
Figure5.1 Sliding a match head along a rough surface initiates a combustion reaction that produces energy in the
form of heat and light. (credit: modification of work by Laszlo Ilyes)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1Energy Basics
5.2Calorimetry
5.3Enthalpy
INTRODUCTION Chemical reactions, such as those that occur when you light a match, involve changes in
energy as well as matter. Societies at all levels of development could not function without the energy released
by chemical reactions. In 2012, about 85% of US energy consumption came from the combustion of petroleum
products, coal, wood, and garbage. We use this energy to produce electricity (38%); to transport food, raw
materials, manufactured goods, and people (27%); for industrial production (21%); and to heat and power our
1
homes and businesses (10%). While these combustion reactions help us meet our essential energy needs,
they are also recognized by the majority of the scientific community as a major contributor to global climate
change.
Useful forms of energy are also available from a variety of chemical reactions other than combustion. For
example, the energy produced by the batteries in a cell phone, car, or flashlight results from chemical
reactions. This chapter introduces many of the basic ideas necessary to explore the relationships between
chemical changes and energy, with a focus on thermal energy.
1 US Energy Information Administration,Primary Energy Consumption by Source and Sector, 2012, http://www.eia.gov/totalenergy/
data/monthly/pdf/flow/css_2012_energy.pdf. Data derived from US Energy Information Administration,Monthly Energy Review
(January 2014).
PAGE: 226
212 5 • Thermochemistry
5.1 Energy Basics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define energy, distinguish types of energy, and describe the nature of energy changes that accompany chemical
and physical changes
• Distinguish the related properties of heat, thermal energy, and temperature
• Define and distinguish specific heat and heat capacity, and describe the physical implications of both
• Perform calculations involving heat, specific heat, and temperature change
Chemical changes and their accompanying changes in energy are important parts of our everyday world
(Figure 5.2). The macronutrients in food (proteins, fats, and carbohydrates) undergo metabolic reactions that
provide the energy to keep our bodies functioning. We burn a variety of fuels (gasoline, natural gas, coal) to
produce energy for transportation, heating, and the generation of electricity. Industrial chemical reactions use
enormous amounts of energy to produce raw materials (such as iron and aluminum). Energy is then used to
manufacture those raw materials into useful products, such as cars, skyscrapers, and bridges.
FIGURE5.2 The energy involved in chemical changes is important to our daily lives: (a) A cheeseburger for lunch
provides the energy you need to get through the rest of the day; (b) the combustion of gasoline provides the energy
that moves your car (and you) between home, work, and school; and (c) coke, a processed form of coal, provides the
energy needed to convert iron ore into iron, which is essential for making many of the products we use daily. (credit
a: modification of work by “Pink Sherbet Photography”/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by Jeffery Turner)
Over 90% of the energy we use comes originally from the sun. Every day, the sun provides the earth with
almost 10,000 times the amount of energy necessary to meet all of the world’s energy needs for that day. Our
challenge is to find ways to convert and store incoming solar energy so that it can be used in reactions or
chemical processes that are both convenient and nonpolluting. Plants and many bacteria capture solar energy
through photosynthesis. We release the energy stored in plants when we burn wood or plant products such as
ethanol. We also use this energy to fuel our bodies by eating food that comes directly from plants or from
animals that got their energy by eating plants. Burning coal and petroleum also releases stored solar energy:
These fuels are fossilized plant and animal matter.
This chapter will introduce the basic ideas of an important area of science concerned with the amount of heat
absorbed or released during chemical and physical changes—an area calledthermochemistry. The concepts
introduced in this chapter are widely used in almost all scientific and technical fields. Food scientists use them
to determine the energy content of foods. Biologists study the energetics of living organisms, such as the
metabolic combustion of sugar into carbon dioxide and water. The oil, gas, and transportation industries,
renewable energy providers, and many others endeavor to find better methods to produce energy for our
commercial and personal needs. Engineers strive to improve energy efficiency, find better ways to heat and
cool our homes, refrigerate our food and drinks, and meet the energy and cooling needs of computers and
electronics, among other applications. Understanding thermochemical principles is essential for chemists,
physicists, biologists, geologists, every type of engineer, and just about anyone who studies or does any kind of
science.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 227
5.1 • Energy Basics 213
Energy
Energycan be defined as the capacity to supply heat or do work. One type ofwork (w)is the process of causing
matter to move against an opposing force. For example, we do work when we inflate a bicycle tire—we move
matter (the air in the pump) against the opposing force of the air already in the tire.
Like matter, energy comes in different types. One scheme classifies energy into two types:potential energy,
the energy an object has because of its relative position, composition, or condition, andkinetic energy, the
energy that an object possesses because of its motion. Water at the top of a waterfall or dam has potential
energy because of its position; when it flows downward through generators, it has kinetic energy that can be
used to do work and produce electricity in a hydroelectric plant (Figure 5.3). A battery has potential energy
because the chemicals within it can produce electricity that can do work.
FIGURE5.3 (a) Water at a higher elevation, for example, at the top of Victoria Falls, has a higher potential energy
than water at a lower elevation. As the water falls, some of its potential energy is converted into kinetic energy. (b) If
the water flows through generators at the bottom of a dam, such as the Hoover Dam shown here, its kinetic energy
is converted into electrical energy. (credit a: modification of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit b: modification of work
by “curimedia”/Wikimedia commons)
Energy can be converted from one form into another, but all of the energy present before a change occurs
always exists in some form after the change is completed. This observation is expressed in the law of
conservation of energy: during a chemical or physical change, energy can be neither created nor destroyed,
although it can be changed in form. (This is also one version of the first law of thermodynamics, as you will
learn later.)
When one substance is converted into another, there is always an associated conversion of one form of energy
into another. Heat is usually released or absorbed, but sometimes the conversion involves light, electrical
energy, or some other form of energy. For example, chemical energy (a type of potential energy) is stored in the
molecules that compose gasoline. When gasoline is combusted within the cylinders of a car’s engine, the
rapidly expanding gaseous products of this chemical reaction generate mechanical energy (a type of kinetic
energy) when they move the cylinders’ pistons.
According to the law of conservation of matter (seen in an earlier chapter), there is no detectable change in the
total amount of matter during a chemical change. When chemical reactions occur, the energy changes are
relatively modest and the mass changes are too small to measure, so the laws of conservation of matter and
energy hold well. However, in nuclear reactions, the energy changes are much larger (by factors of a million or
so), the mass changes are measurable, and matter-energy conversions are significant. This will be examined in
more detail in a later chapter on nuclear chemistry.
Thermal Energy, Temperature, and Heat
Thermal energyis kinetic energy associated with the random motion of atoms and molecules.Temperature
is a quantitative measure of “hot” or “cold.” When the atoms and molecules in an object are moving or
PAGE: 228
214 5 • Thermochemistry
vibrating quickly, they have a higher average kinetic energy (KE), and we say that the object is “hot.” When the
atoms and molecules are moving slowly, they have lower average KE, and we say that the object is “cold”
(Figure 5.4). Assuming that no chemical reaction or phase change (such as melting or vaporizing) occurs,
increasing the amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause its temperature to increase. And,
assuming that no chemical reaction or phase change (such as condensation or freezing) occurs, decreasing the
amount of thermal energy in a sample of matter will cause its temperature to decrease.
FIGURE5.4 (a) The molecules in a sample of hot water move more rapidly than (b) those in a sample of cold water.
LINK TO LEARNING
Click on thisinteractive simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETtempFX)to view the effects of temperature
on molecular motion.
Most substances expand as their temperature increases and contract as their temperature decreases. This
property can be used to measure temperature changes, as shown inFigure 5.5. The operation of many
thermometers depends on the expansion and contraction of substances in response to temperature changes.
FIGURE5.5 (a) In an alcohol or mercury thermometer, the liquid (dyed red for visibility) expands when heated and
contracts when cooled, much more so than the glass tube that contains the liquid. (b) In a bimetallic thermometer,
two different metals (such as brass and steel) form a two-layered strip. When heated or cooled, one of the metals
(brass) expands or contracts more than the other metal (steel), causing the strip to coil or uncoil. Both types of
thermometers have a calibrated scale that indicates the temperature. (credit a: modification of work by
“dwstucke”/Flickr)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 229
5.1 • Energy Basics 215
LINK TO LEARNING
The followingdemonstration(http://openstax.org/l/16Bimetallic)allows one to view the effects of heating and
cooling a coiled bimetallic strip.
Heat (q)is the transfer of thermal energy between two bodies at different temperatures. Heat flow (a
redundant term, but one commonly used) increases the thermal energy of one body and decreases the thermal
energy of the other. Suppose we initially have a high temperature (and high thermal energy) substance (H) and
a low temperature (and low thermal energy) substance (L). The atoms and molecules in H have a higher
average KE than those in L. If we place substance H in contact with substance L, the thermal energy will flow
spontaneously from substance H to substance L. The temperature of substance H will decrease, as will the
average KE of its molecules; the temperature of substance L will increase, along with the average KE of its
molecules. Heat flow will continue until the two substances are at the same temperature (Figure 5.6).
FIGURE5.6 (a) Substances H and L are initially at different temperatures, and their atoms have different average
kinetic energies. (b) When they contact each other, collisions between the molecules result in the transfer of kinetic
(thermal) energy from the hotter to the cooler matter. (c) The two objects reach “thermal equilibrium” when both
substances are at the same temperature and their molecules have the same average kinetic energy.
LINK TO LEARNING
Click on thePhET simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETenergy)to explore energy forms and changes. Visit
the Energy Systems tab to create combinations of energy sources, transformation methods, and outputs. Click
on Energy Symbols to visualize the transfer of energy.
Matter undergoing chemical reactions and physical changes can release or absorb heat. A change that releases
heat is called anexothermic process. For example, the combustion reaction that occurs when using an
oxyacetylene torch is an exothermic process—this process also releases energy in the form of light as
evidenced by the torch’s flame (Figure 5.7). A reaction or change that absorbs heat is anendothermic process.
A cold pack used to treat muscle strains provides an example of an endothermic process. When the substances
in the cold pack (water and a salt like ammonium nitrate) are brought together, the resulting process absorbs
heat, leading to the sensation of cold.
PAGE: 230
216 5 • Thermochemistry
FIGURE5.7 (a) An oxyacetylene torch produces heat by the combustion of acetylene in oxygen. The energy
released by this exothermic reaction heats and then melts the metal being cut. The sparks are tiny bits of the molten
metal flying away. (b) A cold pack uses an endothermic process to create the sensation of cold. (credit a:
modification of work by “Skatebiker”/Wikimedia commons)
Historically, energy was measured in units ofcalories (cal). A calorie is the amount of energy required to raise
one gram of water by 1 degree C (1 kelvin). However, this quantity depends on the atmospheric pressure and
the starting temperature of the water. The ease of measurement of energy changes in calories has meant that
the calorie is still frequently used. The Calorie (with a capital C), or large calorie, commonly used in quantifying
food energy content, is a kilocalorie. The SI unit of heat, work, and energy is the joule. Ajoule (J)is defined as
the amount of energy used when a force of 1 newton moves an object 1 meter. It is named in honor of the
English physicist James Prescott Joule. One joule is equivalent to 1 kg m2/s2, which is also called 1
newton–meter. A kilojoule (kJ) is 1000 joules. To standardize its definition, 1 calorie has been set to equal
4.184 joules.
We now introduce two concepts useful in describing heat flow and temperature change. Theheat capacity (C)
of a body of matter is the quantity of heat (q) it absorbs or releases when it experiences a temperature change
(ΔT) of 1 degree Celsius (or equivalently, 1 kelvin):
Heat capacity is determined by both the type and amount of substance that absorbs or releases heat. It is
therefore an extensive property—its value is proportional to the amount of the substance.
For example, consider the heat capacities of two cast iron frying pans. The heat capacity of the large pan is five
times greater than that of the small pan because, although both are made of the same material, the mass of the
large pan is five times greater than the mass of the small pan. More mass means more atoms are present in the
larger pan, so it takes more energy to make all of those atoms vibrate faster. The heat capacity of the small cast
iron frying pan is found by observing that it takes 18,150 J of energy to raise the temperature of the pan by
50.0 °C:
The larger cast iron frying pan, while made of the same substance, requires 90,700 J of energy to raise its
temperature by 50.0 °C. The larger pan has a (proportionally) larger heat capacity because the larger amount
of material requires a (proportionally) larger amount of energy to yield the same temperature change:
Thespecific heat capacity (c)of a substance, commonly called its “specific heat,” is the quantity of heat
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 231
5.1 • Energy Basics 217
required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1 degree Celsius (or 1 kelvin):
Specific heat capacity depends only on the kind of substance absorbing or releasing heat. It is an intensive
property—the type, but not the amount, of the substance is all that matters. For example, the small cast iron
frying pan has a mass of 808 g. The specific heat of iron (the material used to make the pan) is therefore:
The large frying pan has a mass of 4040 g. Using the data for this pan, we can also calculate the specific heat of
iron:
Although the large pan is more massive than the small pan, since both are made of the same material, they
both yield the same value for specific heat (for the material of construction, iron). Note that specific heat is
measured in units of energy per temperature per mass and is an intensive property, being derived from a ratio
of two extensive properties (heat and mass). The molar heat capacity, also an intensive property, is the heat
capacity per mole of a particular substance and has units of J/mol °C (Figure 5.8).
FIGURE5.8 Because of its larger mass, a large frying pan has a larger heat capacity than a small frying pan.
Because they are made of the same material, both frying pans have the same specific heat. (credit: Mark Blaser)
Water has a relatively high specific heat (about 4.2 J/g °C for the liquid and 2.09 J/g °C for the solid); most
metals have much lower specific heats (usually less than 1 J/g °C). The specific heat of a substance varies
somewhat with temperature. However, this variation is usually small enough that we will treat specific heat as
constant over the range of temperatures that will be considered in this chapter. Specific heats of some common
substances are listed inTable 5.1.
Specific Heats of Common Substances at 25 °C and 1 bar
Substance Symbol (state) Specific Heat (J/g °C)
helium He(g) 5.193
water H O(l) 4.184
2
ethanol C H O(l) 2.376
2 6
ice H O(s) 2.093 (at −10 °C)
2
water vapor H O(g) 1.864
2
TABLE5.1
PAGE: 232
218 5 • Thermochemistry
Substance Symbol (state) Specific Heat (J/g °C)
nitrogen N (g) 1.040
2
air 1.007
oxygen O (g) 0.918
2
aluminum Al(s) 0.897
carbon dioxide CO (g) 0.853
2
argon Ar(g) 0.522
iron Fe(s) 0.449
copper Cu(s) 0.385
lead Pb(s) 0.130
gold Au(s) 0.129
silicon Si(s) 0.712
TABLE5.1
If we know the mass of a substance and its specific heat, we can determine the amount of heat,q, entering or
leaving the substance by measuring the temperature change before and after the heat is gained or lost:
In this equation,cis the specific heat of the substance,mis its mass, and ΔT(which is read “delta T”) is the
temperature change,T −T . If a substance gains thermal energy, its temperature increases, its final
final initial
temperature is higher than its initial temperature,T −T has a positive value, and the value ofqis
final initial
positive. If a substance loses thermal energy, its temperature decreases, the final temperature is lower than the
initial temperature,T −T has a negative value, and the value ofqis negative.
final initial
EXAMPLE 5.1
Measuring Heat
A flask containing 8.0 102g of water is heated, and the temperature of the water increases from 21 °C to 85
°C. How much heat did the water absorb?
Solution
To answer this question, consider these factors:
• the specific heat of the substance being heated (in this case, water)
• the amount of substance being heated (in this case, 8.0 × 102g)
• the magnitude of the temperature change (in this case, from 21 °C to 85 °C).
The specific heat of water is 4.184 J/g °C, so to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C requires 4.184 J. We note that since
4.184 J is required to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C, we will need800 times as muchto heat 8.0 × 102g of water by 1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 233
5.1 • Energy Basics 219
°C. Finally, we observe that since 4.184 J are required to heat 1 g of water by 1 °C, we will need64 times as
muchto heat it by 64 °C (that is, from 21 °C to 85 °C).
This can be summarized using the equation:
Because the temperature increased, the water absorbed heat andqis positive.
Check Your Learning
How much heat, in joules, must be added to a 502 g iron skillet to increase its temperature from 25 °C to 250
°C? The specific heat of iron is 0.449 J/g °C.
Answer:
5.07 104J
Note that the relationship between heat, specific heat, mass, and temperature change can be used to
determine any of these quantities (not just heat) if the other three are known or can be deduced.
EXAMPLE 5.2
Determining Other Quantities
A piece of unknown metal weighs 348 g. When the metal piece absorbs 6.64 kJ of heat, its temperature
increases from 22.4 °C to 43.6 °C. Determine the specific heat of this metal (which might provide a clue to its
identity).
Solution
Since mass, heat, and temperature change are known for this metal, we can determine its specific heat using
the relationship:
Substituting the known values:
Solving:
Comparing this value with the values inTable 5.1, this value matches the specific heat of aluminum, which
suggests that the unknown metal may be aluminum.
Check Your Learning
A piece of unknown metal weighs 217 g. When the metal piece absorbs 1.43 kJ of heat, its temperature
increases from 24.5 °C to 39.1 °C. Determine the specific heat of this metal, and predict its identity.
Answer:
c= 0.451 J/g °C; the metal is likely to be iron
PAGE: 234
220 5 • Thermochemistry
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Solar Thermal Energy Power Plants
The sunlight that reaches the earth contains thousands of times more energy than we presently capture.
Solar thermal systems provide one possible solution to the problem of converting energy from the sun into
energy we can use. Large-scale solar thermal plants have different design specifics, but all concentrate
sunlight to heat some substance; the heat “stored” in that substance is then converted into electricity.
The Solana Generating Station in Arizona’s Sonora Desert produces 280 megawatts of electrical power. It
uses parabolic mirrors that focus sunlight on pipes filled with a heat transfer fluid (HTF) (Figure 5.9). The
HTF then does two things: It turns water into steam, which spins turbines, which in turn produces
electricity, and it melts and heats a mixture of salts, which functions as a thermal energy storage system.
After the sun goes down, the molten salt mixture can then release enough of its stored heat to produce
steam to run the turbines for 6 hours. Molten salts are used because they possess a number of beneficial
properties, including high heat capacities and thermal conductivities.
FIGURE5.9 This solar thermal plant uses parabolic trough mirrors to concentrate sunlight. (credit a:
modification of work by Bureau of Land Management)
The 377-megawatt Ivanpah Solar Generating System, located in the Mojave Desert in California, is the
largest solar thermal power plant in the world (Figure 5.10). Its 170,000 mirrors focus huge amounts of
sunlight on three water-filled towers, producing steam at over 538 °C that drives electricity-producing
turbines. It produces enough energy to power 140,000 homes. Water is used as the working fluid because
of its large heat capacity and heat of vaporization.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 235
5.2 • Calorimetry 221
FIGURE5.10 (a) The Ivanpah solar thermal plant uses 170,000 mirrors to concentrate sunlight on water-filled
towers. (b) It covers 4000 acres of public land near the Mojave Desert and the California-Nevada border. (credit
a: modification of work by Craig Dietrich; credit b: modification of work by “USFWS Pacific Southwest
Region”/Flickr)
5.2 Calorimetry
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the technique of calorimetry
• Calculate and interpret heat and related properties using typical calorimetry data
One technique we can use to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process is known
ascalorimetry. Calorimetry is used to measure amounts of heat transferred to or from a substance. To do so,
the heat is exchanged with a calibrated object (calorimeter). The temperature change measured by the
calorimeter is used to derive the amount of heat transferred by the process under study. The measurement of
heat transfer using this approach requires the definition of asystem(the substance or substances undergoing
the chemical or physical change) and itssurroundings(all other matter, including components of the
measurement apparatus, that serve to either provide heat to the system or absorb heat from the system).
Acalorimeteris a device used to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process. For
example, when an exothermic reaction occurs in solution in a calorimeter, the heat produced by the reaction is
absorbed by the solution, which increases its temperature. When an endothermic reaction occurs, the heat
required is absorbed from the thermal energy of the solution, which decreases its temperature (Figure 5.11).
The temperature change, along with the specific heat and mass of the solution, can then be used to calculate
the amount of heat involved in either case.
PAGE: 236
222 5 • Thermochemistry
FIGURE5.11 In a calorimetric determination, either (a) an exothermic process occurs and heat,q, is negative,
indicating that thermal energy is transferred from the system to its surroundings, or (b) an endothermic process
occurs and heat,q, is positive, indicating that thermal energy is transferred from the surroundings to the system.
Calorimetry measurements are important in understanding the heat transferred in reactions involving
everything from microscopic proteins to massive machines. During her time at the National Bureau of
Standards, research chemist Reatha Clark King performed calorimetric experiments to understand the precise
heats of various flourine compounds. Her work was important to NASA in their quest for better rocket fuels.
Scientists use well-insulated calorimeters that all but prevent the transfer of heat between the calorimeter and
its environment, which effectively limits the “surroundings” to the nonsystem components with the
calorimeter (and the calorimeter itself). This enables the accurate determination of the heat involved in
chemical processes, the energy content of foods, and so on. General chemistry students often use simple
calorimeters constructed from polystyrene cups (Figure 5.12). These easy-to-use “coffee cup” calorimeters
allow more heat exchange with the outside environment, and therefore produce less accurate energy values.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 237
5.2 • Calorimetry 223
FIGURE5.12 A simple calorimeter can be constructed from two polystyrene cups. A thermometer and stirrer
extend through the cover into the reaction mixture.
Commercial solution calorimeters are also available. Relatively inexpensive calorimeters often consist of two
thin-walled cups that are nested in a way that minimizes thermal contact during use, along with an insulated
cover, handheld stirrer, and simple thermometer. More expensive calorimeters used for industry and research
typically have a well-insulated, fully enclosed reaction vessel, motorized stirring mechanism, and a more
accurate temperature sensor (Figure 5.13).
PAGE: 238
224 5 • Thermochemistry
FIGURE5.13 Commercial solution calorimeters range from (a) simple, inexpensive models for student use to (b)
expensive, more accurate models for industry and research.
Before discussing the calorimetry of chemical reactions, consider a simpler example that illustrates the core
idea behind calorimetry. Suppose we initially have a high-temperature substance, such as a hot piece of metal
(M), and a low-temperature substance, such as cool water (W). If we place the metal in the water, heat will flow
from M to W. The temperature of M will decrease, and the temperature of W will increase, until the two
substances have the same temperature—that is, when they reach thermal equilibrium (Figure 5.14). If this
occurs in a calorimeter, ideally all of this heat transfer occurs between the two substances, with no heat gained
or lost by either its external environment. Under these ideal circumstances, the net heat change is zero:
This relationship can be rearranged to show that the heat gained by substance M is equal to the heat lost by
substance W:
The magnitude of the heat (change) is therefore the same for both substances, and the negative sign merely
shows thatq andq are opposite in direction of heat flow (gain or loss) but does not indicate
substance M substance W
the arithmetic sign of eitherqvalue (that is determined by whether the matter in question gains or loses heat,
per definition). In the specific situation described,q is a negative value andq is positive,
substance M substance W
since heat is transferred from M to W.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 239
5.2 • Calorimetry 225
FIGURE5.14 In a simple calorimetry process, (a) heat,q, is transferred from the hot metal, M, to the cool water,
W, until (b) both are at the same temperature.
EXAMPLE 5.3
Heat Transfer between Substances at Different Temperatures
A 360.0-g piece of rebar (a steel rod used for reinforcing concrete) is dropped into 425 mL of water at 24.0 °C.
The final temperature of the water was measured as 42.7 °C. Calculate the initial temperature of the piece of
rebar. Assume the specific heat of steel is approximately the same as that for iron (Table 5.1), and that all heat
transfer occurs between the rebar and the water (there is no heat exchange with the surroundings).
Solution
The temperature of the water increases from 24.0 °C to 42.7 °C, so the water absorbs heat. That heat came
from the piece of rebar, which initially was at a higher temperature. Assuming that all heat transfer was
between the rebar and the water, with no heat “lost” to the outside environment, thenheat given off by rebar =
−heat taken in by water, or:
Since we know how heat is related to other measurable quantities, we have:
Letting f = final and i = initial, in expanded form, this becomes:
The density of water is 1.0 g/mL, so 425 mL of water = 425 g. Noting that the final temperature of both the
rebar and water is 42.7 °C, substituting known values yields:
Solving this givesT = 248 °C, so the initial temperature of the rebar was 248 °C.
i,rebar
Check Your Learning
A 248-g piece of copper is dropped into 390 mL of water at 22.6 °C. The final temperature of the water was
PAGE: 240
226 5 • Thermochemistry
measured as 39.9 °C. Calculate the initial temperature of the piece of copper. Assume that all heat transfer
occurs between the copper and the water.
Answer:
The initial temperature of the copper was 335.6 °C.
Check Your Learning
A 248-g piece of copper initially at 314 °C is dropped into 390 mL of water initially at 22.6 °C. Assuming that all
heat transfer occurs between the copper and the water, calculate the final temperature.
Answer:
The final temperature (reached by both copper and water) is 38.7 °C.
This method can also be used to determine other quantities, such as the specific heat of an unknown metal.
EXAMPLE 5.4
Identifying a Metal by Measuring Specific Heat
A 59.7 g piece of metal that had been submerged in boiling water was quickly transferred into 60.0 mL of water
initially at 22.0 °C. The final temperature is 28.5 °C. Use these data to determine the specific heat of the metal.
Use this result to identify the metal.
Solution
Assuming perfect heat transfer,heat given off by metal = −heat taken in by water, or:
In expanded form, this is:
Noting that since the metal was submerged in boiling water, its initial temperature was 100.0 °C; and that for
water, 60.0 mL = 60.0 g; we have:
Solving this:
Comparing this with values inTable 5.1, our experimental specific heat is closest to the value for copper (0.39
J/g °C), so we identify the metal as copper.
Check Your Learning
A 92.9-g piece of a silver/gray metal is heated to 178.0 °C, and then quickly transferred into 75.0 mL of water
initially at 24.0 °C. After 5 minutes, both the metal and the water have reached the same temperature: 29.7 °C.
Determine the specific heat and the identity of the metal. (Note: You should find that the specific heat is close
to that of two different metals. Explain how you can confidently determine the identity of the metal).
Answer:
c = 0.13 J/g °C
metal
This specific heat is close to that of either gold or lead. It would be difficult to determine which metal this was
based solely on the numerical values. However, the observation that the metal is silver/gray in addition to the
value for the specific heat indicates that the metal is lead.
When we use calorimetry to determine the heat involved in a chemical reaction, the same principles we have
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 241
5.2 • Calorimetry 227
been discussing apply. The amount of heat absorbed by the calorimeter is often small enough that we can
neglect it (though not for highly accurate measurements, as discussed later), and the calorimeter minimizes
energy exchange with the outside environment. Because energy is neither created nor destroyed during a
chemical reaction, the heat produced or consumed in the reaction (the “system”),q , plus the heat
reaction
absorbed or lost by the solution (the “surroundings”),q , must add up to zero:
solution
This means that the amount of heat produced or consumed in the reaction equals the amount of heat absorbed
or lost by the solution:
This concept lies at the heart of all calorimetry problems and calculations.
EXAMPLE 5.5
Heat Produced by an Exothermic Reaction
When 50.0 mL of 1.00 M HCl(aq) and 50.0 mL of 1.00 M NaOH(aq), both at 22.0 °C, are added to a coffee cup
calorimeter, the temperature of the mixture reaches a maximum of 28.9 °C. What is the approximate amount
of heat produced by this reaction?
Solution
To visualize what is going on, imagine that you could combine the two solutions so quickly that no reaction
took place while they mixed; then after mixing, the reaction took place. At the instant of mixing, you have
100.0 mL of a mixture of HCl and NaOH at 22.0 °C. The HCl and NaOH then react until the solution
temperature reaches 28.9 °C.
The heat given off by the reaction is equal to that taken in by the solution. Therefore:
(It is important to remember that this relationship only holds if the calorimeter does not absorb any heat from
the reaction, and there is no heat exchange between the calorimeter and the outside environment.)
Next, we know that the heat absorbed by the solution depends on its specific heat, mass, and temperature
change:
To proceed with this calculation, we need to make a few more reasonable assumptions or approximations.
Since the solution is aqueous, we can proceed as if it were water in terms of its specific heat and mass values.
The density of water is approximately 1.0 g/mL, so 100.0 mL has a mass of about 1.0 102g (two significant
figures). The specific heat of water is approximately 4.184 J/g °C, so we use that for the specific heat of the
solution. Substituting these values gives:
Finally, since we are trying to find the heat of the reaction, we have:
The negative sign indicates that the reaction is exothermic. It produces 2.9 kJ of heat.
Check Your Learning
When 100 mL of 0.200 M NaCl(aq) and 100 mL of 0.200 M AgNO (aq), both at 21.9 °C, are mixed in a coffee cup
3
calorimeter, the temperature increases to 23.5 °C as solid AgCl forms. How much heat is produced by this
precipitation reaction? What assumptions did you make to determine your value?
PAGE: 242
228 5 • Thermochemistry
Answer:
1.34 1.3 kJ; assume no heat is absorbed by the calorimeter, no heat is exchanged between the calorimeter
and its surroundings, and that the specific heat and mass of the solution are the same as those for water
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Thermochemistry of Hand Warmers
When working or playing outdoors on a cold day, you might use a hand warmer to warm your hands (Figure
5.15). A common reusable hand warmer contains a supersaturated solution of NaC H O (sodium acetate)
2 3 2
and a metal disc. Bending the disk creates nucleation sites around which the metastable NaC H O quickly
2 3 2
crystallizes (a later chapter on solutions will investigate saturation and supersaturation in more detail).
The process is exothermic, and the heat produced by this process is
absorbed by your hands, thereby warming them (at least for a while). If the hand warmer is reheated, the
NaC H O redissolves and can be reused.
2 3 2
FIGURE5.15 Chemical hand warmers produce heat that warms your hand on a cold day. In this one, you can
see the metal disc that initiates the exothermic precipitation reaction. (credit: modification of work by Science
Buddies TV/YouTube)
Another common hand warmer produces heat when it is ripped open, exposing iron and water in the hand
warmer to oxygen in the air. One simplified version of this exothermic reaction is
Salt in the hand warmer catalyzes the reaction, so it produces heat more
rapidly; cellulose, vermiculite, and activated carbon help distribute the heat evenly. Other types of hand
warmers use lighter fluid (a platinum catalyst helps lighter fluid oxidize exothermically), charcoal (charcoal
oxidizes in a special case), or electrical units that produce heat by passing an electrical current from a
battery through resistive wires.
LINK TO LEARNING
Thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16Handwarmer)shows the precipitation reaction that occurs when the disk in
a chemical hand warmer is flexed.
EXAMPLE 5.6
Heat Flow in an Instant Ice Pack
When solid ammonium nitrate dissolves in water, the solution becomes cold. This is the basis for an “instant
ice pack” (Figure 5.16). When 3.21 g of solid NH NO dissolves in 50.0 g of water at 24.9 °C in a calorimeter, the
4 3
temperature decreases to 20.3 °C.
Calculate the value ofqfor this reaction and explain the meaning of its arithmetic sign. State any assumptions
that you made.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 243
5.2 • Calorimetry 229
FIGURE5.16 An instant cold pack consists of a bag containing solid ammonium nitrate and a second bag of water.
When the bag of water is broken, the pack becomes cold because the dissolution of ammonium nitrate is an
endothermic process that removes thermal energy from the water. The cold pack then removes thermal energy from
your body.
Solution
We assume that the calorimeter prevents heat transfer between the solution and its external environment
(including the calorimeter itself), in which case:
with “rxn” and “soln” used as shorthand for “reaction” and “solution,” respectively.
Assuming also that the specific heat of the solution is the same as that for water, we have:
The positive sign forqindicates that the dissolution is an endothermic process.
Check Your Learning
When a 3.00-g sample of KCl was added to 3.00 102g of water in a coffee cup calorimeter, the temperature
decreased by 1.05 °C. How much heat is involved in the dissolution of the KCl? What assumptions did you
make?
Answer:
1.33 kJ; assume that the calorimeter prevents heat transfer between the solution and its external environment
(including the calorimeter itself) and that the specific heat of the solution is the same as that for water
PAGE: 244
230 5 • Thermochemistry
If the amount of heat absorbed by a calorimeter is too large to neglect or if we require more accurate results,
then we must take into account the heat absorbed both by the solution and by the calorimeter.
The calorimeters described are designed to operate at constant (atmospheric) pressure and are convenient to
measure heat flow accompanying processes that occur in solution. A different type of calorimeter that operates
at constant volume, colloquially known as abomb calorimeter, is used to measure the energy produced by
reactions that yield large amounts of heat and gaseous products, such as combustion reactions. (The term
“bomb” comes from the observation that these reactions can be vigorous enough to resemble explosions that
would damage other calorimeters.) This type of calorimeter consists of a robust steel container (the “bomb”)
that contains the reactants and is itself submerged in water (Figure 5.17). The sample is placed in the bomb,
which is then filled with oxygen at high pressure. A small electrical spark is used to ignite the sample. The
energy produced by the reaction is absorbed by the steel bomb and the surrounding water. The temperature
increase is measured and, along with the known heat capacity of the calorimeter, is used to calculate the
energy produced by the reaction. Bomb calorimeters require calibration to determine the heat capacity of the
calorimeter and ensure accurate results. The calibration is accomplished using a reaction with a knownq,
such as a measured quantity of benzoic acid ignited by a spark from a nickel fuse wire that is weighed before
and after the reaction. The temperature change produced by the known reaction is used to determine the heat
capacity of the calorimeter. The calibration is generally performed each time before the calorimeter is used to
gather research data.
FIGURE5.17 (a) A bomb calorimeter is used to measure heat produced by reactions involving gaseous reactants
or products, such as combustion. (b) The reactants are contained in the gas-tight “bomb,” which is submerged in
water and surrounded by insulating materials. (credit a: modification of work by “Harbor1”/Wikimedia commons)
LINK TO LEARNING
Click on thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16BombCal)to view how a bomb calorimeter is prepared for action.
Thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16Calorcalcs)shows calorimetric calculations using sample data.
EXAMPLE 5.7
Bomb Calorimetry
When 3.12 g of glucose, C H O , is burned in a bomb calorimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter
6 12 6
increases from 23.8 °C to 35.6 °C. The calorimeter contains 775 g of water, and the bomb itself has a heat
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 245
5.2 • Calorimetry 231
capacity of 893 J/°C. How much heat was produced by the combustion of the glucose sample?
Solution
The combustion produces heat that is primarily absorbed by the water and the bomb. (The amounts of heat
absorbed by the reaction products and the unreacted excess oxygen are relatively small and dealing with them
is beyond the scope of this text. We will neglect them in our calculations.)
The heat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the water and the bomb:
This reaction released 48.7 kJ of heat when 3.12 g of glucose was burned.
Check Your Learning
When 0.963 g of benzene, C H , is burned in a bomb calorimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter increases
6 6
by 8.39 °C. The bomb has a heat capacity of 784 J/°C and is submerged in 925 mL of water. How much heat was
produced by the combustion of the benzene sample?
Answer:
q = –39.0 kJ (the reaction produced 39.0 kJ of heat)
rx
Since the first one was constructed in 1899, 35 calorimeters have been built to measure the heat produced by a
2
living person. These whole-body calorimeters of various designs are large enough to hold an individual
human being. More recently, whole-room calorimeters allow for relatively normal activities to be performed,
and these calorimeters generate data that more closely reflect the real world. These calorimeters are used to
measure the metabolism of individuals under different environmental conditions, different dietary regimes,
and with different health conditions, such as diabetes.
For example Carla Prado's team at University of Alberta undertook whole-body calorimetry to understand the
energy expenditures of women who had recently given birth. Studies like this help develop better
recommendations and regimens for nutrition, exercise, and general wellbeing during this period of significant
physiological change. In humans, metabolism is typically measured in Calories per day. Anutritional calorie
(Calorie)is the energy unit used to quantify the amount of energy derived from the metabolism of foods; one
Calorie is equal to 1000 calories (1 kcal), the amount of energy needed to heat 1 kg of water by 1 °C.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Measuring Nutritional Calories
In your day-to-day life, you may be more familiar with energy being given in Calories, or nutritional
calories, which are used to quantify the amount of energy in foods. One calorie (cal) = exactly 4.184 joules,
and one Calorie (note the capitalization) = 1000 cal, or 1 kcal. (This is approximately the amount of energy
needed to heat 1 kg of water by 1 °C.)
The macronutrients in food are proteins, carbohydrates, and fats or oils. Proteins provide about 4 Calories
per gram, carbohydrates also provide about 4 Calories per gram, and fats and oils provide about 9 Calories/
g. Nutritional labels on food packages show the caloric content of one serving of the food, as well as the
breakdown into Calories from each of the three macronutrients (Figure 5.18).
2 Francis D. Reardon et al. “The Snellen human calorimeter revisited, re-engineered and upgraded: Design and performance
characteristics.”Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing8 (2006)721–28, http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/
s11517-006-0086-5.
PAGE: 246
232 5 • Thermochemistry
FIGURE5.18 (a) Macaroni and cheese contain energy in the form of the macronutrients in the food. (b) The
food’s nutritional information is shown on the package label. In the US, the energy content is given in Calories
(per serving); the rest of the world usually uses kilojoules. (credit a: modification of work by “Rex Roof”/Flickr)
For the example shown in (b), the total energy per 228-g portion is calculated by:
So, you can use food labels to count your Calories. But where do the values come from? And how accurate
are they? The caloric content of foods can be determined by using bomb calorimetry; that is, by burning
the food and measuring the energy it contains. A sample of food is weighed, mixed in a blender, freeze-
dried, ground into powder, and formed into a pellet. The pellet is burned inside a bomb calorimeter, and
the measured temperature change is converted into energy per gram of food.
Today, the caloric content on food labels is derived using a method called theAtwater systemthat uses the
average caloric content of the different chemical constituents of food, protein, carbohydrate, and fats. The
average amounts are those given in the equation and are derived from the various results given by bomb
calorimetry of whole foods. The carbohydrate amount is discounted a certain amount for the fiber content,
which is indigestible carbohydrate. To determine the energy content of a food, the quantities of
carbohydrate, protein, and fat are each multiplied by the average Calories per gram for each and the
products summed to obtain the total energy.
LINK TO LEARNING
Click on thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16USDA)to access the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) National
Nutrient Database, containing nutritional information on over 8000 foods.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 247
5.3 • Enthalpy 233
5.3 Enthalpy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the first law of thermodynamics
• Define enthalpy and explain its classification as a state function
• Write and balance thermochemical equations
• Calculate enthalpy changes for various chemical reactions
• Explain Hess’s law and use it to compute reaction enthalpies
Thermochemistry is a branch ofchemical thermodynamics, the science that deals with the relationships
between heat, work, and other forms of energy in the context of chemical and physical processes. As we
concentrate on thermochemistry in this chapter, we need to consider some widely used concepts of
thermodynamics.
Substances act as reservoirs of energy, meaning that energy can be added to them or removed from them.
Energy is stored in a substance when the kinetic energy of its atoms or molecules is raised. The greater kinetic
energy may be in the form of increased translations (travel or straight-line motions), vibrations, or rotations of
the atoms or molecules. When thermal energy is lost, the intensities of these motions decrease and the kinetic
energy falls. The total of all possible kinds of energy present in a substance is called theinternal energy (U),
sometimes symbolized asE.
As a system undergoes a change, its internal energy can change, and energy can be transferred from the
system to the surroundings, or from the surroundings to the system. Energy is transferred into a system when
it absorbs heat (q) from the surroundings or when the surroundings do work (w) on the system. For example,
energy is transferred into room-temperature metal wire if it is immersed in hot water (the wire absorbs heat
from the water), or if you rapidly bend the wire back and forth (the wire becomes warmer because of the work
done on it). Both processes increase the internal energy of the wire, which is reflected in an increase in the
wire’s temperature. Conversely, energy is transferred out of a system when heat is lost from the system, or
when the system does work on the surroundings.
The relationship between internal energy, heat, and work can be represented by the equation:
as shown inFigure 5.19. This is one version of thefirst law of thermodynamics, and it shows that the internal
energy of a system changes through heat flow into or out of the system (positiveqis heat flow in; negativeqis
heat flow out) or work done on or by the system. The work,w, is positive if it is done on the system and negative
if it is done by the system.
FIGURE5.19 The internal energy,U, of a system can be changed by heat flow and work. If heat flows into the
system,q , or work is done on the system,w , its internal energy increases, ΔU> 0. If heat flows out of the system,
in on
q , or work is done by the system,w , its internal energy decreases, ΔU< 0.
out by
A type of work calledexpansion work(or pressure-volume work) occurs when a system pushes back the
PAGE: 248
234 5 • Thermochemistry
surroundings against a restraining pressure, or when the surroundings compress the system. An example of
this occurs during the operation of an internal combustion engine. The reaction of gasoline and oxygen is
exothermic. Some of this energy is given off as heat, and some does work pushing the piston in the cylinder.
The substances involved in the reaction are the system, and the engine and the rest of the universe are the
surroundings. The system loses energy by both heating and doing work on the surroundings, and its internal
energy decreases. (The engine is able to keep the car moving because this process is repeated many times per
second while the engine is running.) We will consider how to determine the amount of work involved in a
chemical or physical change in the chapter on thermodynamics.
LINK TO LEARNING
This view ofan internal combustion engine(http://openstax.org/l/16combustion)illustrates the conversion of
energy produced by the exothermic combustion reaction of a fuel such as gasoline into energy of motion.
As discussed, the relationship between internal energy, heat, and work can be represented as ΔU=q+w.
Internal energy is an example of astate function(or state variable), whereas heat and work are not state
functions. The value of a state function depends only on the state that a system is in, and not on how that state
is reached. If a quantity is not a state function, then its valuedoesdepend on how the state is reached. An
example of a state function is altitude or elevation. If you stand on the summit of Mt. Kilimanjaro, you are at an
altitude of 5895 m, and it does not matter whether you hiked there or parachuted there. The distance you
traveled to the top of Kilimanjaro, however, is not a state function. You could climb to the summit by a direct
route or by a more roundabout, circuitous path (Figure 5.20). The distances traveled would differ (distance is
not a state function) but the elevation reached would be the same (altitude is a state function).
FIGURE5.20 Paths X and Y represent two different routes to the summit of Mt. Kilimanjaro. Both have the same
change in elevation (altitude or elevation on a mountain is a state function; it does not depend on path), but they
have very different distances traveled (distance walked is not a state function; it depends on the path). (credit:
modification of work by Paul Shaffner)
Chemists ordinarily use a property known asenthalpy (H)to describe the thermodynamics of chemical and
physical processes. Enthalpy is defined as the sum of a system’s internal energy (U) and the mathematical
product of its pressure (P) and volume (V):
Enthalpy is also a state function. Enthalpy values for specific substances cannot be measured directly; only
enthalpychangesfor chemical or physical processes can be determined. For processes that take place at
constant pressure (a common condition for many chemical and physical changes), theenthalpy change (ΔH)
is:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 249
5.3 • Enthalpy 235
The mathematical productPΔVrepresents work (w), namely, expansion or pressure-volume work as noted. By
their definitions, the arithmetic signs of ΔVandwwill always be opposite:
Substituting this equation and the definition of internal energy into the enthalpy-change equation yields:
whereq is the heat of reaction under conditions of constant pressure.
p
And so, if a chemical or physical process is carried out at constant pressure with the only work done caused by
expansion or contraction, then the heat flow (q) and enthalpy change (ΔH) for the process are equal.
p
The heat given off when you operate a Bunsen burner is equal to the enthalpy change of the methane
combustion reaction that takes place, since it occurs at the essentially constant pressure of the atmosphere. On
the other hand, the heat produced by a reaction measured in a bomb calorimeter (Figure 5.17) is not equal to
ΔHbecause the closed, constant-volume metal container prevents the pressure from remaining constant (it
may increase or decrease if the reaction yields increased or decreased amounts of gaseous species). Chemists
usually perform experiments under normal atmospheric conditions, at constant external pressure withq=
ΔH, which makes enthalpy the most convenient choice for determining heat changes for chemical reactions.
The following conventions apply when using ΔH:
• A negative value of an enthalpy change, ΔH< 0, indicates an exothermic reaction; a positive value, ΔH> 0,
indicates an endothermic reaction. If the direction of a chemical equation is reversed, the arithmetic sign
of its ΔHis changed (a process that is endothermic in one direction is exothermic in the opposite
direction).
• Chemists use a thermochemical equation to represent the changes in both matter and energy. In a
thermochemical equation, the enthalpy change of a reaction is shown as a ΔHvalue following the equation
for the reaction. This ΔHvalue indicates the amount of heat associated with the reaction involving the
number of moles of reactants and productsas shown in the chemical equation. For example, consider this
equation:
This equation indicates that when 1 mole of hydrogen gas and mole of oxygen gas at some temperature
and pressure change to 1 mole of liquid water at the same temperature and pressure, 286 kJ of heat are
released to the surroundings. If the coefficients of the chemical equation are multiplied by some factor, the
enthalpy change must be multiplied by that same factor (ΔHis an extensive property):
• The enthalpy change of a reaction depends on the physical states of the reactants and products, so these
must be shown. For example, when 1 mole of hydrogen gas and mole of oxygen gas change to 1 mole of
liquid water at the same temperature and pressure, 286 kJ of heat are released. If gaseous water forms,
only 242 kJ of heat are released.
PAGE: 250
236 5 • Thermochemistry
EXAMPLE 5.8
Writing Thermochemical Equations
When 0.0500 mol of HCl(aq) reacts with 0.0500 mol of NaOH(aq) to form 0.0500 mol of NaCl(aq), 2.9 kJ of heat
are produced. Write a balanced thermochemical equation for the reaction of one mole of HCl.
Solution
For the reaction of 0.0500 mol acid (HCl),q= −2.9 kJ. The reactants are provided in stoichiometric amounts
(same molar ratio as in the balanced equation), and so the amount of acid may be used to calculate a molar
enthalpy change. Since ΔHis an extensive property, it is proportional to the amount of acid neutralized:
The thermochemical equation is then
Check Your Learning
When 1.34 g Zn(s) reacts with 60.0 mL of 0.750 M HCl(aq), 3.14 kJ of heat are produced. Determine the
enthalpy change per mole of zinc reacting for the reaction:
Answer:
ΔH= −153 kJ
Be sure to take both stoichiometry and limiting reactants into account when determining the ΔHfor a
chemical reaction.
EXAMPLE 5.9
Writing Thermochemical Equations
A gummy bear contains 2.67 g sucrose, C H O . When it reacts with 7.19 g potassium chlorate, KClO , 43.7
12 22 11 3
kJ of heat are produced. Write a thermochemical equation for the reaction of one mole of sucrose:
Solution
Unlike the previous example exercise, this one does not involve the reaction of stoichiometric amounts of
reactants, and so thelimiting reactantmust be identified (it limits the yield of the reaction and the amount of
thermal energy produced or consumed).
The provided amounts of the two reactants are
The provided molar ratio of perchlorate-to-sucrose is then
The balanced equation indicates 8 mol KClO are required for reaction with 1 mol C H O . Since the
3 12 22 11
provided amount of KClO is less than the stoichiometric amount, it is the limiting reactant and may be used to
3
compute the enthalpy change:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 251
5.3 • Enthalpy 237
Because the equation, as written, represents the reaction of 8 mol KClO , the enthalpy change is
3
The enthalpy change for this reaction is −5960 kJ, and the thermochemical equation is:
Check Your Learning
When 1.42 g of iron reacts with 1.80 g of chlorine, 3.22 g of FeCl (s) and 8.60 kJ of heat is produced. What is the
2
enthalpy change for the reaction when 1 mole of FeCl (s) is produced?
2
Answer:
ΔH= −338 kJ
Enthalpy changes are typically tabulated for reactions in which both the reactants and products are at the
same conditions. Astandard stateis a commonly accepted set of conditions used as a reference point for the
determination of properties under other different conditions. For chemists, the IUPAC standard state refers to
materials under a pressure of 1 bar and solutions at 1 M, and does not specify a temperature. Many
thermochemical tables list values with a standard state of 1 atm. Because the ΔHof a reaction changes very
little with such small changes in pressure (1 bar = 0.987 atm), ΔHvalues (except for the most precisely
measured values) are essentially the same under both sets of standard conditions. We will include a
superscripted “o” in the enthalpy change symbol to designate standard state. Since the usual (but not
technically standard) temperature is 298.15 K, this temperature will be assumed unless some other
temperature is specified. Thus, the symbol is used to indicate an enthalpy change for a process
occurring under these conditions. (The symbol ΔHis used to indicate an enthalpy change for a reaction
occurring under nonstandard conditions.)
The enthalpy changes for many types of chemical and physical processes are available in the reference
literature, including those for combustion reactions, phase transitions, and formation reactions. As we discuss
these quantities, it is important to pay attention to theextensivenature of enthalpy and enthalpy changes.
Since the enthalpy change for a given reaction is proportional to the amounts of substances involved, it may be
reported on that basis (i.e., as the ΔHfor specific amounts of reactants). However, we often find it more useful
to divide one extensive property (ΔH) by another (amount of substance), and report a per-amountintensive
value of ΔH, often “normalized” to a per-mole basis. (Note that this is similar to determining the intensive
property specific heat from the extensive property heat capacity, as seen previously.)
Standard Enthalpy of Combustion
Standard enthalpy of combustion is the enthalpy change when 1 mole of a substance burns
(combines vigorously with oxygen) under standard state conditions; it is sometimes called “heat of
combustion.” For example, the enthalpy of combustion of ethanol, −1366.8 kJ/mol, is the amount of heat
produced when one mole of ethanol undergoes complete combustion at 25 °C and 1 atmosphere pressure,
yielding products also at 25 °C and 1 atm.
Enthalpies of combustion for many substances have been measured; a few of these are listed inTable 5.2.
Many readily available substances with large enthalpies of combustion are used as fuels, including hydrogen,
carbon (as coal or charcoal), andhydrocarbons(compounds containing only hydrogen and carbon), such as
methane, propane, and the major components of gasoline.
PAGE: 252
238 5 • Thermochemistry
Standard Molar Enthalpies of Combustion
Enthalpy of Combustion,
Substance Combustion Reaction
carbon −393.5
hydrogen −285.8
magnesium −601.6
sulfur −296.8
carbon
−283.0
monoxide
methane −890.8
acetylene −1301.1
ethanol −1366.8
methanol −726.1
isooctane −5461
TABLE5.2
EXAMPLE 5.10
Using Enthalpy of Combustion
AsFigure 5.21suggests, the combustion of gasoline is a highly exothermic process. Let us determine the
approximate amount of heat produced by burning 1.00 L of gasoline, assuming the enthalpy of combustion of
gasoline is the same as that of isooctane, a common component of gasoline. The density of isooctane is 0.692
g/mL.
FIGURE5.21 The combustion of gasoline is very exothermic. (credit: modification of work by “AlexEagle”/Flickr)
Solution
Starting with a known amount (1.00 L of isooctane), we can perform conversions between units until we arrive
at the desired amount of heat or energy. The enthalpy of combustion of isooctane provides one of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 253
5.3 • Enthalpy 239
necessary conversions.Table 5.2gives this value as −5460 kJ per 1 mole of isooctane (C H ).
8 18
Using these data,
The combustion of 1.00 L of isooctane produces 33,100 kJ of heat. (This amount of energy is enough to melt
99.2 kg, or about 218 lbs, of ice.)
Note: If you do this calculation one step at a time, you would find:
Check Your Learning
How much heat is produced by the combustion of 125 g of acetylene?
Answer:
6.25 103kJ
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Emerging Algae-Based Energy Technologies (Biofuels)
As reserves of fossil fuels diminish and become more costly to extract, the search is ongoing for
replacement fuel sources for the future. Among the most promising biofuels are those derived from algae
(Figure 5.22). The species of algae used are nontoxic, biodegradable, and among the world’s fastest growing
organisms. About 50% of algal weight is oil, which can be readily converted into fuel such as biodiesel.
Algae can yield 26,000 gallons ofbiofuelper hectare—much more energy per acre than other crops. Some
strains of algae can flourish in brackish water that is not usable for growing other crops. Algae can produce
biodiesel, biogasoline, ethanol, butanol, methane, and even jet fuel.
FIGURE5.22 (a) Tiny algal organisms can be (b) grown in large quantities and eventually (c) turned into a
useful fuel such as biodiesel. (credit a: modification of work by Micah Sittig; credit b: modification of work by
Robert Kerton; credit c: modification of work by John F. Williams)
PAGE: 254
240 5 • Thermochemistry
According to the US Department of Energy, only 39,000 square kilometers (about 0.4% of the land mass of
the US or less than of the area used to grow corn) can produce enough algal fuel to replace all the
petroleum-based fuel used in the US. The cost of algal fuels is becoming more competitive—for instance,
3
the US Air Force is producing jet fuel from algae at a total cost of under $5 per gallon. The process used to
produce algal fuel is as follows: grow the algae (which use sunlight as their energy source and CO as a raw
2
material); harvest the algae; extract the fuel compounds (or precursor compounds); process as necessary
(e.g., perform a transesterification reaction to make biodiesel); purify; and distribute (Figure 5.23).
FIGURE5.23 Algae convert sunlight and carbon dioxide into oil that is harvested, extracted, purified, and
transformed into a variety of renewable fuels.
LINK TO LEARNING
Clickhere(http://openstax.org/l/16biofuel)to learn more about the process of creating algae biofuel.
Standard Enthalpy of Formation
Astandard enthalpy of formation is an enthalpy change for a reaction in which exactly 1 mole of a pure
substance is formed from free elements in their most stable states under standard state conditions. These
values are especially useful for computing or predicting enthalpy changes for chemical reactions that are
impractical or dangerous to carry out, or for processes for which it is difficult to make measurements. If we
have values for the appropriate standard enthalpies of formation, we can determine the enthalpy change for
any reaction, which we will practice in the next section on Hess’s law.
The standard enthalpy of formation of CO (g) is −393.5 kJ/mol. This is the enthalpy change for the exothermic
2
reaction:
starting with the reactants at a pressure of 1 atm and 25 °C (with the carbon present as graphite, the most
stable form of carbon under these conditions) and ending with one mole of CO , also at 1 atm and 25 °C. For
2
nitrogen dioxide, NO (g), is 33.2 kJ/mol. This is the enthalpy change for the reaction:
2
A reaction equation with mole of N and 1 mole of O is correct in this case because the standard enthalpy of
2 2
formation always refers to 1 mole of product, NO (g).
2
You will find a table of standard enthalpies of formation of many common substances inAppendix G. These
values indicate that formation reactions range from highly exothermic (such as −2984 kJ/mol for the
formation of P O ) to strongly endothermic (such as +226.7 kJ/mol for the formation of acetylene, C H ). By
4 10 2 2
definition, the standard enthalpy of formation of an element in its most stable form is equal to zero under
3 For more on algal fuel, see http://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/feb/13/algae-solve-pentagon-fuel-problem.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 255
5.3 • Enthalpy 241
standard conditions, which is 1 atm for gases and 1 M for solutions.
EXAMPLE 5.11
Evaluating an Enthalpy of Formation
Ozone, O (g), forms from oxygen, O (g), by an endothermic process. Ultraviolet radiation is the source of the
3 2
energy that drives this reaction in the upper atmosphere. Assuming that both the reactants and products of the
reaction are in their standard states, determine the standard enthalpy of formation, of ozone from the
following information:
Solution
is the enthalpy change for the formation of one mole of a substance in its standard state from the
elements in their standard states. Thus, for O (g) is the enthalpy change for the reaction:
3
For the formation of 2 mol of O (g), This ratio, can be used as a conversion factor
3
to find the heat produced when 1 mole of O (g) is formed, which is the enthalpy of formation for O (g):
3 3
Therefore,
Check Your Learning
Hydrogen gas, H , reacts explosively with gaseous chlorine, Cl , to form hydrogen chloride, HCl(g). What is the
2 2
enthalpy change for the reaction of 1 mole of H (g) with 1 mole of Cl (g) if both the reactants and products are
2 2
at standard state conditions? The standard enthalpy of formation of HCl(g) is −92.3 kJ/mol.
Answer:
For the reaction
EXAMPLE 5.12
Writing Reaction Equations for
Write the heat of formation reaction equations for:
(a) C H OH(l)
2 5
(b) Ca (PO ) (s)
3 42
Solution
Remembering that reaction equations are for forming 1 mole of the compound from its constituent
elements under standard conditions, we have:
(a)
(b)
Note: The standard state of carbon is graphite, and phosphorus exists as P .
4
Check Your Learning
Write the heat of formation reaction equations for:
PAGE: 256
242 5 • Thermochemistry
(a) C H OC H (l)
2 5 2 5
(b) Na CO (s)
2 3
Answer:
(a) (b)
Hess’s Law
There are two ways to determine the amount of heat involved in a chemical change: measure it experimentally,
or calculate it from other experimentally determined enthalpy changes. Some reactions are difficult, if not
impossible, to investigate and make accurate measurements for experimentally. And even when a reaction is
not hard to perform or measure, it is convenient to be able to determine the heat involved in a reaction without
having to perform an experiment.
This type of calculation usually involves the use ofHess’s law, which states:If a process can be written as the
sum of several stepwise processes, the enthalpy change of the total process equals the sum of the enthalpy
changes of the various steps. Hess’s law is valid because enthalpy is a state function: Enthalpy changes depend
only on where a chemical process starts and ends, but not on the path it takes from start to finish. For example,
we can think of the reaction of carbon with oxygen to form carbon dioxide as occurring either directly or by a
two-step process. The direct process is written:
In the two-step process, first carbon monoxide is formed:
Then, carbon monoxide reacts further to form carbon dioxide:
The equation describing the overall reaction is the sum of these two chemical changes:
Because the CO produced in Step 1 is consumed in Step 2, the net change is:
According to Hess’s law, the enthalpy change of the reaction will equal the sum of the enthalpy changes of the
steps.
The result is shown inFigure 5.24. We see that ΔHof the overall reaction is the same whether it occurs in one
step or two. This finding (overall ΔHfor the reaction = sum of ΔHvalues for reaction “steps” in the overall
reaction) is true in general for chemical and physical processes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 257
5.3 • Enthalpy 243
FIGURE5.24 The formation of CO (g) from its elements can be thought of as occurring in two steps, which sum to
2
the overall reaction, as described by Hess’s law. The horizontal blue lines represent enthalpies. For an exothermic
process, the products are at lower enthalpy than are the reactants.
Before we further practice using Hess’s law, let us recall two important features of ΔH.
1. ΔHis directly proportional to the quantities of reactants or products. For example, the enthalpy change for
the reaction forming 1 mole of NO (g) is +33.2 kJ:
2
When 2 moles of NO (twice as much) are formed, the ΔHwill be twice as large:
2
In general, if we multiply or divide an equation by a number, then the enthalpy change should also be
multiplied or divided by the same number.
2. ΔHfor a reaction in one direction is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to ΔHfor the reaction in the
reverse direction. For example, given that:
Then, for the “reverse” reaction, the enthalpy change is also “reversed”:
EXAMPLE 5.13
Stepwise Calculation of Using Hess’s Law
Determine the enthalpy of formation, of FeCl (s) from the enthalpy changes of the following two-step
3
process that occurs under standard state conditions:
Solution
We are trying to find the standard enthalpy of formation of FeCl (s), which is equal to ΔH° for the reaction:
3
PAGE: 258
244 5 • Thermochemistry
Looking at the reactions, we see that the reaction for which we want to find ΔH° is the sum of the two reactions
with known ΔHvalues, so we must sum their ΔHs:
The enthalpy of formation, of FeCl (s) is −399.5 kJ/mol.
3
Check Your Learning
Calculate ΔHfor the process:
from the following information:
Answer:
66.4 kJ
Here is a less straightforward example that illustrates the thought process involved in solving many Hess’s law
problems. It shows how we can find many standard enthalpies of formation (and other values of ΔH) if they are
difficult to determine experimentally.
EXAMPLE 5.14
A More Challenging Problem Using Hess’s Law
Chlorine monofluoride can react with fluorine to form chlorine trifluoride:
(i)
Use the reactions here to determine the ΔH° for reaction(i):
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Solution
Our goal is to manipulate and combine reactions(ii),(iii), and(iv)such that they add up to reaction(i). Going
from left to right in(i), we first see that ClF(g) is needed as a reactant. This can be obtained by multiplying
reaction(iii)by which means that the ΔH° change is also multiplied by
Next, we see that F is also needed as a reactant. To get this, reverse and halve reaction(ii), which means that
2
the ΔH° changes sign and is halved:
To get ClF as a product, reverse(iv), changing the sign of ΔH°:
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 259
5.3 • Enthalpy 245
Now check to make sure that these reactions add up to the reaction we want:
Reactants and cancel out product O ; product cancels reactant and reactant
2
is cancelled by products and OF . This leaves only reactants ClF(g) and F (g) and product ClF (g), which
2 2 3
are what we want. Since summing these three modified reactions yields the reaction of interest, summing the
three modified ΔH° values will give the desired ΔH°:
Check Your Learning
Aluminum chloride can be formed from its elements:
(i)
Use the reactions here to determine the ΔH° for reaction(i):
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Answer:
−1407 kJ
We also can useHess’s lawto determine the enthalpy change of any reaction if the corresponding enthalpies of
formation of the reactants and products are available. The stepwise reactions we consider are: (i)
decompositions of the reactants into their component elements (for which the enthalpy changes are
proportional to the negative of the enthalpies of formation of the reactants), followed by (ii) re-combinations of
the elements to give the products (with the enthalpy changes proportional to the enthalpies of formation of the
products). The standard enthalpy change of the overall reaction is therefore equal to: (ii) the sum of the
standard enthalpies of formation of all the products plus (i) the sum of the negatives of the standard enthalpies
of formation of the reactants. This is usually rearranged slightly to be written as follows, with ∑ representing
“the sum of” andnstanding for the stoichiometric coefficients:
The following example shows in detail why this equation is valid, and how to use it to calculate the enthalpy
change for a reaction of interest.
EXAMPLE 5.15
Using Hess’s Law
What is the standard enthalpy change for the reaction:
PAGE: 260
246 5 • Thermochemistry
Solution: Using the Equation
Use the special form of Hess’s law given previously, and values fromAppendix G:
Solution: Supporting Why the General Equation Is Valid
Alternatively, we can write this reaction as the sum of the decompositions of 3NO (g) and 1H O(l) into their
2 2
constituent elements, and the formation of 2HNO (aq) and 1NO(g) from their constituent elements. Writing out
3
these reactions, and noting their relationships to the values for these compounds (fromAppendix G), we
have:
Summing these reaction equations gives the reaction we are interested in:
Summing their enthalpy changes gives the value we want to determine:
So the standard enthalpy change for this reaction is ΔH° = −138.4 kJ.
Note that this result was obtained by (1) multiplying the of each product by its stoichiometric coefficient
and summing those values, (2) multiplying the of each reactant by its stoichiometric coefficient and
summing those values, and then (3) subtracting the result found in (2) from the result found in (1). This is also
the procedure in using the general equation, as shown.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of ethanol, C H OH(l), when H O(l) and CO (g) are formed. Use the
2 5 2 2
following enthalpies of formation: C H OH(l), −278 kJ/mol; H O(l), −286 kJ/mol; and CO (g), −394 kJ/mol.
2 5 2 2
Answer:
−1368 kJ/mol
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 261
5 • Key Terms 247
Key Terms
bomb calorimeter device designed to measure the joule (J) SI unit of energy; 1 joule is the kinetic
energy change for processes occurring under energy of an object with a mass of 2 kilograms
conditions of constant volume; commonly used moving with a velocity of 1 meter per second, 1 J
for reactions involving solid and gaseous = 1 kg m2/s and 4.184 J = 1 cal
reactants or products kinetic energy energy of a moving body, in joules,
calorie (cal) unit of heat or other energy; the equal to (wherem= mass andv= velocity)
amount of energy required to raise 1 gram of nutritional calorie (Calorie) unit used for
water by 1 degree Celsius; 1 cal is defined as quantifying energy provided by digestion of
4.184 J foods, defined as 1000 cal or 1 kcal
calorimeter device used to measure the amount of potential energy energy of a particle or system of
heat absorbed or released in a chemical or particles derived from relative position,
physical process composition, or condition
calorimetry process of measuring the amount of specific heat capacity (c) intensive property of a
heat involved in a chemical or physical process substance that represents the quantity of heat
chemical thermodynamics area of science that required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of the
deals with the relationships between heat, work, substance by 1 degree Celsius (or 1 kelvin)
and all forms of energy associated with chemical standard enthalpy of combustion heat
and physical processes released when one mole of a compound
endothermic process chemical reaction or undergoes complete combustion under standard
physical change that absorbs heat conditions
energy capacity to supply heat or do work standard enthalpy of formation enthalpy
enthalpy (H) sum of a system’s internal energy and
change of a chemical reaction in which 1 mole of
the mathematical product of its pressure and
a pure substance is formed from its elements in
volume
their most stable states under standard state
enthalpy change (ΔH) heat released or absorbed
conditions
by a system under constant pressure during a
standard state set of physical conditions as
chemical or physical process
accepted as common reference conditions for
exothermic process chemical reaction or physical
reporting thermodynamic properties; 1 bar of
change that releases heat
pressure, and solutions at 1 molar
expansion work (pressure-volume work) work
concentrations, usually at a temperature of
done as a system expands or contracts against
298.15 K
external pressure
state function property depending only on the
first law of thermodynamics internal energy of a
state of a system, and not the path taken to reach
system changes due to heat flow in or out of the
that state
system or work done on or by the system
surroundings all matter other than the system
heat (q) transfer of thermal energy between two
being studied
bodies
system portion of matter undergoing a chemical or
heat capacity (C) extensive property of a body of
physical change being studied
matter that represents the quantity of heat
temperature intensive property of matter that is a
required to increase its temperature by 1 degree
quantitative measure of “hotness” and “coldness”
Celsius (or 1 kelvin)
thermal energy kinetic energy associated with the
Hess’s law if a process can be represented as the
random motion of atoms and molecules
sum of several steps, the enthalpy change of the
thermochemistry study of measuring the amount
process equals the sum of the enthalpy changes
of heat absorbed or released during a chemical
of the steps
reaction or a physical change
hydrocarbon compound composed only of
work (w) energy transfer due to changes in
hydrogen and carbon; the major component of
external, macroscopic variables such as pressure
fossil fuels
and volume; or causing matter to move against an
internal energy (U) total of all possible kinds of
opposing force
energy present in a substance or substances
PAGE: 262
248 5 • Key Equations
Key Equations
Summary
5.1Energy Basics and the masses of the system and surroundings.
These measured quantities are then used to
Energy is the capacity to supply heat or do work
compute the amount of heat produced or consumed
(applying a force to move matter). Kinetic energy
in the process using known mathematical relations.
(KE) is the energy of motion; potential energy is
energy due to relative position, composition, or Calorimeters are designed to minimize energy
condition. When energy is converted from one form exchange between their contents and the external
into another, energy is neither created nor destroyed environment. They range from simple coffee cup
(law of conservation of energy or first law of calorimeters used by introductory chemistry
thermodynamics). students to sophisticated bomb calorimeters used to
determine the energy content of food.
The thermal energy of matter is due to the kinetic
energies of its constituent atoms or molecules. 5.3Enthalpy
Temperature is an intensive property of matter
If a chemical change is carried out at constant
reflecting hotness or coldness that increases as the
pressure and the only work done is caused by
average kinetic energy increases. Heat is the
expansion or contraction,qfor the change is called
transfer of thermal energy between objects at
the enthalpy change with the symbol ΔH, or for
different temperatures. Chemical and physical
reactions occurring under standard state conditions
processes can absorb heat (endothermic) or release
at 298 K. The value of ΔHfor a reaction in one
heat (exothermic). The SI unit of energy, heat, and
direction is equal in magnitude, but opposite in sign,
work is the joule (J).
to ΔHfor the reaction in the opposite direction, and
Specific heat and heat capacity are measures of the ΔHis directly proportional to the quantity of
energy needed to change the temperature of a reactants and products. The standard enthalpy of
substance or object. The amount of heat absorbed or formation, is the enthalpy change
released by a substance depends directly on the type accompanying the formation of 1 mole of a
of substance, its mass, and the temperature change substance from the elements in their most stable
it undergoes. states at 1 bar and 298.15 K. If the enthalpies of
formation are available for the reactants and
5.2Calorimetry
products of a reaction, the enthalpy change can be
Calorimetry is used to measure the amount of calculated using Hess’s law: If a process can be
thermal energy transferred in a chemical or physical written as the sum of several stepwise processes, the
process. This requires careful measurement of the enthalpy change of the total process equals the sum
temperature change that occurs during the process of the enthalpy changes of the various steps.
Exercises
5.1Energy Basics
1. A burning match and a bonfire may have the same temperature, yet you would not sit around a burning
match on a fall evening to stay warm. Why not?
2. Prepare a table identifying several energy transitions that take place during the typical operation of an
automobile.
3. Explain the difference between heat capacity and specific heat of a substance.
4. Calculate the heat capacity, in joules and in calories per degree, of the following:
(a) 28.4 g of water
(b) 1.00 oz of lead
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 263
5 • Exercises 249
5. Calculate the heat capacity, in joules and in calories per degree, of the following:
(a) 45.8 g of nitrogen gas
(b) 1.00 pound of aluminum metal
6. How much heat, in joules and in calories, must be added to a 75.0–g iron block with a specific heat of
0.449 J/g °C to increase its temperature from 25 °C to its melting temperature of 1535 °C?
7. How much heat, in joules and in calories, is required to heat a 28.4-g (1-oz) ice cube from −23.0 °C to −1.0
°C?
8. How much would the temperature of 275 g of water increase if 36.5 kJ of heat were added?
9. If 14.5 kJ of heat were added to 485 g of liquid water, how much would its temperature increase?
10. A piece of unknown substance weighs 44.7 g and requires 2110 J to increase its temperature from 23.2 °C
to 89.6 °C.
(a) What is the specific heat of the substance?
(b) If it is one of the substances found inTable 5.1, what is its likely identity?
11. A piece of unknown solid substance weighs 437.2 g, and requires 8460 J to increase its temperature from
19.3 °C to 68.9 °C.
(a) What is the specific heat of the substance?
(b) If it is one of the substances found inTable 5.1, what is its likely identity?
12. An aluminum kettle weighs 1.05 kg.
(a) What is the heat capacity of the kettle?
(b) How much heat is required to increase the temperature of this kettle from 23.0 °C to 99.0 °C?
(c) How much heat is required to heat this kettle from 23.0 °C to 99.0 °C if it contains 1.25 L of water
(density of 0.997 g/mL and a specific heat of 4.184 J/g °C)?
13. Most people find waterbeds uncomfortable unless the water temperature is maintained at about 85 °F.
Unless it is heated, a waterbed that contains 892 L of water cools from 85 °F to 72 °F in 24 hours. Estimate
the amount of electrical energy required over 24 hours, in kWh, to keep the bed from cooling. Note that 1
kilowatt-hour (kWh) = 3.6 106J, and assume that the density of water is 1.0 g/mL (independent of
temperature). What other assumptions did you make? How did they affect your calculated result (i.e., were
they likely to yield “positive” or “negative” errors)?
5.2Calorimetry
14. A 500-mL bottle of water at room temperature and a 2-L bottle of water at the same temperature were
placed in a refrigerator. After 30 minutes, the 500-mL bottle of water had cooled to the temperature of the
refrigerator. An hour later, the 2-L of water had cooled to the same temperature. When asked which
sample of water lost the most heat, one student replied that both bottles lost the same amount of heat
because they started at the same temperature and finished at the same temperature. A second student
thought that the 2-L bottle of water lost more heat because there was more water. A third student believed
that the 500-mL bottle of water lost more heat because it cooled more quickly. A fourth student thought
that it was not possible to tell because we do not know the initial temperature and the final temperature of
the water. Indicate which of these answers is correct and describe the error in each of the other answers.
15. Would the amount of heat measured for the reaction inExample 5.5be greater, lesser, or remain the same
if we used a calorimeter that was a poorer insulator than a coffee cup calorimeter? Explain your answer.
16. Would the amount of heat absorbed by the dissolution inExample 5.6appear greater, lesser, or remain the
same if the experimenter used a calorimeter that was a poorer insulator than a coffee cup calorimeter?
Explain your answer.
17. Would the amount of heat absorbed by the dissolution inExample 5.6appear greater, lesser, or remain the
same if the heat capacity of the calorimeter were taken into account? Explain your answer.
18. How many milliliters of water at 23 °C with a density of 1.00 g/mL must be mixed with 180 mL (about 6 oz)
of coffee at 95 °C so that the resulting combination will have a temperature of 60 °C? Assume that coffee
and water have the same density and the same specific heat.
19. How much will the temperature of a cup (180 g) of coffee at 95 °C be reduced when a 45 g silver spoon
(specific heat 0.24 J/g °C) at 25 °C is placed in the coffee and the two are allowed to reach the same
temperature? Assume that the coffee has the same density and specific heat as water.
PAGE: 264
250 5 • Exercises
20. A 45-g aluminum spoon (specific heat 0.88 J/g °C) at 24 °C is placed in 180 mL (180 g) of coffee at 85 °C
and the temperature of the two become equal.
(a) What is the final temperature when the two become equal? Assume that coffee has the same specific
heat as water.
(b) The first time a student solved this problem she got an answer of 88 °C. Explain why this is clearly an
incorrect answer.
21. The temperature of the cooling water as it leaves the hot engine of an automobile is 240 °F. After it passes
through the radiator it has a temperature of 175 °F. Calculate the amount of heat transferred from the
engine to the surroundings by one gallon of water with a specific heat of 4.184 J/g °C.
22. A 70.0-g piece of metal at 80.0 °C is placed in 100 g of water at 22.0 °C contained in a calorimeter like that
shown inFigure 5.12. The metal and water come to the same temperature at 24.6 °C. How much heat did
the metal give up to the water? What is the specific heat of the metal?
23. If a reaction produces 1.506 kJ of heat, which is trapped in 30.0 g of water initially at 26.5 °C in a
calorimeter like that inFigure 5.12, what is the resulting temperature of the water?
24. A 0.500-g sample of KCl is added to 50.0 g of water in a calorimeter (Figure 5.12). If the temperature
decreases by 1.05 °C, what is the approximate amount of heat involved in the dissolution of the KCl,
assuming the specific heat of the resulting solution is 4.18 J/g °C? Is the reaction exothermic or
endothermic?
25. Dissolving 3.0 g of CaCl (s) in 150.0 g of water in a calorimeter (Figure 5.12) at 22.4 °C causes the
2
temperature to rise to 25.8 °C. What is the approximate amount of heat involved in the dissolution,
assuming the specific heat of the resulting solution is 4.18 J/g °C? Is the reaction exothermic or
endothermic?
26. When 50.0 g of 0.200 M NaCl(aq) at 24.1 °C is added to 100.0 g of 0.100 M AgNO (aq) at 24.1 °C in a
3
calorimeter, the temperature increases to 25.2 °C as AgCl(s) forms. Assuming the specific heat of the
solution and products is 4.20 J/g °C, calculate the approximate amount of heat in joules produced.
27. The addition of 3.15 g of Ba(OH) ·8H O to a solution of 1.52 g of NH SCN in 100 g of water in a calorimeter
2 2 4
caused the temperature to fall by 3.1 °C. Assuming the specific heat of the solution and products is 4.20
J/g °C, calculate the approximate amount of heat absorbed by the reaction, which can be represented by
the following equation:
Ba(OH) ·8H O(s) + 2NH SCN(aq) ⟶ Ba(SCN) (aq) + 2NH (aq) + 10H O(l)
2 2 4 2 3 2
28. The reaction of 50 mL of acid and 50 mL of base described inExample 5.5increased the temperature of
the solution by 6.9 ºC. How much would the temperature have increased if 100 mL of acid and 100 mL of
base had been used in the same calorimeter starting at the same temperature of 22.0 ºC? Explain your
answer.
29. If the 3.21 g of NH NO inExample 5.6were dissolved in 100.0 g of water under the same conditions, how
4 3
much would the temperature change? Explain your answer.
30. When 1.0 g of fructose, C H O (s), a sugar commonly found in fruits, is burned in oxygen in a bomb
6 12 6
calorimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter increases by 1.58 °C. If the heat capacity of the
calorimeter and its contents is 9.90 kJ/°C, what isqfor this combustion?
31. When a 0.740-g sample of trinitrotoluene (TNT), C H N O , is burned in a bomb calorimeter, the
7 5 2 6
temperature increases from 23.4 °C to 26.9 °C. The heat capacity of the calorimeter is 534 J/°C, and it
contains 675 mL of water. How much heat was produced by the combustion of the TNT sample?
32. One method of generating electricity is by burning coal to heat water, which produces steam that drives an
electric generator. To determine the rate at which coal is to be fed into the burner in this type of plant, the
heat of combustion per ton of coal must be determined using a bomb calorimeter. When 1.00 g of coal is
burned in a bomb calorimeter (Figure 5.17), the temperature increases by 1.48 °C. If the heat capacity of
the calorimeter is 21.6 kJ/°C, determine the heat produced by combustion of a ton of coal (2.000 103
pounds).
33. The amount of fat recommended for someone with a daily diet of 2000 Calories is 65 g. What percent of
the calories in this diet would be supplied by this amount of fat if the average number of Calories for fat is
9.1 Calories/g?
34. A teaspoon of the carbohydrate sucrose (common sugar) contains 16 Calories (16 kcal). What is the mass
of one teaspoon of sucrose if the average number of Calories for carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 265
5 • Exercises 251
35. What is the maximum mass of carbohydrate in a 6-oz serving of diet soda that contains less than 1 Calorie
per can if the average number of Calories for carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g?
36. A pint of premium ice cream can contain 1100 Calories. What mass of fat, in grams and pounds, must be
produced in the body to store an extra 1.1 103Calories if the average number of Calories for fat is
9.1 Calories/g?
37. A serving of a breakfast cereal contains 3 g of protein, 18 g of carbohydrates, and 6 g of fat. What is the
Calorie content of a serving of this cereal if the average number of Calories for fat is 9.1 Calories/g, for
carbohydrates is 4.1 Calories/g, and for protein is 4.1 Calories/g?
38. Which is the least expensive source of energy in kilojoules per dollar: a box of breakfast cereal that weighs
32 ounces and costs $4.23, or a liter of isooctane (density, 0.6919 g/mL) that costs $0.45? Compare the
nutritional value of the cereal with the heat produced by combustion of the isooctane under standard
conditions. A 1.0-ounce serving of the cereal provides 130 Calories.
5.3Enthalpy
39. Explain how the heat measured inExample 5.5differs from the enthalpy change for the exothermic
reaction described by the following equation:
40. Using the data in the check your learning section ofExample 5.5, calculate ΔHin kJ/mol of AgNO (aq) for
3
the reaction:
41. Calculate the enthalpy of solution (ΔHfor the dissolution) per mole of NH NO under the conditions
4 3
described inExample 5.6.
42. Calculate ΔHfor the reaction described by the equation. (Hint: Use the value for the approximate amount
of heat absorbed by the reaction that you calculated in a previous exercise.)
43. Calculate the enthalpy of solution (ΔHfor the dissolution) per mole of CaCl (refer toExercise 5.25).
2
44. Although the gas used in an oxyacetylene torch (Figure 5.7) is essentially pure acetylene, the heat
produced by combustion of one mole of acetylene in such a torch is likely not equal to the enthalpy of
combustion of acetylene listed inTable 5.2. Considering the conditions for which the tabulated data are
reported, suggest an explanation.
45. How much heat is produced by burning 4.00 moles of acetylene under standard state conditions?
46. How much heat is produced by combustion of 125 g of methanol under standard state conditions?
47. How many moles of isooctane must be burned to produce 100 kJ of heat under standard state conditions?
48. What mass of carbon monoxide must be burned to produce 175 kJ of heat under standard state
conditions?
49. When 2.50 g of methane burns in oxygen, 125 kJ of heat is produced. What is the enthalpy of combustion
per mole of methane under these conditions?
50. How much heat is produced when 100 mL of 0.250 M HCl (density, 1.00 g/mL) and 200 mL of 0.150 M
NaOH (density, 1.00 g/mL) are mixed?
If both solutions are at the same temperature and the specific heat of the products is 4.19 J/g °C, how
much will the temperature increase? What assumption did you make in your calculation?
51. A sample of 0.562 g of carbon is burned in oxygen in a bomb calorimeter, producing carbon dioxide.
Assume both the reactants and products are under standard state conditions, and that the heat released is
directly proportional to the enthalpy of combustion of graphite. The temperature of the calorimeter
increases from 26.74 °C to 27.93 °C. What is the heat capacity of the calorimeter and its contents?
52. Before the introduction of chlorofluorocarbons, sulfur dioxide (enthalpy of vaporization, 6.00 kcal/mol)
was used in household refrigerators. What mass of SO must be evaporated to remove as much heat as
2
evaporation of 1.00 kg of CCl F (enthalpy of vaporization is 17.4 kJ/mol)?
2 2
The vaporization reactions for SO and CCl F are and
2 2 2
respectively.
53. Homes may be heated by pumping hot water through radiators. What mass of water will provide the same
amount of heat when cooled from 95.0 to 35.0 °C, as the heat provided when 100 g of steam is cooled from
110 °C to 100 °C.
PAGE: 266
252 5 • Exercises
54. Which of the enthalpies of combustion inTable 5.2the table are also standard enthalpies of formation?
55. Does the standard enthalpy of formation of H O(g) differ from ΔH° for the reaction
2
56. Joseph Priestly prepared oxygen in 1774 by heating red mercury(II) oxide with sunlight focused through a
lens. How much heat is required to decompose exactly 1 mole of red HgO(s) to Hg(l) and O (g) under
2
standard conditions?
57. How many kilojoules of heat will be released when exactly 1 mole of manganese, Mn, is burned to form
Mn O (s) at standard state conditions?
3 4
58. How many kilojoules of heat will be released when exactly 1 mole of iron, Fe, is burned to form Fe O (s) at
2 3
standard state conditions?
59. The following sequence of reactions occurs in the commercial production of aqueous nitric acid:
Determine the total energy change for the production of one mole of aqueous nitric acid by this process.
60. Both graphite and diamond burn.
For the conversion of graphite to diamond:
Which produces more heat, the combustion of graphite or the combustion of diamond?
61. From the molar heats of formation inAppendix G, determine how much heat is required to evaporate one
mole of water:
62. Which produces more heat?
or
for the phase change
63. Calculate for the process
from the following information:
64. Calculate for the process
from the following information:
65. Calculate ΔHfor the process
from the following information:
66. Calculate for the process
from the following information:
67. Calculate the standard molar enthalpy of formation of NO(g) from the following data:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 267
5 • Exercises 253
68. Using the data inAppendix G, calculate the standard enthalpy change for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
69. Using the data inAppendix G, calculate the standard enthalpy change for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
70. The following reactions can be used to prepare samples of metals. Determine the enthalpy change under
standard state conditions for each.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
71. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, H O , has been used to provide thrust in the control jets of
2 2
various space vehicles. Using the data inAppendix G, determine how much heat is produced by the
decomposition of exactly 1 mole of H O under standard conditions.
2 2
72. Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of propane, C H (g), for the formation of H O(g) and CO (g). The
3 8 2 2
enthalpy of formation of propane is −104 kJ/mol.
73. Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of butane, C H (g) for the formation of H O(g) and CO (g). The
4 10 2 2
enthalpy of formation of butane is −126 kJ/mol.
74. Both propane and butane are used as gaseous fuels. Which compound produces more heat per gram when
burned?
75. The white pigment TiO is prepared by the reaction of titanium tetrachloride, TiCl , with water vapor in
2 4
the gas phase:
How much heat is evolved in the production of exactly 1 mole of TiO (s) under standard state conditions?
2
76. Water gas, a mixture of H and CO, is an important industrial fuel produced by the reaction of steam with
2
red hot coke, essentially pure carbon:
(a) Assuming that coke has the same enthalpy of formation as graphite, calculate for this reaction.
(b) Methanol, a liquid fuel that could possibly replace gasoline, can be prepared from water gas and
additional hydrogen at high temperature and pressure in the presence of a suitable catalyst:
Under the conditions of the reaction, methanol forms as a gas. Calculate for this reaction and for the
condensation of gaseous methanol to liquid methanol.
(c) Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of liquid methanol to H O(g) and CO (g).
2 2
77. In the early days of automobiles, illumination at night was provided by burning acetylene, C H . Though
2 2
no longer used as auto headlamps, acetylene is still used as a source of light by some cave explorers. The
acetylene is (was) prepared in the lamp by the reaction of water with calcium carbide, CaC :
2
Calculate the standard enthalpy of the reaction. The of CaC is −15.14 kcal/mol.
2
78. From the data inTable 5.2, determine which of the following fuels produces the greatest amount of heat
per gram when burned under standard conditions: CO(g), CH (g), or C H (g).
4 2 2
79. The enthalpy of combustion of hard coal averages −35 kJ/g, that of gasoline, 1.28 105kJ/gal. How many
kilograms of hard coal provide the same amount of heat as is available from 1.0 gallon of gasoline?
Assume that the density of gasoline is 0.692 g/mL (the same as the density of isooctane).
PAGE: 268
254 5 • Exercises
80. Ethanol, C H OH, is used as a fuel for motor vehicles, particularly in Brazil.
2 5
(a) Write the balanced equation for the combustion of ethanol to CO (g) and H O(g), and, using the data in
2 2
Appendix G, calculate the enthalpy of combustion of 1 mole of ethanol.
(b) The density of ethanol is 0.7893 g/mL. Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of exactly 1 L of ethanol.
(c) Assuming that an automobile’s mileage is directly proportional to the heat of combustion of the fuel,
calculate how much farther an automobile could be expected to travel on 1 L of gasoline than on 1 L of
ethanol. Assume that gasoline has the heat of combustion and the density of n–octane, C H
8 18
density = 0.7025 g/mL).
81. Among the substances that react with oxygen and that have been considered as potential rocket fuels are
diborane [B H , produces B O (s) and H O(g)], methane [CH , produces CO (g) and H O(g)], and hydrazine
2 6 2 3 2 4 2 2
[N H , produces N (g) and H O(g)]. On the basis of the heat released by 1.00 g of each substance in its
2 4 2 2
reaction with oxygen, which of these compounds offers the best possibility as a rocket fuel? The of
B H (g), CH (g), and N H (l) may be found inAppendix G.
2 6 4 2 4
82. How much heat is produced when 1.25 g of chromium metal reacts with oxygen gas under standard
conditions?
83. Ethylene, C H , a byproduct from the fractional distillation of petroleum, is fourth among the 50 chemical
2 4
compounds produced commercially in the largest quantities. About 80% of synthetic ethanol is
manufactured from ethylene by its reaction with water in the presence of a suitable catalyst.
Using the data in the table inAppendix G, calculate ΔH° for the reaction.
84. The oxidation of the sugar glucose, C H O , is described by the following equation:
6 12 6
The metabolism of glucose gives the same products, although the glucose reacts with oxygen in a series of
steps in the body.
(a) How much heat in kilojoules can be produced by the metabolism of 1.0 g of glucose?
(b) How many Calories can be produced by the metabolism of 1.0 g of glucose?
85. Propane, C H , is a hydrocarbon that is commonly used as a fuel.
3 8
(a) Write a balanced equation for the complete combustion of propane gas.
(b) Calculate the volume of air at 25 °C and 1.00 atmosphere that is needed to completely combust 25.0
grams of propane. Assume that air is 21.0 percent O by volume. (Hint: We will see how to do this
2
calculation in a later chapter on gases—for now use the information that 1.00 L of air at 25 °C and 1.00 atm
contains 0.275 g of O .)
2
(c) The heat of combustion of propane is −2,219.2 kJ/mol. Calculate the heat of formation, of propane
given that of H O(l) = −285.8 kJ/mol and of CO (g) = −393.5 kJ/mol.
2 2
(d) Assuming that all of the heat released in burning 25.0 grams of propane is transferred to 4.00
kilograms of water, calculate the increase in temperature of the water.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 269
5 • Exercises 255
86. During a recent winter month in Sheboygan, Wisconsin, it was necessary to obtain 3500 kWh of heat
provided by a natural gas furnace with 89% efficiency to keep a small house warm (the efficiency of a gas
furnace is the percent of the heat produced by combustion that is transferred into the house).
(a) Assume that natural gas is pure methane and determine the volume of natural gas in cubic feet that
was required to heat the house. The average temperature of the natural gas was 56 °F; at this temperature
and a pressure of 1 atm, natural gas has a density of 0.681 g/L.
(b) How many gallons of LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) would be required to replace the natural gas used?
Assume the LPG is liquid propane [C H : density, 0.5318 g/mL; enthalpy of combustion, 2219 kJ/mol for
3 8
the formation of CO (g) and H O(l)] and the furnace used to burn the LPG has the same efficiency as the
2 2
gas furnace.
(c) What mass of carbon dioxide is produced by combustion of the methane used to heat the house?
(d) What mass of water is produced by combustion of the methane used to heat the house?
(e) What volume of air is required to provide the oxygen for the combustion of the methane used to heat
the house? Air contains 23% oxygen by mass. The average density of air during the month was 1.22 g/L.
(f) How many kilowatt–hours (1 kWh = 3.6 106J) of electricity would be required to provide the heat
necessary to heat the house? Note electricity is 100% efficient in producing heat inside a house.
(g) Although electricity is 100% efficient in producing heat inside a house, production and distribution of
electricity is not 100% efficient. The efficiency of production and distribution of electricity produced in a
coal-fired power plant is about 40%. A certain type of coal provides 2.26 kWh per pound upon
combustion. What mass of this coal in kilograms will be required to produce the electrical energy
necessary to heat the house if the efficiency of generation and distribution is 40%?
PAGE: 270
256 5 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 271
CHAPTER 6
Electronic Structure and Periodic
Properties of Elements
Figure6.1 The Crab Nebula consists of remnants of a supernova (the explosion of a star). NASA’s Hubble Space
Telescope produced this composite image. Measurements of the emitted light wavelengths enabled astronomers to
identify the elements in the nebula, determining that it contains specific ions including S+(green filaments) and O2+
(red filaments). (credit: modification of work by NASA and ESA)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1Electromagnetic Energy
6.2The Bohr Model
6.3Development of Quantum Theory
6.4Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations)
6.5Periodic Variations in Element Properties
INTRODUCTION In 1054, Chinese astronomers recorded the appearance of a “guest star” in the sky, visible
even during the day, which then disappeared slowly over the next two years. The sudden appearance was due
to a supernova explosion, which was much brighter than the original star. Even though this supernova was
observed almost a millennium ago, the remaining Crab Nebula (Figure 6.1) continues to release energy today.
It emits not only visible light but also infrared light, X-rays, and other forms of electromagnetic radiation. The
nebula emits both continuous spectra (the blue-white glow) and atomic emission spectra (the colored
filaments). In this chapter, we will discuss light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation and how they are
related to the electronic structure of atoms. We will also see how this radiation can be used to identify
PAGE: 272
258 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
elements, even from thousands of light years away.
6.1 Electromagnetic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the basic behavior of waves, including travelling waves and standing waves
• Describe the wave nature of light
• Use appropriate equations to calculate related light-wave properties such as frequency, wavelength, and energy
• Distinguish between line and continuous emission spectra
• Describe the particle nature of light
The nature of light has been a subject of inquiry since antiquity. In the seventeenth century, IsaacNewton
performed experiments with lenses and prisms and was able to demonstrate that white light consists of the
individual colors of the rainbow combined together. Newton explained his optics findings in terms of a
"corpuscular" view of light, in which light was composed of streams of extremely tiny particles travelling at
high speeds according to Newton's laws of motion. Others in the seventeenth century, such as Christiaan
Huygens, had shown that optical phenomena such as reflection and refraction could be equally well explained
in terms of light as waves travelling at high speed through a medium called "luminiferous aether" that was
thought to permeate all space. Early in the nineteenth century, ThomasYoungdemonstrated that light passing
through narrow, closely spaced slits produced interference patterns that could not be explained in terms of
Newtonian particles but could be easily explained in terms of waves. Later in the nineteenth century, after
James ClerkMaxwelldeveloped his theory ofelectromagnetic radiationand showed that light was the visible
part of a vast spectrum of electromagnetic waves, the particle view of light became thoroughly discredited. By
the end of the nineteenth century, scientists viewed the physical universe as roughly comprising two separate
domains: matter composed of particles moving according to Newton's laws of motion, and electromagnetic
radiation consisting of waves governed by Maxwell's equations. Today, these domains are referred to as
classical mechanics and classical electrodynamics (or classical electromagnetism). Although there were a few
physical phenomena that could not be explained within this framework, scientists at that time were so
confident of the overall soundness of this framework that they viewed these aberrations as puzzling paradoxes
that would ultimately be resolved somehow within this framework. As we shall see, these paradoxes led to a
contemporary framework that intimately connects particles and waves at a fundamental level called wave-
particle duality, which has superseded the classical view.
Visible light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation play important roles in chemistry, since they can be
used to infer the energies of electrons within atoms and molecules. Much of modern technology is based on
electromagnetic radiation. For example, radio waves from a mobile phone, X-rays used by dentists, the energy
used to cook food in your microwave, the radiant heat from red-hot objects, and the light from your television
screen are forms of electromagnetic radiation that all exhibit wavelike behavior.
Waves
Awaveis an oscillation or periodic movement that can transport energy from one point in space to another.
Common examples of waves are all around us. Shaking the end of a rope transfers energy from your hand to
the other end of the rope, dropping a pebble into a pond causes waves to ripple outward along the water's
surface, and the expansion of air that accompanies a lightning strike generates sound waves (thunder) that can
travel outward for several miles. In each of these cases, kinetic energy is transferred through matter (the rope,
water, or air) while the matter remains essentially in place. An insightful example of a wave occurs in sports
stadiums when fans in a narrow region of seats rise simultaneously and stand with their arms raised up for a
few seconds before sitting down again while the fans in neighboring sections likewise stand up and sit down in
sequence. While this wave can quickly encircle a large stadium in a few seconds, none of the fans actually
travel with the wave-they all stay in or above their seats.
Waves need not be restricted to travel through matter. As Maxwell showed, electromagnetic waves consist of an
electric field oscillating in step with a perpendicular magnetic field, both of which are perpendicular to the
direction of travel. These waves can travel through a vacuum at a constant speed of 2.998 108m/s, the speed
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 273
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 259
of light (denoted byc).
All waves, including forms of electromagnetic radiation, are characterized by, awavelength(denoted byλ, the
lowercase Greek letter lambda), afrequency(denoted byν, the lowercase Greek letter nu), and anamplitude.
As can be seen inFigure 6.2, the wavelength is the distance between two consecutive peaks or troughs in a
wave (measured in meters in the SI system). Electromagnetic waves have wavelengths that fall within an
enormous range-wavelengths of kilometers (103m) to picometers (10−12m) have been observed. The
frequency is the number of wave cycles that pass a specified point in space in a specified amount of time (in
the SI system, this is measured in seconds). A cycle corresponds to one complete wavelength. The unit for
frequency, expressed as cycles per second [s−1], is thehertz (Hz). Common multiples of this unit are
megahertz, (1 MHz = 1 106Hz) and gigahertz (1 GHz = 1 109Hz). The amplitude corresponds to the
magnitude of the wave's displacement and so, inFigure 6.2, this corresponds to one-half the height between
the peaks and troughs. The amplitude is related to the intensity of the wave, which for light is the brightness,
and for sound is the loudness.
FIGURE6.2 One-dimensional sinusoidal waves show the relationship among wavelength, frequency, and speed.
The wave with the shortest wavelength has the highest frequency. Amplitude is one-half the height of the wave from
peak to trough.
The product of a wave's wavelength (λ) and its frequency (ν),λν, is the speed of the wave. Thus, for
electromagnetic radiation in a vacuum, speed is equal to the fundamental constant,c:
Wavelength and frequency are inversely proportional: As the wavelength increases, the frequency decreases.
The inverse proportionality is illustrated inFigure 6.3. This figure also shows theelectromagnetic spectrum,
the range of all types of electromagnetic radiation. Each of the various colors of visible light has specific
frequencies and wavelengths associated with them, and you can see that visible light makes up only a small
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Because the technologies developed to work in various parts of the
electromagnetic spectrum are different, for reasons of convenience and historical legacies, different units are
typically used for different parts of the spectrum. For example, radio waves are usually specified as
frequencies (typically in units of MHz), while the visible region is usually specified in wavelengths (typically in
units of nm or angstroms).
PAGE: 274
260 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.3 Portions of the electromagnetic spectrum are shown in order of decreasing frequency and increasing
wavelength. (credit “Cosmic ray": modification of work by NASA; credit “PET scan": modification of work by the
National Institute of Health; credit “X-ray": modification of work by Dr. Jochen Lengerke; credit “Dental curing":
modification of work by the Department of the Navy; credit “Night vision": modification of work by the Department
of the Army; credit “Remote": modification of work by Emilian Robert Vicol; credit “Cell phone": modification of work
by Brett Jordan; credit “Microwave oven": modification of work by Billy Mabray; credit “Ultrasound": modification of
work by Jane Whitney; credit “AM radio": modification of work by Dave Clausen)
EXAMPLE 6.1
Determining the Frequency and Wavelength of Radiation
A sodium streetlight gives off yellow light that has a wavelength of 589 nm (1 nm = 1 10−9m). What is the
frequency of this light?
Solution
We can rearrange the equationc=λνto solve for the frequency:
Sincecis expressed in meters per second, we must also convert 589 nm to meters.
Check Your Learning
One of the frequencies used to transmit and receive cellular telephone signals in the United States is 850 MHz.
What is the wavelength in meters of these radio waves?
Answer:
0.353 m = 35.3 cm
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 275
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 261
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Wireless Communication
FIGURE6.4 Radio and cell towers are typically used to transmit long-wavelength electromagnetic radiation.
Increasingly, cell towers are designed to blend in with the landscape, as with the Tucson, Arizona, cell tower
(right) disguised as a palm tree. (credit left: modification of work by Sir Mildred Pierce; credit middle:
modification of work by M.O. Stevens)
Many valuable technologies operate in the radio (3 kHz-300 GHz) frequency region of the electromagnetic
spectrum. At the low frequency (low energy, long wavelength) end of this region are AM (amplitude
modulation) radio signals (540-2830 kHz) that can travel long distances. FM (frequency modulation) radio
signals are used at higher frequencies (87.5-108.0 MHz). In AM radio, the information is transmitted by
varying the amplitude of the wave (Figure 6.5). In FM radio, by contrast, the amplitude is constant and the
instantaneous frequency varies.
FIGURE6.5 This schematic depicts how amplitude modulation (AM) and frequency modulation (FM) can be
used to transmit a radio wave.
PAGE: 276
262 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
Other technologies also operate in the radio-wave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. For example,
4G cellular telephone signals are approximately 880 MHz, while Global Positioning System (GPS) signals
operate at 1.228 and 1.575 GHz, local area wireless technology (Wi-Fi) networks operate at 2.4 to 5 GHz,
and highway toll sensors operate at 5.8 GHz. The frequencies associated with these applications are
convenient because such waves tend not to be absorbed much by common building materials.
One particularly characteristic phenomenon of waves results when two or more waves come into contact: They
interfere with each other.Figure 6.6shows theinterference patternsthat arise when light passes through
narrow slits closely spaced about a wavelength apart. The fringe patterns produced depend on the wavelength,
with the fringes being more closely spaced for shorter wavelength light passing through a given set of slits.
When the light passes through the two slits, each slit effectively acts as a new source, resulting in two closely
spaced waves coming into contact at the detector (the camera in this case). The dark regions inFigure 6.6
correspond to regions where the peaks for the wave from one slit happen to coincide with the troughs for the
wave from the other slit (destructive interference), while the brightest regions correspond to the regions where
the peaks for the two waves (or their two troughs) happen to coincide (constructive interference). Likewise,
when two stones are tossed close together into a pond, interference patterns are visible in the interactions
between the waves produced by the stones. Such interference patterns cannot be explained by particles
moving according to the laws of classical mechanics.
FIGURE6.6 Interference fringe patterns are shown for light passing through two closely spaced, narrow slits. The
spacing of the fringes depends on the wavelength, with the fringes being more closely spaced for the shorter-
wavelength blue light. (credit: PASCO)
Portrait of a Chemist
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin
X-rays exhibit wavelengths of approximately 0.01–10 nm. Since these wavelengths are comparable to the
spaces between atoms in a crystalline solid, X-rays are scattered when they pass through crystals. The
scattered rays undergo constructive and destructive interference that creates a specific diffraction pattern
that may be measured and used to precisely determine the positions of atoms within the crystal. This
phenomenon of X-ray diffraction is the basis for very powerful techniques enabling the determination of
molecular structure. One of the pioneers who applied this powerful technology to important biochemical
substances was Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin.
Born in Cairo, Egypt, in 1910 to British parents, Dorothy’s fascination with chemistry was fostered early in
her life. At age 11 she was enrolled in a prestigious English grammar school where she was one of just two
girls allowed to study chemistry. On her 16th birthday, her mother, Molly, gifted her a book on X-ray
crystallography, which had a profound impact on the trajectory of her career. She studied chemistry at
Oxford University, graduating with first-class honors in 1932 and directly entering Cambridge University to
pursue a doctoral degree. At Cambridge, Dorothy recognized the promise of X-ray crystallography for
protein structure determinations, conducting research that earned her a PhD in 1937. Over the course of a
very productive career, Dr. Hodgkin was credited with determining structures for several important
biomolecules, including cholesterol iodide, penicillin, and vitamin B12. In recognition of her achievements
in the use of X-ray techniques to elucidate the structures of biochemical substances, she was awarded the
1964 Nobel Prize in Chemistry. In 1969, she led a team of scientists who deduced the structure of insulin,
facilitating the mass production of this hormone and greatly advancing the treatment of diabetic patients
worldwide. Dr. Hodgkin continued working with the international scientific community, earning numerous
distinctions and awards prior to her death in 1993.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 277
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 263
Not all waves are travelling waves.Standing waves(also known asstationary waves) remain constrained
within some region of space. As we shall see, standing waves play an important role in our understanding of
the electronic structure of atoms and molecules. The simplest example of a standing wave is a one-
dimensional wave associated with a vibrating string that is held fixed at its two end points.Figure 6.7shows
the four lowest-energy standing waves (the fundamental wave and the lowest three harmonics) for a vibrating
string at a particular amplitude. Although the string's motion lies mostly within a plane, the wave itself is
considered to be one dimensional, since it lies along the length of the string. The motion of string segments in
a direction perpendicular to the string length generates the waves and so the amplitude of the waves is visible
as the maximum displacement of the curves seen inFigure 6.7. The key observation from the figure isthat
only those waves having an integer number, n, of half-wavelengths between the end points can form. A system
with fixed end points such as this restricts the number and type of the possible waveforms. This is an example
ofquantization, in which only discrete values from a more general set of continuous values of some property
are observed. Another important observation is that the harmonic waves (those waves displaying more than
one-half wavelength) all have one or more points between the two end points that are not in motion. These
special points arenodes. The energies of the standing waves with a given amplitude in a vibrating string
increase with the number of half-wavelengthsn. Since the number of nodes isn– 1, the energy can also be
said to depend on the number of nodes, generally increasing as the number of nodes increases.
FIGURE6.7 A vibrating string shows some one-dimensional standing waves. Since the two end points of the string
are held fixed, only waves having an integer number of half-wavelengths can form. The points on the string between
the end points that are not moving are called the nodes.
An example of two-dimensional standing waves is shown inFigure 6.8, which shows the vibrational patterns
on a flat surface. Although the vibrational amplitudes cannot be seen like they could in the vibrating string, the
nodes have been made visible by sprinkling the drum surface with a powder that collects on the areas of the
surface that have minimal displacement. For one-dimensional standing waves, the nodes were points on the
line, but for two-dimensional standing waves, the nodes are lines on the surface (for three-dimensional
standing waves, the nodes are two-dimensional surfaces within the three-dimensional volume).
FIGURE6.8 Two-dimensional standing waves can be visualized on a vibrating surface. The surface has been
sprinkled with a powder that collects near the nodal lines. There are two types of nodes visible: radial nodes
PAGE: 278
264 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
(circles) and angular nodes (radii).
LINK TO LEARNING
You can watch the formation of various radial nodeshere(http://openstax.org/l/16radnodes)as singer Imogen
Heap projects her voice across a kettle drum.
Blackbody Radiation and the Ultraviolet Catastrophe
The last few decades of the nineteenth century witnessed intense research activity in commercializing newly
discovered electric lighting. This required obtaining a better understanding of the distributions of light
emitted from various sources being considered. Artificial lighting is usually designed to mimic natural
sunlight within the limitations of the underlying technology. Such lighting consists of a range of broadly
distributed frequencies that form acontinuous spectrum.Figure 6.9shows the wavelength distribution for
sunlight. The most intense radiation is in the visible region, with the intensity dropping off rapidly for shorter
wavelength ultraviolet (UV) light, and more slowly for longer wavelength infrared (IR) light.
FIGURE6.9 The spectral distribution (light intensity vs. wavelength) of sunlight reaches the Earth's atmosphere as
UV light, visible light, and IR light. The unabsorbed sunlight at the top of the atmosphere has a distribution that
approximately matches the theoretical distribution of a blackbody at 5250 °C, represented by the blue curve.
(credit: modification of work by American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Terrestrial Reference Spectra for
Photovoltaic Performance Evaluation)
InFigure 6.9, the solar distribution is compared to a representative distribution, called a blackbody spectrum,
that corresponds to a temperature of 5250 °C. The blackbody spectrum matches the solar spectrum quite well.
Ablackbodyis a convenient, ideal emitter that approximates the behavior of many materials when heated. It
is “ideal” in the same sense that an ideal gas is a convenient, simple representation of real gases that works
well, provided that the pressure is not too high nor the temperature too low. A good approximation of a
blackbody that can be used to observe blackbody radiation is a metal oven that can be heated to very high
temperatures. The oven has a small hole allowing for the light being emitted within the oven to be observed
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 279
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 265
with a spectrometer so that the wavelengths and their intensities can be measured.Figure 6.10shows the
resulting curves for some representative temperatures. Each distribution depends only on a single parameter:
the temperature. The maxima in the blackbody curves,λ , shift to shorter wavelengths as the temperature
max
increases, reflecting the observation that metals being heated to high temperatures begin to glow a darker red
that becomes brighter as the temperature increases, eventually becoming white hot at very high temperatures
as the intensities of all of the visible wavelengths become appreciable. This common observation was at the
heart of the first paradox that showed the fundamental limitations of classical physics that we will examine.
Physicists derived mathematical expressions for the blackbody curves using well-accepted concepts from the
theories of classical mechanics and classical electromagnetism. The theoretical expressions as functions of
temperature fit the observed experimental blackbody curves well at longer wavelengths, but showed
significant discrepancies at shorter wavelengths. Not only did the theoretical curves not show a peak, they
absurdly showed the intensity becoming infinitely large as the wavelength became smaller, which would imply
that everyday objects at room temperature should be emitting large amounts of UV light. This became known
as the “ultraviolet catastrophe” because no one could find any problems with the theoretical treatment that
could lead to such unrealistic short-wavelength behavior. Finally, around 1900, Max Planck derived a
theoretical expression for blackbody radiation that fit the experimental observations exactly (within
experimental error). Planck developed his theoretical treatment by extending the earlier work that had been
based on the premise that the atoms composing the oven vibrated at increasing frequencies (or decreasing
wavelengths) as the temperature increased, with these vibrations being the source of the emitted
electromagnetic radiation. But where the earlier treatments had allowed the vibrating atoms to have any
energy values obtained from a continuous set of energies (perfectly reasonable, according to classical physics),
Planck found that by restricting the vibrational energies to discrete values for each frequency, he could derive
an expression for blackbody radiation that correctly had the intensity dropping rapidly for the short
wavelengths in the UV region.
The quantityhis a constant now known as Planck's constant, in his honor. Although Planck was pleased he
had resolved the blackbody radiation paradox, he was disturbed that to do so, he needed to assume the
vibrating atoms required quantized energies, which he was unable to explain. The value of Planck's constant is
very small, 6.626 10−34joule seconds (J s), which helps explain why energy quantization had not been
observed previously in macroscopic phenomena.
FIGURE6.10 Blackbody spectral distribution curves are shown for some representative temperatures.
PAGE: 280
266 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
The Photoelectric Effect
The next paradox in the classical theory to be resolved concerned the photoelectric effect (Figure 6.11). It had
been observed that electrons could be ejected from the clean surface of a metal when light having a frequency
greater than some threshold frequency was shone on it. Surprisingly, the kinetic energy of the ejected
electrons did not depend on the brightness of the light, but increased with increasing frequency of the light.
Since the electrons in the metal had a certain amount of binding energy keeping them there, the incident light
needed to have more energy to free the electrons. According to classical wave theory, a wave's energy depends
on its intensity (which depends on its amplitude), not its frequency. One part of these observations was that the
number of electrons ejected within in a given time period was seen to increase as the brightness increased. In
1905, Albert Einstein was able to resolve the paradox by incorporating Planck's quantization findings into the
discredited particle view of light (Einstein actually won his Nobel prize for this work, and not for his theories of
relativity for which he is most famous).
Einstein argued that the quantized energies that Planck had postulated in his treatment of blackbody radiation
could be applied to the light in the photoelectric effect so that the light striking the metal surface should not be
viewed as a wave, but instead as a stream of particles (later calledphotons) whose energy depended on their
frequency, according to Planck's formula,E=hν(or, in terms of wavelength usingc=νλ, ). Electrons
were ejected when hit by photons having sufficient energy (a frequency greater than the threshold). The
greater the frequency, the greater the kinetic energy imparted to the escaping electrons by the collisions.
Einstein also argued that the light intensity did not depend on the amplitude of the incoming wave, but instead
corresponded to the number of photons striking the surface within a given time period. This explains why the
number of ejected electrons increased with increasing brightness, since the greater the number of incoming
photons, the greater the likelihood that they would collide with some of the electrons.
With Einstein's findings, the nature of light took on a new air of mystery. Although many light phenomena
could be explained either in terms of waves or particles, certain phenomena, such as the interference patterns
obtained when light passed through a double slit, were completely contrary to a particle view of light, while
other phenomena, such as the photoelectric effect, were completely contrary to a wave view of light. Somehow,
at a deep fundamental level still not fully understood, light is both wavelike and particle-like. This is known as
wave-particle duality.
FIGURE6.11 Photons with low frequencies do not have enough energy to cause electrons to be ejected via the
photoelectric effect. For any frequency of light above the threshold frequency, the kinetic energy of an ejected
electron will increase linearly with the energy of the incoming photon.
EXAMPLE 6.2
Calculating the Energy of Radiation
When we see light from a neon sign, we are observing radiation from excited neon atoms. If this radiation has a
wavelength of 640 nm, what is the energy of the photon being emitted?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 281
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 267
Solution
We use the part of Planck's equation that includes the wavelength,λ, and convert units of nanometers to
meters so that the units ofλandcare the same.
Check Your Learning
The microwaves in an oven are of a specific frequency that will heat the water molecules contained in food.
(This is why most plastics and glass do not become hot in a microwave oven-they do not contain water
molecules.) This frequency is about 3 109Hz. What is the energy of one photon in these microwaves?
Answer:
2 10−24J
LINK TO LEARNING
Use thissimulation program(http://openstax.org/l/16photelec)to experiment with the photoelectric effect to
see how intensity, frequency, type of metal, and other factors influence the ejected photons.
EXAMPLE 6.3
Photoelectric Effect
Identify which of the following statements are false and, where necessary, change the italicized word or phrase
to make them true, consistent with Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect.
(a) Increasing the brightness of incoming lightincreasesthe kinetic energy of the ejected electrons.
(b) Increasing thewavelengthof incoming light increases the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons.
(c) Increasing the brightness of incoming lightincreasesthe number of ejected electrons.
(d) Increasing thefrequencyof incoming light can increase the number of ejected electrons.
Solution
(a) False. Increasing the brightness of incoming lighthas no effecton the kinetic energy of the ejected
electrons. Only energy, not the number or amplitude, of the photons influences the kinetic energy of the
electrons.
(b) False. Increasing thefrequencyof incoming light increases the kinetic energy of the ejected electrons.
Frequency is proportional to energy and inversely proportional to wavelength. Frequencies above the
threshold value transfer the excess energy into the kinetic energy of the electrons.
(c) True. Because the number of collisions with photons increases with brighter light, the number of ejected
electrons increases.
(d) True with regard to the threshold energy binding the electrons to the metal. Below this threshold, electrons
are not emitted and above it they are. Once over the threshold value, further increasing the frequency does not
increase the number of ejected electrons
PAGE: 282
268 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
Check Your Learning
Calculate the threshold energy in kJ/mol of electrons in aluminum, given that the lowest frequency photon for
which the photoelectric effect is observed is 9.87 1014Hz.
Answer:
394 kJ/mol
Line Spectra
Another paradox within the classical electromagnetic theory that scientists in the late nineteenth century
struggled with concerned the light emitted from atoms and molecules. When solids, liquids, or condensed
gases are heated sufficiently, they radiate some of the excess energy as light. Photons produced in this manner
have a range of energies, and thereby produce a continuous spectrum in which an unbroken series of
wavelengths is present. Most of the light generated from stars (including our sun) is produced in this fashion.
You can see all the visible wavelengths of light present in sunlight by using a prism to separate them. As can be
seen inFigure 6.9, sunlight also contains UV light (shorter wavelengths) and IR light (longer wavelengths) that
can be detected using instruments but that are invisible to the human eye. Incandescent (glowing) solids such
as tungsten filaments in incandescent lights also give off light that contains all wavelengths of visible light.
These continuous spectra can often be approximated by blackbody radiation curves at some appropriate
temperature, such as those shown inFigure 6.10.
In contrast to continuous spectra, light can also occur as discrete orline spectrahaving very narrow line
widths interspersed throughout the spectral regions such as those shown inFigure 6.13. Exciting a gas at low
partial pressure using an electrical current, or heating it, will produce line spectra. Fluorescent light bulbs and
neon signs operate in this way (Figure 6.12). Each element displays its own characteristic set of lines, as do
molecules, although their spectra are generally much more complicated.
FIGURE6.12 Neon signs operate by exciting a gas at low partial pressure using an electrical current. This sign
shows the elaborate artistic effects that can be achieved. (credit: Dave Shaver)
Each emission line consists of a single wavelength of light, which implies that the light emitted by a gas
consists of a set of discrete energies. For example, when an electric discharge passes through a tube
containing hydrogen gas at low pressure, the H molecules are broken apart into separate H atoms and we see
2
a blue-pink color. Passing the light through a prism produces a line spectrum, indicating that this light is
composed of photons of four visible wavelengths, as shown inFigure 6.13.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 283
6.1 • Electromagnetic Energy 269
FIGURE6.13 Compare the two types of emission spectra: continuous spectrum of white light (top) and the line
spectra of the light from excited sodium, hydrogen, calcium, and mercury atoms.
The origin of discrete spectra in atoms and molecules was extremely puzzling to scientists in the late
nineteenth century, since according to classical electromagnetic theory, only continuous spectra should be
observed. Even more puzzling, in 1885, JohannBalmerwas able to derive an empirical equation that related
the four visible wavelengths of light emitted by hydrogen atoms to whole integers. That equation is the
following one, in whichkis a constant:
Other discrete lines for the hydrogen atom were found in the UV and IR regions. JohannesRydberggeneralized
Balmer's work and developed an empirical formula that predicted all of hydrogen's emission lines, not just
those restricted to the visible range, where,n andn are integers,n <n, and is the Rydberg constant
1 2 1 2 ∞
(1.097 107m−1).
∞
Even in the late nineteenth century, spectroscopy was a very precise science, and so the wavelengths of
hydrogen were measured to very high accuracy, which implied that the Rydberg constant could be determined
very precisely as well. That such a simple formula as the Rydberg formula could account for such precise
measurements seemed astounding at the time, but it was the eventual explanation for emission spectra by
NeilsBohrin 1913 that ultimately convinced scientists to abandon classical physics and spurred the
development of modern quantum mechanics.
PAGE: 284
270 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
6.2 The Bohr Model
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom
• Use the Rydberg equation to calculate energies of light emitted or absorbed by hydrogen atoms
Following the work of ErnestRutherfordand his colleagues in the early twentieth century, the picture of atoms
consisting of tiny dense nuclei surrounded by lighter and even tinier electrons continually moving about the
nucleus was well established. This picture was called the planetary model, since it pictured the atom as a
miniature “solar system” with the electrons orbiting the nucleus like planets orbiting the sun. The simplest
atom is hydrogen, consisting of a single proton as the nucleus about which a single electron moves. The
electrostatic force attracting the electron to the proton depends only on the distance between the two particles.
This classical mechanics description of the atom is incomplete, however, since an electron moving in an
elliptical orbit would be accelerating (by changing direction) and, according to classical electromagnetism, it
should continuously emit electromagnetic radiation. This loss in orbital energy should result in the electron’s
orbit getting continually smaller until it spirals into the nucleus, implying that atoms are inherently unstable.
In 1913, NielsBohrattempted to resolve the atomic paradox by ignoring classical electromagnetism’s
prediction that the orbiting electron in hydrogen would continuously emit light. Instead, he incorporated into
the classical mechanics description of the atom Planck’s ideas of quantization and Einstein’s finding that light
consists of photons whose energy is proportional to their frequency. Bohr assumed that the electron orbiting
the nucleus would not normally emit any radiation (the stationary state hypothesis), but it would emit or
absorb a photon if it moved to a different orbit. The energy absorbed or emitted would reflect differences in the
orbital energies according to this equation:
In this equation,his Planck’s constant andEandE are the initial and final orbital energies, respectively. The
i f
absolute value of the energy difference is used, since frequencies and wavelengths are always positive. Instead
of allowing for continuous values of energy, Bohr assumed the energies of these electron orbitals were
quantized:
In this expression,kis a constant comprising fundamental constants such as the electron mass and charge
and Planck’s constant. Inserting the expression for the orbit energies into the equation for ΔEgives
or
which is identical to the Rydberg equation in which When Bohr calculated his theoretical value for
∞
the Rydberg constant, and compared it with the experimentally accepted value, he got excellent
∞
agreement. Since the Rydberg constant was one of the most precisely measured constants at that time, this
level of agreement was astonishing and meant thatBohr’s modelwas taken seriously, despite the many
assumptions that Bohr needed to derive it.
The lowest few energy levels are shown inFigure 6.14. One of the fundamental laws of physics is that matter is
most stable with the lowest possible energy. Thus, the electron in a hydrogen atom usually moves in then= 1
orbit, the orbit in which it has the lowest energy. When the electron is in this lowest energy orbit, the atom is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 285
6.2 • The Bohr Model 271
said to be in itsground electronic state(or simply ground state). If the atom receives energy from an outside
source, it is possible for the electron to move to an orbit with a highernvalue and the atom is now in an
excited electronic state(or simply an excited state) with a higher energy. When an electron transitions from
an excited state (higher energy orbit) to a less excited state, or ground state, the difference in energy is emitted
as a photon. Similarly, if a photon is absorbed by an atom, the energy of the photon moves an electron from a
lower energy orbit up to a more excited one. We can relate the energy of electrons in atoms to what we learned
previously about energy. The law of conservation of energy says that we can neither create nor destroy energy.
Thus, if a certain amount of external energy is required to excite an electron from one energy level to another,
that same amount of energy will be liberated when the electron returns to its initial state (Figure 6.15).
Since Bohr’s model involved only a single electron, it could also be applied to the single electron ions He+, Li2+,
Be3+, and so forth, which differ from hydrogen only in their nuclear charges, and so one-electron atoms and
ions are collectively referred to as hydrogen-like atoms. The energy expression for hydrogen-like atoms is a
generalization of the hydrogen atom energy, in whichZis the nuclear charge (+1 for hydrogen, +2 for He, +3 for
Li, and so on) andkhas a value of 2.179 10–18J.
The sizes of the circular orbits for hydrogen-like atoms are given in terms of their radii by the following
expression, in which is a constant called the Bohr radius, with a value of 5.292 10−11m:
The equation also shows us that as the electron’s energy increases (asnincreases), the electron is found at
greater distances from the nucleus. This is implied by the inverse dependence of electrostatic attraction on
distance, since, as the electron moves away from the nucleus, the electrostatic attraction between it and the
nucleus decreases and it is held less tightly in the atom. Note that asngets larger and the orbits get larger,
their energies get closer to zero, and so the limits ∞and ∞imply thatE= 0 corresponds to the
ionization limit where the electron is completely removed from the nucleus. Thus, for hydrogen in the ground
staten= 1, the ionization energy would be:
∞
With three extremely puzzling paradoxes now solved (blackbody radiation, the photoelectric effect, and the
hydrogen atom), and all involving Planck’s constant in a fundamental manner, it became clear to most
physicists at that time that the classical theories that worked so well in the macroscopic world were
fundamentally flawed and could not be extended down into the microscopic domain of atoms and molecules.
Unfortunately, despite Bohr’s remarkable achievement in deriving a theoretical expression for the Rydberg
constant, he was unable to extend his theory to the next simplest atom, He, which only has two electrons.
Bohr’s model was severely flawed, since it was still based on the classical mechanics notion of precise orbits, a
concept that was later found to be untenable in the microscopic domain, when a proper model of quantum
mechanics was developed to supersede classical mechanics.
PAGE: 286
272 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.14 Quantum numbers and energy levels in a hydrogen atom. The more negative the calculated value,
the lower the energy.
EXAMPLE 6.4
Calculating the Energy of an Electron in a Bohr Orbit
Early researchers were very excited when they were able to predict the energy of an electron at a particular
distance from the nucleus in a hydrogen atom. If a spark promotes the electron in a hydrogen atom into an
orbit withn= 3, what is the calculated energy, in joules, of the electron?
Solution
The energy of the electron is given by this equation:
The atomic number,Z, of hydrogen is 1;k= 2.179 10–18J; and the electron is characterized by annvalue of
3. Thus,
Check Your Learning
The electron inFigure 6.15is promoted even further to an orbit withn= 6. What is its new energy?
Answer:
−6.053 10–20J
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 287
6.2 • The Bohr Model 273
FIGURE6.15 The horizontal lines show the relative energy of orbits in the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, and
the vertical arrows depict the energy of photons absorbed (left) or emitted (right) as electrons move between these
orbits.
EXAMPLE 6.5
Calculating the Energy and Wavelength of Electron Transitions in a One–electron (Bohr)
System
What is the energy (in joules) and the wavelength (in meters) of the line in the spectrum of hydrogen that
represents the movement of an electron from Bohr orbit withn= 4 to the orbit withn= 6? In what part of the
electromagnetic spectrum do we find this radiation?
Solution
In this case, the electron starts out withn= 4, son = 4. It comes to rest in then= 6 orbit, son = 6. The
1 2
difference in energy between the two states is given by this expression:
This energy difference is positive, indicating a photon enters the system (is absorbed) to excite the electron
PAGE: 288
274 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
from then= 4 orbit up to then= 6 orbit. The wavelength of a photon with this energy is found by the
expression Rearrangement gives:
From the illustration of the electromagnetic spectrum in Electromagnetic Energy, we can see that this
wavelength is found in the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Check Your Learning
What is the energy in joules and the wavelength in meters of the photon produced when an electron falls from
then= 5 to then= 3 level in a He+ion (Z= 2 for He+)?
Answer:
6.198 10–19J; 3.205 10−7m
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom provides insight into the behavior of matter at the microscopic level, but it
does not account for electron–electron interactions in atoms with more than one electron. It does introduce
several important features of all models used to describe the distribution of electrons in an atom. These
features include the following:
• The energies of electrons (energy levels) in an atom are quantized, described byquantum numbers:
integer numbers having only specific allowed value and used to characterize the arrangement of electrons
in an atom.
• An electron’s energy increases with increasing distance from the nucleus.
• The discrete energies (lines) in the spectra of the elements result from quantized electronic energies.
Of these features, the most important is the postulate of quantized energy levels for an electron in an atom. As
a consequence, the model laid the foundation for the quantum mechanical model of the atom. Bohr won a
Nobel Prize in Physics for his contributions to our understanding of the structure of atoms and how that is
related to line spectra emissions.
6.3 Development of Quantum Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Extend the concept of wave–particle duality that was observed in electromagnetic radiation to matter as well
• Understand the general idea of the quantum mechanical description of electrons in an atom, and that it uses
the notion of three-dimensional wave functions, or orbitals, that define the distribution of probability to find an
electron in a particular part of space
• List and describe traits of the four quantum numbers that form the basis for completely specifying the state of
an electron in an atom
Bohr’s model explained the experimental data for the hydrogen atom and was widely accepted, but it also
raised many questions. Why did electrons orbit at only fixed distances defined by a single quantum numbern
= 1, 2, 3, and so on, but never in between? Why did the model work so well describing hydrogen and one-
electron ions, but could not correctly predict the emission spectrum for helium or any larger atoms? To answer
these questions, scientists needed to completely revise the way they thought about matter.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 289
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 275
Behavior in the Microscopic World
We know how matter behaves in the macroscopic world—objects that are large enough to be seen by the naked
eye follow the rules of classical physics. A billiard ball moving on a table will behave like a particle: It will
continue in a straight line unless it collides with another ball or the table cushion, or is acted on by some other
force (such as friction). The ball has a well-defined position and velocity (or a well-defined momentum,p=mv,
defined by massmand velocityv) at any given moment. In other words, the ball is moving in a classical
trajectory. This is the typical behavior of a classical object.
When waves interact with each other, they show interference patterns that are not displayed by macroscopic
particles such as the billiard ball. For example, interacting waves on the surface of water can produce
interference patterns similar to those shown onFigure 6.16. This is a case of wave behavior on the
macroscopic scale, and it is clear that particles and waves are very different phenomena in the macroscopic
realm.
FIGURE6.16 An interference pattern on the water surface is formed by interacting waves. The waves are caused
by reflection of water from the rocks. (credit: modification of work by Sukanto Debnath)
As technological improvements allowed scientists to probe the microscopic world in greater detail, it became
increasingly clear by the 1920s that very small pieces of matter follow a different set of rules from those we
observe for large objects. The unquestionable separation of waves and particles was no longer the case for the
microscopic world.
One of the first people to pay attention to the special behavior of the microscopic world was Louisde Broglie.
He asked the question: If electromagnetic radiation can have particle-like character, can electrons and other
submicroscopic particles exhibit wavelike character? In his 1925 doctoral dissertation, de Broglie extended
the wave–particle duality of light that Einstein used to resolve the photoelectric-effect paradox to material
particles. He predicted that a particle with massmand velocityv(that is, with linear momentump) should also
exhibit the behavior of a wave with a wavelength valueλ, given by this expression in whichhis the familiar
Planck’s constant:
This is called thede Broglie wavelength. Unlike the other values ofλdiscussed in this chapter, the de Broglie
wavelength is a characteristic of particles and other bodies, not electromagnetic radiation (note that this
equation involves velocity [v, m/s], not frequency [ν, Hz]. Although these two symbols appear nearly identical,
they mean very different things). Where Bohr had postulated the electron as being a particle orbiting the
nucleus in quantized orbits, de Broglie argued that Bohr’s assumption of quantization can be explained if the
electron is considered not as a particle, but rather as a circular standing wave such that only an integer
number of wavelengths could fit exactly within the orbit (Figure 6.17).
PAGE: 290
276 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.17 If an electron is viewed as a wave circling around the nucleus, an integer number of wavelengths
must fit into the orbit for this standing wave behavior to be possible.
For a circular orbit of radiusr, the circumference is 2πr, and so de Broglie’s condition is:
Shortly after de Broglie proposed the wave nature of matter, two scientists at Bell Laboratories, C. J.Davisson
and L. H.Germer, demonstrated experimentally that electrons can exhibit wavelike behavior by showing an
interference pattern for electrons travelling through a regular atomic pattern in a crystal. The regularly spaced
atomic layers served as slits, as used in other interference experiments. Since the spacing between the layers
serving as slits needs to be similar in size to the wavelength of the tested wave for an interference pattern to
form, Davisson and Germer used a crystalline nickel target for their “slits,” since the spacing of the atoms
within the lattice was approximately the same as the de Broglie wavelengths of the electrons that they used.
Figure 6.18shows an interference pattern. It is strikingly similar to the interference patterns for light shown in
Electromagnetic Energy for light passing through two closely spaced, narrow slits. The wave–particle duality of
matter can be seen inFigure 6.18by observing what happens if electron collisions are recorded over a long
period of time. Initially, when only a few electrons have been recorded, they show clear particle-like behavior,
having arrived in small localized packets that appear to be random. As more and more electrons arrived and
were recorded, a clear interference pattern that is the hallmark of wavelike behavior emerged. Thus, it appears
that while electrons are small localized particles, their motion does not follow the equations of motion implied
by classical mechanics, but instead it is governed by some type of a wave equation. Thus the wave–particle
duality first observed with photons is actually a fundamental behavior intrinsic to all quantum particles.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 291
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 277
FIGURE6.18 (a) The interference pattern for electrons passing through very closely spaced slits demonstrates
that quantum particles such as electrons can exhibit wavelike behavior. (b) The experimental results illustrated here
demonstrate the wave–particle duality in electrons.
LINK TO LEARNING
View the Dr. Quantum – Double Slit Experimentcartoon(http://openstax.org/l/16duality)for an easy-to-
understand description of wave–particle duality and the associated experiments.
EXAMPLE 6.6
Calculating the Wavelength of a Particle
If an electron travels at a velocity of 1.000 107m s–1and has a mass of 9.109 10–28g, what is its
wavelength?
Solution
We can use de Broglie’s equation to solve this problem, but we first must do a unit conversion of Planck’s
constant. You learned earlier that 1 J = 1 kg m2/s2. Thus, we can writeh= 6.626 10–34J s as 6.626 10–34kg
m2/s.
PAGE: 292
278 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
This is a small value, but it is significantly larger than the size of an electron in the classical (particle) view.
This size is the same order of magnitude as the size of an atom. This means that electron wavelike behavior is
going to be noticeable in an atom.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the wavelength of a softball with a mass of 100 g traveling at a velocity of 35 m s–1, assuming that it
can be modeled as a single particle.
Answer:
1.9 10–34m.
We never think of a thrown softball having a wavelength, since this wavelength is so small it is impossible for
our senses or any known instrument to detect (strictly speaking, the wavelength of a real baseball would
correspond to the wavelengths of its constituent atoms and molecules, which, while much larger than this
value, would still be microscopically tiny). The de Broglie wavelength is only appreciable for matter that has a
very small mass and/or a very high velocity.
Werner Heisenberg considered the limits of how accurately we can measure properties of an electron or other
microscopic particles. He determined that there is a fundamental limit to how accurately one can measure
both a particle’s position and its momentum simultaneously. The more accurately we measure the momentum
of a particle, the less accurately we can determine its position at that time, and vice versa. This is summed up
in what we now call theHeisenberg uncertainty principle:It is fundamentally impossible to determine
simultaneously and exactly both the momentum and the position of a particle. For a particle of massmmoving
with velocityv in thexdirection (or equivalently with momentump), the product of the uncertainty in the
x x
ℏ
position, Δx, and the uncertainty in the momentum, Δp , must be greater than or equal to (where
x
ℏ the value of Planck’s constant divided by 2π).
ℏ
This equation allows us to calculate the limit to how precisely we can know both the simultaneous position of
an object and its momentum. For example, if we improve our measurement of an electron’s position so that the
uncertainty in the position (Δx) has a value of, say, 1 pm (10–12m, about 1% of the diameter of a hydrogen
atom), then our determination of its momentum must have an uncertainty with a value of at least
The value ofħis not large, so the uncertainty in the position or momentum of a macroscopic object like a
baseball is too insignificant to observe. However, the mass of a microscopic object such as an electron is small
enough that the uncertainty can be large and significant.
It should be noted that Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle is not just limited to uncertainties in position and
momentum, but it also links other dynamical variables. For example, when an atom absorbs a photon and
makes a transition from one energy state to another, the uncertainty in the energy and the uncertainty in the
ℏ
time required for the transition are similarly related, as ΔEΔt≥
Heisenberg’s principle imposes ultimate limits on what is knowable in science. The uncertainty principle can
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 293
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 279
be shown to be a consequence of wave–particle duality, which lies at the heart of what distinguishes modern
quantum theory from classical mechanics.
LINK TO LEARNING
Read thisarticle(http://openstax.org/l/16uncertainty)that describes a recent macroscopic demonstration of
the uncertainty principle applied to microscopic objects.
The Quantum–Mechanical Model of an Atom
Shortly after de Broglie published his ideas that the electron in a hydrogen atom could be better thought of as
being a circular standing wave instead of a particle moving in quantized circular orbits, Erwin Schrödinger
extended de Broglie’s work by deriving what is today known as the Schrödinger equation. When Schrödinger
applied his equation to hydrogen-like atoms, he was able to reproduce Bohr’s expression for the energy and,
thus, the Rydberg formula governing hydrogen spectra. Schrödinger described electrons as three-dimensional
stationary waves, orwavefunctions, represented by the Greek letter psi,ψ. A few years later, MaxBorn
proposed an interpretation of the wavefunctionψthat is still accepted today: Electrons are still particles, and
so the waves represented byψare not physical waves but, instead, are complex probability amplitudes. The
square of the magnitude of a wavefunction describes the probability of the quantum particle being
present near a certain location in space. This means that wavefunctions can be used to determine the
distribution of the electron’s density with respect to the nucleus in an atom. In the most general form, the
Schrödinger equation can be written as:
is the Hamiltonian operator, a set of mathematical operations representing the total energy of the quantum
particle (such as an electron in an atom),ψis the wavefunction of this particle that can be used to find the
special distribution of the probability of finding the particle, and is the actual value of the total energy of the
particle.
Schrödinger’s work, as well as that of Heisenberg and many other scientists following in their footsteps, is
generally referred to asquantum mechanics.
LINK TO LEARNING
You may also have heard of Schrödinger because of his famous thought experiment.This story
(http://openstax.org/l/16superpos)explains the concepts of superposition and entanglement as related to a cat
in a box with poison.
Understanding Quantum Theory of Electrons in Atoms
The goal of this section is to understand the electron orbitals (location of electrons in atoms), their different
energies, and other properties. The use of quantum theory provides the best understanding to these topics.
This knowledge is a precursor to chemical bonding.
As was described previously, electrons in atoms can exist only on discrete energy levels but not between them.
It is said that the energy of an electron in an atom is quantized, that is, it can be equal only to certain specific
values and can jump from one energy level to another but not transition smoothly or stay between these levels.
The energy levels are labeled with annvalue, wheren= 1, 2, 3, …. Generally speaking, the energy of an
electron in an atom is greater for greater values ofn. This number,n, is referred to as the principal quantum
number. Theprincipal quantum numberdefines the location of the energy level. It is essentially the same
concept as thenin the Bohr atom description. Another name for the principal quantum number is the shell
number. Theshellsof an atom can be thought of concentric circles radiating out from the nucleus. The
electrons that belong to a specific shell are most likely to be found within the corresponding circular area. The
further we proceed from the nucleus, the higher the shell number, and so the higher the energy level (Figure
6.19). The positively charged protons in the nucleus stabilize the electronic orbitals by electrostatic attraction
PAGE: 294
280 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
between the positive charges of the protons and the negative charges of the electrons. So the further away the
electron is from the nucleus, the greater the energy it has.
FIGURE6.19 Different shells are numbered by principal quantum numbers.
This quantum mechanical model for where electrons reside in an atom can be used to look at electronic
transitions, the events when an electron moves from one energy level to another. If the transition is to a higher
energy level, energy is absorbed, and the energy change has a positive value. To obtain the amount of energy
necessary for the transition to a higher energy level, a photon is absorbed by the atom. A transition to a lower
energy level involves a release of energy, and the energy change is negative. This process is accompanied by
emission of a photon by the atom. The following equation summarizes these relationships and is based on the
hydrogen atom:
The valuesn andnare the final and initial energy states of the electron.Example 6.5in the previous section
f i
of the chapter demonstrates calculations of such energy changes.
The principal quantum number is one of three quantum numbers used to characterize an orbital. Anatomic
orbitalis a general region in an atom within which an electron is most probable to reside. The quantum
mechanical model specifies the probability of finding an electron in the three-dimensional space around the
nucleus and is based on solutions of the Schrödinger equation. In addition, the principal quantum number
defines the energy of an electron in a hydrogen or hydrogen-like atom or an ion (an atom or an ion with only
one electron) and the general region in which discrete energy levels of electrons in a multi-electron atoms and
ions are located.
Another quantum number isl, thesecondary (angular momentum) quantum number. It is an integer that
may take the values,l =0, 1, 2, …,n– 1. This means that an orbital withn= 1 can have only one value ofl,l= 0,
whereasn= 2 permitsl= 0 andl= 1, and so on. Whereas the principal quantum number,n, defines the general
size and energy of the orbital, the secondary quantum numberlspecifies the shape of the orbital. Orbitals with
the same value ofldefine asubshell.
Orbitals withl= 0 are calledsorbitalsand they make up thessubshells. The valuel= 1 corresponds to thep
orbitals. For a givenn,porbitalsconstitute apsubshell (e.g., 3pifn= 3). The orbitals withl= 2 are called thed
orbitals, followed by thef-,g-, and h-orbitals forl= 3, 4, and 5.
There are certain distances from the nucleus at which the probability density of finding an electron located at a
particular orbital is zero. In other words, the value of the wavefunctionψis zero at this distance for this orbital.
Such a value of radiusris called a radial node. The number of radial nodes in an orbital isn–l– 1.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 295
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 281
FIGURE6.20 The graphs show the probability (yaxis) of finding an electron for the 1s, 2s, 3sorbitals as a function
of distance from the nucleus.
Consider the examples inFigure 6.20. The orbitals depicted are of thestype, thusl= 0 for all of them. It can be
seen from the graphs of the probability densities that there are 1 – 0 – 1 = 0 places where the density is zero
(nodes) for 1s(n= 1), 2 – 0 – 1 = 1 node for 2s, and 3 – 0 – 1 = 2 nodes for the 3sorbitals.
Thessubshell electron density distribution is spherical and thepsubshell has a dumbbell shape. Thedandf
orbitalsare more complex. These shapes represent the three-dimensional regions within which the electron
is likely to be found.
PAGE: 296
282 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.21 Shapes ofs,p,d, andforbitals.
Themagnetic quantum number,m, specifies the relative spatial orientation of a particular orbital. Generally
l
speaking,mcan be equal to –l, –(l –1), …, 0, …, (l– 1),l. The total number of possible orbitals with the same
l
value ofl(that is, in the same subshell) is 2l+ 1. Thus, there is ones-orbital in anssubshell (l= 0), there are
threep-orbitals in apsubshell (l= 1), fived-orbitals in adsubshell (l= 2), sevenf-orbitals in anfsubshell (l=
3), and so forth. The principal quantum number defines the general value of the electronic energy. The angular
momentum quantum number determines the shape of the orbital. And the magnetic quantum number
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 297
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 283
specifies orientation of the orbital in space, as can be seen inFigure 6.21.
FIGURE6.22 The chart shows the energies of electron orbitals in a multi-electron atom.
Figure 6.22illustrates the energy levels for various orbitals. The number before the orbital name (such as 2s,
3p, and so forth) stands for the principal quantum number,n. The letter in the orbital name defines the
subshell with a specific angular momentum quantum numberl= 0 forsorbitals, 1 forporbitals, 2 ford
orbitals. Finally, there are more than one possible orbitals forl≥ 1, each corresponding to a specific value of
m. In the case of a hydrogen atom or a one-electron ion (such as He+, Li2+, and so on), energies of all the
l
orbitals with the samenare the same. This is called a degeneracy, and the energy levels for the same principal
quantum number,n, are calleddegenerate orbitals. However, in atoms with more than one electron, this
degeneracy is eliminated by the electron–electron interactions, and orbitals that belong to different subshells
have different energies, as shown onFigure 6.22. Orbitals within the same subshell are still degenerate and
have the same energy.
While the three quantum numbers discussed in the previous paragraphs work well for describing electron
orbitals, some experiments showed that they were not sufficient to explain all observed results. It was
demonstrated in the 1920s that when hydrogen-line spectra are examined at extremely high resolution, some
lines are actually not single peaks but, rather, pairs of closely spaced lines. This is the so-called fine structure
of the spectrum, and it implies that there are additional small differences in energies of electrons even when
they are located in the same orbital. These observations led Samuel Goudsmit and George Uhlenbeck to
propose that electrons have a fourth quantum number. They called this thespin quantum number, orm.
s
The other three quantum numbers,n,l, andm, are properties of specific atomic orbitals that also define in
l
what part of the space an electron is most likely to be located. Orbitals are a result of solving the Schrödinger
equation for electrons in atoms. The electron spin is a different kind of property. It is a completely quantum
phenomenon with no analogues in the classical realm. In addition, it cannot be derived from solving the
Schrödinger equation and is not related to the normal spatial coordinates (such as the Cartesianx,y, andz).
Electron spin describes an intrinsic electron "rotation" or "spinning." Each electron acts as a tiny magnet or a
tiny rotating object with an angular momentum, or as a loop with an electric current, even though this rotation
or current cannot be observed in terms of spatial coordinates.
The magnitude of the overall electron spin can only have one value, and an electron can only “spin” in one of
two quantized states. One is termed the α state, with thezcomponent of the spin being in the positive direction
of thezaxis. This corresponds to the spin quantum number The other is called the β state, with the
zcomponent of the spin being negative and Any electron, regardless of the atomic orbital it is
located in, can only have one of those two values of the spin quantum number. The energies of electrons having
and are different if an external magnetic field is applied.
PAGE: 298
284 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.23 Electrons with spin values in an external magnetic field.
Figure 6.23illustrates this phenomenon. An electron acts like a tiny magnet. Its moment is directed up (in the
positive direction of thezaxis) for the spin quantum number and down (in the negativezdirection) for the
spin quantum number of A magnet has a lower energy if its magnetic moment is aligned with the external
magnetic field (the left electron onFigure 6.23) and a higher energy for the magnetic moment being opposite
to the applied field. This is why an electron with has a slightly lower energy in an external field in the
positivezdirection, and an electron with has a slightly higher energy in the same field. This is true
even for an electron occupying the same orbital in an atom. A spectral line corresponding to a transition for
electrons from the same orbital but with different spin quantum numbers has two possible values of energy;
thus, the line in the spectrum will show a fine structure splitting.
The Pauli Exclusion Principle
An electron in an atom is completely described by four quantum numbers:n,l,m, andm. The first three
l s
quantum numbers define the orbital and the fourth quantum number describes the intrinsic electron property
called spin. An Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli formulated a general principle that gives the last piece of
information that we need to understand the general behavior of electrons in atoms. ThePauli exclusion
principlecan be formulated as follows: No two electrons in the same atom can have exactly the same set of all
the four quantum numbers. What this means is that two electrons can share the same orbital (the same set of
the quantum numbersn,l, andm) only if their spin quantum numbersm have different values. Since the spin
l s
quantum number can only have two values no more than two electrons can occupy the same orbital
(and if two electrons are located in the same orbital, they must have opposite spins). Therefore, any atomic
orbital can be populated by only zero, one, or two electrons.
The properties and meaning of the quantum numbers of electrons in atoms are briefly summarized inTable
6.1.
Quantum Numbers, Their Properties, and Significance
Allowed
Name Symbol Physical meaning
values
1, 2, 3, 4, shell, the general region for the value of energy
principal quantum number n
…. for an electron on the orbital
angular momentum or 0 ≤l≤n
l subshell, the shape of the orbital
azimuthal quantum number – 1
–l≤m≤
magnetic quantum number m l orientation of the orbital
l l
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 299
6.3 • Development of Quantum Theory 285
Quantum Numbers, Their Properties, and Significance
Allowed
Name Symbol Physical meaning
values
direction of the intrinsic quantum “spinning” of
spin quantum number m
s the electron
TABLE6.1
EXAMPLE 6.7
Working with Shells and Subshells
Indicate the number of subshells, the number of orbitals in each subshell, and the values oflandmfor the
l
orbitals in then= 4 shell of an atom.
Solution
Forn= 4,lcan have values of 0, 1, 2, and 3. Thus,s,p,d, andfsubshells are found in then= 4 shell of an atom.
Forl= 0 (thessubshell),mcan only be 0. Thus, there is only one 4sorbital. Forl= 1 (p-type orbitals),mcan
l
have values of –1, 0, +1, so we find three 4porbitals. Forl= 2 (d-type orbitals),mcan have values of –2, –1, 0,
l
+1, +2, so we have five 4dorbitals. Whenl= 3 (f-type orbitals),mcan have values of –3, –2, –1, 0, +1, +2, +3,
l
and we can have seven 4forbitals. Thus, we find a total of 16 orbitals in then= 4 shell of an atom.
Check Your Learning
Identify the subshell in which electrons with the following quantum numbers are found: (a)n= 3,l= 1; (b)n=
5,l= 3; (c)n= 2,l= 0.
Answer:
(a) 3p(b) 5f(c) 2s
EXAMPLE 6.8
Maximum Number of Electrons
Calculate the maximum number of electrons that can occupy a shell with (a)n= 2, (b)n= 5, and (c)nas a
variable. Note you are only looking at the orbitals with the specifiednvalue, not those at lower energies.
Solution
(a) Whenn= 2, there are four orbitals (a single 2sorbital, and three orbitals labeled 2p). These four orbitals can
contain eight electrons.
(b) Whenn= 5, there are five subshells of orbitals that we need to sum:
PAGE: 300
286 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
Again, each orbital holds two electrons, so 50 electrons can fit in this shell.
(c) The number of orbitals in any shellnwill equaln2 There can be up to two electrons in each orbital, so the
.
maximum number of electrons will be 2 n2.
Check Your Learning
If a shell contains a maximum of 32 electrons, what is the principal quantum number,n?
Answer:
n= 4
EXAMPLE 6.9
Working with Quantum Numbers
Complete the following table for atomic orbitals:
Orbital n l mdegeneracy Radial nodes (no.)
l
4f
4 1
7 7 3
5d
Solution
The table can be completed using the following rules:
• The orbital designation isnl, wherel= 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, … is mapped to the letter sequence s,p,d,f,g,h, …,
• Themdegeneracy is the number of orbitals within anlsubshell, and so is 2l+ 1 (there is onesorbital,
l
threeporbitals, fivedorbitals, sevenforbitals, and so forth).
• The number of radial nodes is equal ton –l– 1.
Orbital n l mdegeneracy Radial nodes (no.)
l
4f 4 3 7 0
4p 4 1 3 2
7f 7 3 7 3
5d 5 2 5 2
Check Your Learning
How many orbitals havel= 2 andn= 3?
Answer:
The five degenerate 3dorbitals
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 301
6.4 • Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations) 287
6.4 Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations)
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the predicted ground-state electron configurations of atoms
• Identify and explain exceptions to predicted electron configurations for atoms and ions
• Relate electron configurations to element classifications in the periodic table
Having introduced the basics of atomic structure and quantum mechanics, we can use our understanding of
quantum numbers to determine how atomic orbitals relate to one another. This allows us to determine which
orbitals are occupied by electrons in each atom. The specific arrangement of electrons in orbitals of an atom
determines many of the chemical properties of that atom.
Orbital Energies and Atomic Structure
The energy of atomic orbitals increases as the principal quantum number,n, increases. In any atom with two
or more electrons, the repulsion between the electrons makes energies of subshells with different values ofl
differ so that the energy of the orbitals increases within a shell in the orders<p<d<f.Figure 6.24depicts
how these two trends in increasing energy relate. The 1sorbital at the bottom of the diagram is the orbital with
electrons of lowest energy. The energy increases as we move up to the 2sand then 2p, 3s, and 3porbitals,
showing that the increasingnvalue has more influence on energy than the increasinglvalue for small atoms.
However, this pattern does not hold for larger atoms. The 3dorbital is higher in energy than the 4sorbital.
Such overlaps continue to occur frequently as we move up the chart.
FIGURE6.24 Generalized energy-level diagram for atomic orbitals in an atom with two or more electrons (not to
scale).
Electrons in successive atoms on the periodic table tend to fill low-energy orbitals first. Thus, many students
find it confusing that, for example, the 5porbitals fill immediately after the 4d, and immediately before the 6s.
The filling order is based on observed experimental results, and has been confirmed by theoretical
calculations. As the principal quantum number,n, increases, the size of the orbital increases and the electrons
spend more time farther from the nucleus. Thus, the attraction to the nucleus is weaker and the energy
associated with the orbital is higher (less stabilized). But this is not the only effect we have to take into account.
Within each shell, as the value oflincreases, the electrons are less penetrating (meaning there is less electron
density found close to the nucleus), in the orders>p>d>f. Electrons that are closer to the nucleus slightly
repel electrons that are farther out, offsetting the more dominant electron–nucleus attractions slightly (recall
PAGE: 302
288 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
that all electrons have −1 charges, but nuclei have +Zcharges). This phenomenon is called shielding and will
be discussed in more detail in the next section. Electrons in orbitals that experience more shielding are less
stabilized and thus higher in energy. For small orbitals (1sthrough 3p), the increase in energy due tonis more
significant than the increase due tol; however, for larger orbitals the two trends are comparable and cannot be
simply predicted. We will discuss methods for remembering the observed order.
The arrangement of electrons in the orbitals of an atom is called theelectron configurationof the atom. We
describe an electron configuration with a symbol that contains three pieces of information (Figure 6.25):
1. The number of the principal quantum shell,n,
2. The letter that designates the orbital type (the subshell,l), and
3. A superscript number that designates the number of electrons in that particular subshell.
For example, the notation 2p4(read "two–p–four") indicates four electrons in apsubshell (l= 1) with a
principal quantum number (n) of 2. The notation 3d8(read "three–d–eight") indicates eight electrons in thed
subshell (i.e.,l= 2) of the principal shell for whichn= 3.
FIGURE6.25 The diagram of an electron configuration specifies the subshell (nandlvalue, with letter symbol) and
superscript number of electrons.
The Aufbau Principle
To determine the electron configuration for any particular atom, we can “build” the structures in the order of
atomic numbers. Beginning with hydrogen, and continuing across the periods of the periodic table, we add one
proton at a time to the nucleus and one electron to the proper subshell until we have described the electron
configurations of all the elements. This procedure is called theAufbau principle, from the German word
Aufbau(“to build up”). Each added electron occupies the subshell of lowest energy available (in the order
shown inFigure 6.24), subject to the limitations imposed by the allowed quantum numbers according to the
Pauli exclusion principle. Electrons enter higher-energy subshells only after lower-energy subshells have been
filled to capacity.Figure 6.26illustrates the traditional way to remember the filling order for atomic orbitals.
Since the arrangement of the periodic table is based on the electron configurations,Figure 6.27provides an
alternative method for determining the electron configuration. The filling order simply begins at hydrogen and
includes each subshell as you proceed in increasingZorder. For example, after filling the 3pblock up to Ar, we
see the orbital will be 4s (K, Ca), followed by the 3dorbitals.
FIGURE6.26 This diagram depicts the energy order for atomic orbitals and is useful for deriving ground-state
electron configurations.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 303
6.4 • Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations) 289
FIGURE6.27 This partial periodic table shows electron configurations for the valence subshells of atoms. By
“building up” from hydrogen, this table can be used to determine the electron configuration for atoms of most
elements in the periodic table. (Electron configurations of the lanthanides and actinides are not accurately predicted
by this simple approach. SeeFigure 6.29
We will now construct the ground-state electron configuration and orbital diagram for a selection of atoms in
the first and second periods of the periodic table.Orbital diagramsare pictorial representations of the
electron configuration, showing the individual orbitals and the pairing arrangement of electrons. We start with
a single hydrogen atom (atomic number 1), which consists of one proton and one electron. Referring toFigure
6.26orFigure 6.27, we would expect to find the electron in the 1sorbital. By convention, the value is
usually filled first. The electron configuration and the orbital diagram are:
Following hydrogen is the noble gas helium, which has an atomic number of 2. The helium atom contains two
protons and two electrons. The first electron has the same four quantum numbers as the hydrogen atom
electron (n= 1,l= 0,m= 0, ). The second electron also goes into the 1sorbital and fills that orbital.
l
The second electron has the samen,l, andmquantum numbers, but must have the opposite spin quantum
l
number, This is in accord with the Pauli exclusion principle: No two electrons in the same atom can
have the same set of four quantum numbers. For orbital diagrams, this means two arrows go in each box
(representing two electrons in each orbital) and the arrows must point in opposite directions (representing
paired spins). The electron configuration and orbital diagram of helium are:
Then= 1 shell is completely filled in a helium atom.
PAGE: 304
290 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
The next atom is the alkali metal lithium with an atomic number of 3. The first two electrons in lithium fill the
1sorbital and have the same sets of four quantum numbers as the two electrons in helium. The remaining
electron must occupy the orbital of next lowest energy, the 2sorbital (Figure 6.26orFigure 6.27). Thus, the
electron configuration and orbital diagram of lithium are:
An atom of the alkaline earth metal beryllium, with an atomic number of 4, contains four protons in the
nucleus and four electrons surrounding the nucleus. The fourth electron fills the remaining space in the 2s
orbital.
An atom of boron (atomic number 5) contains five electrons. Then= 1 shell is filled with two electrons and
three electrons will occupy then= 2 shell. Because anyssubshell can contain only two electrons, the fifth
electron must occupy the next energy level, which will be a 2porbital. There are three degenerate 2porbitals
(m= −1, 0, +1) and the electron can occupy any one of theseporbitals. When drawing orbital diagrams, we
l
include empty boxes to depict any empty orbitals in the same subshell that we are filling.
Carbon (atomic number 6) has six electrons. Four of them fill the 1sand 2sorbitals. The remaining two
electrons occupy the 2psubshell. We now have a choice of filling one of the 2porbitals and pairing the
electrons or of leaving the electrons unpaired in two different, but degenerate,porbitals. The orbitals are filled
as described byHund’s rule: the lowest-energy configuration for an atom with electrons within a set of
degenerate orbitals is that having the maximum number of unpaired electrons. Thus, the two electrons in the
carbon 2porbitals have identicaln,l, andm quantum numbers and differ in theirmquantum number (in
s l
accord with the Pauli exclusion principle). The electron configuration and orbital diagram for carbon are:
Nitrogen (atomic number 7) fills the 1sand 2ssubshells and has one electron in each of the three 2porbitals,
in accordance with Hund’s rule. These three electrons have unpaired spins. Oxygen (atomic number 8) has a
pair of electrons in any one of the 2porbitals (the electrons have opposite spins) and a single electron in each
of the other two. Fluorine (atomic number 9) has only one 2porbital containing an unpaired electron. All of the
electrons in the noble gas neon (atomic number 10) are paired, and all of the orbitals in then= 1 and then= 2
shells are filled. The electron configurations and orbital diagrams of these four elements are:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 305
6.4 • Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations) 291
The alkali metal sodium (atomic number 11) has one more electron than the neon atom. This electron must go
into the lowest-energy subshell available, the 3sorbital, giving a 1s22s22p63s1configuration. The electrons
occupying the outermost shell orbital(s) (highest value ofn) are calledvalence electrons, and those occupying
the inner shell orbitals are calledcore electrons(Figure 6.28). Since the core electron shells correspond to
noble gas electron configurations, we can abbreviate electron configurations by writing the noble gas that
matches the core electron configuration, along with the valence electrons in a condensed format. For our
sodium example, the symbol [Ne] represents core electrons, (1s22s22p6) and our abbreviated or condensed
configuration is [Ne]3s1.
FIGURE6.28 A core-abbreviated electron configuration (right) replaces the core electrons with the noble gas
symbol whose configuration matches the core electron configuration of the other element.
Similarly, the abbreviated configuration of lithium can be represented as [He]2s1, where [He] represents the
configuration of the helium atom, which is identical to that of the filled inner shell of lithium. Writing the
configurations in this way emphasizes the similarity of the configurations of lithium and sodium. Both atoms,
which are in the alkali metal family, have only one electron in a valencessubshell outside a filled set of inner
shells.
The alkaline earth metal magnesium (atomic number 12), with its 12 electrons in a [Ne]3s2configuration, is
analogous to its family member beryllium, [He]2s2. Both atoms have a filledssubshell outside their filled inner
shells. Aluminum (atomic number 13), with 13 electrons and the electron configuration [Ne]3s23p1, is
analogous to its family member boron, [He]2s22p1.
The electron configurations of silicon (14 electrons), phosphorus (15 electrons), sulfur (16 electrons), chlorine
(17 electrons), and argon (18 electrons) are analogous in the electron configurations of their outer shells to
their corresponding family members carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, and neon, respectively, except that
the principal quantum number of the outer shell of the heavier elements has increased by one ton= 3.Figure
6.29shows the lowest energy, or ground-state, electron configuration for these elements as well as that for
atoms of each of the known elements.
PAGE: 306
292 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.29 This version of the periodic table shows the outer-shell electron configuration of each element. Note
that down each group, the configuration is often similar.
When we come to the next element in the periodic table, the alkali metal potassium (atomic number 19), we
might expect that we would begin to add electrons to the 3dsubshell. However, all available chemical and
physical evidence indicates that potassium is like lithium and sodium, and that the next electron is not added
to the 3dlevel but is, instead, added to the 4slevel (Figure 6.29). As discussed previously, the 3dorbital with no
radial nodes is higher in energy because it is less penetrating and more shielded from the nucleus than the 4s,
which has three radial nodes. Thus, potassium has an electron configuration of [Ar]4s1. Hence, potassium
corresponds to Li and Na in its valence shell configuration. The next electron is added to complete the 4s
subshell and calcium has an electron configuration of [Ar]4s2. This gives calcium an outer-shell electron
configuration corresponding to that of beryllium and magnesium.
Beginning with the transition metal scandium (atomic number 21), additional electrons are added
successively to the 3dsubshell. This subshell is filled to its capacity with 10 electrons (remember that forl= 2
[dorbitals], there are 2l+ 1 = 5 values ofm, meaning that there are fivedorbitals that have a combined
l
capacity of 10 electrons). The 4psubshell fills next. Note that for three series of elements, scandium (Sc)
through copper (Cu), yttrium (Y) through silver (Ag), and lutetium (Lu) through gold (Au), a total of 10d
electrons are successively added to the (n– 1) shell next to thenshell to bring that (n– 1) shell from 8 to 18
electrons. For two series, lanthanum (La) through lutetium (Lu) and actinium (Ac) through lawrencium (Lr), 14
felectrons (l= 3, 2l+ 1 = 7mvalues; thus, seven orbitals with a combined capacity of 14 electrons) are
l
successively added to the (n– 2) shell to bring that shell from 18 electrons to a total of 32 electrons.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 307
6.4 • Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations) 293
EXAMPLE 6.10
Quantum Numbers and Electron Configurations
What is the electron configuration and orbital diagram for a phosphorus atom? What are the four quantum
numbers for the last electron added?
Solution
The atomic number of phosphorus is 15. Thus, a phosphorus atom contains 15 electrons. The order of filling of
the energy levels is 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, . . . The 15 electrons of the phosphorus atom will fill up to the 3p
orbital, which will contain three electrons:
The last electron added is a 3pelectron. Therefore,n= 3 and, for ap-type orbital,l= 1. Themvalue could be
l
–1, 0, or +1. The threeporbitals are degenerate, so any of thesemvalues is correct. For unpaired electrons,
l
convention assigns the value of for the spin quantum number; thus,
Check Your Learning
Identify the atoms from the electron configurations given:
(a) [Ar]4s23d5
(b) [Kr]5s24d105p6
Answer:
(a) Mn (b) Xe
The periodic table can be a powerful tool in predicting the electron configuration of an element. However, we
do find exceptions to the order of filling of orbitals that are shown inFigure 6.26orFigure 6.27. For instance,
the electron configurations (shown inFigure 6.29) of the transition metals chromium (Cr; atomic number 24)
and copper (Cu; atomic number 29), among others, are not those we would expect. In general, such exceptions
involve subshells with very similar energy, and small effects can lead to changes in the order of filling.
In the case of Cr and Cu, we find that half-filled and completely filled subshells apparently represent conditions
of preferred stability. This stability is such that an electron shifts from the 4sinto the 3dorbital to gain the
extra stability of a half-filled 3dsubshell (in Cr) or a filled 3dsubshell (in Cu). Other exceptions also occur. For
example, niobium (Nb, atomic number 41) is predicted to have the electron configuration [Kr]5s24d3.
Experimentally, we observe that its ground-state electron configuration is actually [Kr]5s14d4. We can
rationalize this observation by saying that the electron–electron repulsions experienced by pairing the
electrons in the 5sorbital are larger than the gap in energy between the 5sand 4dorbitals. There is no simple
method to predict the exceptions for atoms where the magnitude of the repulsions between electrons is
greater than the small differences in energy between subshells.
Electron Configurations and the Periodic Table
As described earlier, the periodic table arranges atoms based on increasing atomic number so that elements
with the same chemical properties recur periodically. When their electron configurations are added to the
table (Figure 6.29), we also see a periodic recurrence of similar electron configurations in the outer shells of
these elements. Because they are in the outer shells of an atom, valence electrons play the most important role
in chemical reactions. The outer electrons have the highest energy of the electrons in an atom and are more
easily lost or shared than the core electrons. Valence electrons are also the determining factor in some
physical properties of the elements.
Elements in any one group (or column) have the same number of valence electrons; the alkali metals lithium
PAGE: 308
294 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
and sodium each have only one valence electron, the alkaline earth metals beryllium and magnesium each
have two, and the halogens fluorine and chlorine each have seven valence electrons. The similarity in chemical
properties among elements of the same group occurs because they have the same number of valence
electrons. It is the loss, gain, or sharing of valence electrons that defines how elements react.
It is important to remember that the periodic table was developed on the basis of the chemical behavior of the
elements, well before any idea of their atomic structure was available. Now we can understand why the
periodic table has the arrangement it has—the arrangement puts elements whose atoms have the same
number of valence electrons in the same group. This arrangement is emphasized inFigure 6.29, which shows
in periodic-table form the electron configuration of the last subshell to be filled by the Aufbau principle. The
colored sections ofFigure 6.29show the three categories of elements classified by the orbitals being filled:
main group, transition, and inner transition elements. These classifications determine which orbitals are
counted in thevalence shell, or highest energy level orbitals of an atom.
1. Main group elements(sometimes calledrepresentative elements) are those in which the last electron
added enters ansor aporbital in the outermost shell, shown in blue and red inFigure 6.29. This category
includes all the nonmetallic elements, as well as many metals and the metalloids. The valence electrons
for main group elements are those with the highestnlevel. For example, gallium (Ga, atomic number 31)
has the electron configuration [Ar]4s23d104p1, which contains three valence electrons (underlined). The
completely filleddorbitals count as core, not valence, electrons.
2. Transition elements or transition metals. These are metallic elements in which the last electron added
enters adorbital. The valence electrons (those added after the last noble gas configuration) in these
elements include thensand (n– 1)delectrons. The official IUPAC definition of transition elements
specifies those with partially filleddorbitals. Thus, the elements with completely filled orbitals (Zn, Cd,
Hg, as well as Cu, Ag, and Au inFigure 6.29) are not technically transition elements. However, the term is
frequently used to refer to the entiredblock (colored yellow inFigure 6.29), and we will adopt this usage in
this textbook.
3. Inner transition elementsare metallic elements in which the last electron added occupies anforbital.
They are shown in green inFigure 6.29. The valence shells of the inner transition elements consist of the
(n– 2)f,the (n– 1)d, and thenssubshells. There are two inner transition series:
a. The lanthanide series: lanthanum (La) through lutetium (Lu)
b. The actinide series: actinium (Ac) through lawrencium (Lr)
Lanthanum and actinium, because of their similarities to the other members of the series, are included and
used to name the series, even though they are transition metals with nofelectrons.
Electron Configurations of Ions
Ions are formed when atoms gain or lose electrons. A cation (positively charged ion) forms when one or more
electrons are removed from a parent atom. For main group elements, the electrons that were added last are
the first electrons removed. For transition metals and inner transition metals, however, electrons in the
sorbital are easier to remove than thedorfelectrons, and so the highest nselectrons are lost, and then the
(n– 1)dor (n– 2)felectrons are removed. An anion (negatively charged ion) forms when one or more
electrons are added to a parent atom. The added electrons fill in the order predicted by the Aufbau principle.
EXAMPLE 6.11
Predicting Electron Configurations of Ions
What is the electron configuration of:
(a) Na+
(b) P3–
(c) Al2+
(d) Fe2+
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 309
6.5 • Periodic Variations in Element Properties 295
(e) Sm3+
Solution
First, write out the electron configuration for each parent atom. We have chosen to show the full,
unabbreviated configurations to provide more practice for students who want it, but listing the core-
abbreviated electron configurations is also acceptable.
Next, determine whether an electron is gained or lost. Remember electrons are negatively charged, so ions
with a positive charge havelostan electron. For main group elements, the last orbital gains or loses the
electron. For transition metals, the lastsorbital loses an electron before thedorbitals.
(a) Na: 1s22s22p63s1. Sodium cation loses one electron, so Na+: 1s22s22p63s1= Na+: 1s22s22p6.
(b) P: 1s22s22p63s23p3. Phosphorus trianion gains three electrons, so P3−: 1s22s22p63s23p6.
(c) Al: 1s22s22p63s23p1. Aluminum dication loses two electrons Al2+: 1s22s22p63s23p1=
Al2+: 1s22s22p63s1.
(d) Fe: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d6. Iron(II) loses two electrons and, since it is a transition metal, they are removed
from the 4sorbital Fe2+: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d6= 1s22s22p63s23p63d6.
(e). Sm: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f6. Samarium trication loses three electrons. The first two
will be lost from the 6sorbital, and the final one is removed from the 4forbital. Sm3+:
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f6= 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p64f5.
Check Your Learning
Which ion with a +2 charge has the electron configuration 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p64d5? Which ion with a
+3 charge has this configuration?
Answer:
Tc2+, Ru3+
6.5 Periodic Variations in Element Properties
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe and explain the observed trends in atomic size, ionization energy, and electron affinity of the elements
The elements in groups (vertical columns) of the periodic table exhibit similar chemical behavior. This
similarity occurs because the members of a group have the same number and distribution of electrons in their
valence shells. However, there are also other patterns in chemical properties on the periodic table. For
example, as we move down a group, the metallic character of the atoms increases. Oxygen, at the top of group
16 (6A), is a colorless gas; in the middle of the group, selenium is a semiconducting solid; and, toward the
bottom, polonium is a silver-grey solid that conducts electricity.
As we go across a period from left to right, we add a proton to the nucleus and an electron to the valence shell
with each successive element. As we go down the elements in a group, the number of electrons in the valence
shell remains constant, but the principal quantum number increases by one each time. An understanding of
the electronic structure of the elements allows us to examine some of the properties that govern their chemical
behavior. These properties vary periodically as the electronic structure of the elements changes. They are (1)
size (radius) of atoms and ions, (2) ionization energies, and (3) electron affinities.
LINK TO LEARNING
Explorevisualizations(http://openstax.org/l/16pertrends)of the periodic trends discussed in this section (and
many more trends). With just a few clicks, you can create three-dimensional versions of the periodic table
showing atomic size or graphs of ionization energies from all measured elements.
PAGE: 310
296 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
Variation in Covalent Radius
The quantum mechanical picture makes it difficult to establish a definite size of an atom. However, there are
several practical ways to define the radius of atoms and, thus, to determine their relative sizes that give roughly
similar values. We will use thecovalent radius(Figure 6.30), which is defined as one-half the distance between
the nuclei of two identical atoms when they are joined by a covalent bond (this measurement is possible
because atoms within molecules still retain much of their atomic identity). We know that as we scan down a
group, the principal quantum number,n, increases by one for each element. Thus, the electrons are being
added to a region of space that is increasingly distant from the nucleus. Consequently, the size of the atom (and
its covalent radius) must increase as we increase the distance of the outermost electrons from the nucleus.
This trend is illustrated for the covalent radii of the halogens inTable 6.2andFigure 6.30. The trends for the
entire periodic table can be seen inFigure 6.30.
Covalent Radii of the Halogen Group Elements
Atom Covalent radius (pm) Nuclear charge
F 64 +9
Cl 99 +17
Br 114 +35
I 133 +53
At 148 +85
TABLE6.2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 311
6.5 • Periodic Variations in Element Properties 297
FIGURE6.30 (a) The radius of an atom is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei in a molecule
consisting of two identical atoms joined by a covalent bond. The atomic radius for the halogens increases down the
group asnincreases. (b) Covalent radii of the elements are shown to scale. The general trend is that radii increase
down a group and decrease across a period.
PAGE: 312
298 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
FIGURE6.31 Within each period, the trend in atomic radius decreases asZincreases; for example, from K to Kr.
Within each group (e.g., the alkali metals shown in purple), the trend is that atomic radius increases asZincreases.
As shown inFigure 6.31, as we move across a period from left to right, we generally find that each element has
a smaller covalent radius than the element preceding it. This might seem counterintuitive because it implies
that atoms with more electrons have a smaller atomic radius. This can be explained with the concept of
effective nuclear charge,Z . This is the pull exerted on a specific electron by the nucleus, taking into
eff
account any electron–electron repulsions. For hydrogen, there is only one electron and so the nuclear charge
(Z) and the effective nuclear charge (Z ) are equal. For all other atoms, the inner electrons partiallyshieldthe
eff
outer electrons from the pull of the nucleus, and thus:
Shielding is determined by the probability of another electron being between the electron of interest and the
nucleus, as well as by the electron–electron repulsions the electron of interest encounters. Core electrons are
adept at shielding, while electrons in the same valence shell do not block the nuclear attraction experienced by
each other as efficiently. Thus, each time we move from one element to the next across a period,Zincreases by
one, but the shielding increases only slightly. Thus,Z increases as we move from left to right across a period.
eff
The stronger pull (higher effective nuclear charge) experienced by electrons on the right side of the periodic
table draws them closer to the nucleus, making the covalent radii smaller.
Thus, as we would expect, the outermost or valence electrons are easiest to remove because they have the
highest energies, are shielded more, and are farthest from the nucleus. As a general rule, when the
representative elements form cations, they do so by the loss of thensornpelectrons that were added last in
the Aufbau process. The transition elements, on the other hand, lose thenselectrons before they begin to lose
the (n– 1)delectrons, even though thenselectrons are added first, according to the Aufbau principle.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 313
6.5 • Periodic Variations in Element Properties 299
EXAMPLE 6.12
Sorting Atomic Radii
Predict the order of increasing covalent radius for Ge, Fl, Br, Kr.
Solution
Radius increases as we move down a group, so Ge < Fl (Note: Fl is the symbol for flerovium, element 114, NOT
fluorine). Radius decreases as we move across a period, so Kr < Br < Ge. Putting the trends together, we obtain
Kr < Br < Ge < Fl.
Check Your Learning
Give an example of an atom whose size is smaller than fluorine.
Answer:
Ne or He
Variation in Ionic Radii
Ionic radius is the measure used to describe the size of an ion. A cation always has fewer electrons and the
same number of protons as the parent atom; it is smaller than the atom from which it is derived (Figure 6.32).
For example, the covalent radius of an aluminum atom (1s22s22p63s23p1) is 118 pm, whereas the ionic radius
of an Al3+(1s22s22p6) is 68 pm. As electrons are removed from the outer valence shell, the remaining core
electrons occupying smaller shells experience a greater effective nuclear chargeZ (as discussed) and are
eff
drawn even closer to the nucleus.
FIGURE6.32 The radius for a cation is smaller than the parent atom (Al), due to the lost electrons; the radius for
an anion is larger than the parent (S), due to the gained electrons.
Cations with larger charges are smaller than cations with smaller charges (e.g., V2+has an ionic radius of 79
pm, while that of V3+is 64 pm). Proceeding down the groups of the periodic table, we find that cations of
successive elements with the same charge generally have larger radii, corresponding to an increase in the
principal quantum number,n.
An anion (negative ion) is formed by the addition of one or more electrons to the valence shell of an atom. This
results in a greater repulsion among the electrons and a decrease inZ per electron. Both effects (the
eff
increased number of electrons and the decreasedZ ) cause the radius of an anion to be larger than that of the
eff
parent atom (Figure 6.32). For example, a sulfur atom ([Ne]3s23p4) has a covalent radius of 104 pm, whereas
the ionic radius of the sulfide anion ([Ne]3s23p6) is 170 pm. For consecutive elements proceeding down any
group, anions have larger principal quantum numbers and, thus, larger radii.
Atoms and ions that have the same electron configuration are said to beisoelectronic. Examples of
isoelectronic species are N3–, O2–, F–, Ne, Na+, Mg2+, and Al3+(1s22s22p6). Another isoelectronic series is P3–,
S2–, Cl–, Ar, K+, Ca2+, and Sc3+([Ne]3s23p6). For atoms or ions that are isoelectronic, the number of protons
determines the size. The greater the nuclear charge, the smaller the radius in a series of isoelectronic ions and
atoms.
Variation in Ionization Energies
The amount of energy required to remove the most loosely bound electron from a gaseous atom in its ground
state is called its firstionization energy(IE ). The first ionization energy for an element, X, is the energy
1
required to form a cation with +1 charge:
PAGE: 314
300 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
The energy required to remove the second most loosely bound electron is called the second ionization energy
(IE ).
2
The energy required to remove the third electron is the third ionization energy, and so on. Energy is always
required to remove electrons from atoms or ions, so ionization processes are endothermic and IE values are
always positive. For larger atoms, the most loosely bound electron is located farther from the nucleus and so is
easier to remove. Thus, as size (atomic radius) increases, the ionization energy should decrease. Relating this
logic to what we have just learned about radii, we would expect first ionization energies to decrease down a
group and to increase across a period.
Figure 6.33graphs the relationship between the first ionization energy and the atomic number of several
elements. The values of first ionization energy for the elements are given inFigure 6.34. Within a period, the
IE generally increases with increasingZ. Down a group, the IE value generally decreases with increasingZ.
1 1
There are some systematic deviations from this trend, however. Note that the ionization energy of boron
(atomic number 5) is less than that of beryllium (atomic number 4) even though the nuclear charge of boron is
greater by one proton. This can be explained because the energy of the subshells increases aslincreases, due
to penetration and shielding (as discussed previously in this chapter). Within any one shell, theselectrons are
lower in energy than thepelectrons. This means that anselectron is harder to remove from an atom than ap
electron in the same shell. The electron removed during the ionization of beryllium ([He]2s2) is anselectron,
whereas the electron removed during the ionization of boron ([He]2s22p1) is apelectron; this results in a lower
first ionization energy for boron, even though its nuclear charge is greater by one proton. Thus, we see a small
deviation from the predicted trend occurring each time a new subshell begins.
FIGURE6.33 The first ionization energy of the elements in the first five periods are plotted against their atomic
number.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 315
6.5 • Periodic Variations in Element Properties 301
FIGURE6.34 This version of the periodic table shows the first ionization energy (IE ), in kJ/mol, of selected
1
elements.
Another deviation occurs as orbitals become more than one-half filled. The first ionization energy for oxygen is
slightly less than that for nitrogen, despite the trend in increasing IE values across a period. Looking at the
1
orbital diagram of oxygen, we can see that removing one electron will eliminate the electron–electron
repulsion caused by pairing the electrons in the 2porbital and will result in a half-filled orbital (which is
energetically favorable). Analogous changes occur in succeeding periods (note the dip for sulfur after
phosphorus inFigure 6.34).
Removing an electron from a cation is more difficult than removing an electron from a neutral atom because of
the greater electrostatic attraction to the cation. Likewise, removing an electron from a cation with a higher
positive charge is more difficult than removing an electron from an ion with a lower charge. Thus, successive
ionization energies for one element always increase. As seen inTable 6.3, there is a large increase in the
ionization energies for each element. This jump corresponds to removal of the core electrons, which are
harder to remove than the valence electrons. For example, Sc and Ga both have three valence electrons, so the
rapid increase in ionization energy occurs after the third ionization.
Successive Ionization Energies for Selected Elements (kJ/mol)
Element IE IE IE IE IE IE IE
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
K 418.8 3051.8 4419.6 5876.9 7975.5 9590.6 11343
Ca 589.8 1145.4 4912.4 6490.6 8153.0 10495.7 12272.9
Sc 633.1 1235.0 2388.7 7090.6 8842.9 10679.0 13315.0
Ga 578.8 1979.4 2964.6 6180 8298.7 10873.9 13594.8
TABLE6.3
PAGE: 316
302 6 • Electronic Structure and Periodic Properties of Elements
Element IE IE IE IE IE IE IE
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Ge 762.2 1537.5 3302.1 4410.6 9021.4 Not available Not available
As 944.5 1793.6 2735.5 4836.8 6042.9 12311.5 Not available
TABLE6.3
EXAMPLE 6.13
Ranking Ionization Energies
Predict the order of increasing energy for the following processes: IE for Al, IE for Tl, IE for Na, IE for Al.
1 1 2 3
Solution
Removing the 6p1electron from Tl is easier than removing the 3p1electron from Al because the highern
orbital is farther from the nucleus, so IE (Tl) < IE (Al). Ionizing the third electron from
1 1
requires more energy because the cation Al2+exerts a stronger pull on the
electron than the neutral Al atom, so IE (Al) < IE (Al). The second ionization energy for sodium removes a core
1 3
electron, which is a much higher energy process than removing valence electrons. Putting this all together, we
obtain: IE (Tl) < IE (Al) < IE (Al) < IE (Na).
1 1 3 2
Check Your Learning
Which has the lowest value for IE : O, Po, Pb, or Ba?
1
Answer:
Ba
Variation in Electron Affinities
Theelectron affinity(EA) is the energy change for the process of adding an electron to a gaseous atom to form
an anion (negative ion).
This process can be either endothermic or exothermic, depending on the element. The EA of some of the
elements is given inFigure 6.35. You can see that many of these elements have negative values of EA, which
means that energy is released when the gaseous atom accepts an electron. However, for some elements,
energy is required for the atom to become negatively charged and the value of their EA is positive. Just as with
ionization energy, subsequent EA values are associated with forming ions with more charge. The second EA is
the energy associated with adding an electron to an anion to form a –2 ion, and so on.
As we might predict, it becomes easier to add an electron across a series of atoms as the effective nuclear
charge of the atoms increases. We find, as we go from left to right across a period, EAs tend to become more
negative. The exceptions found among the elements of group 2 (2A), group 15 (5A), and group 18 (8A) can be
understood based on the electronic structure of these groups. The noble gases, group 18 (8A), have a
completely filled shell and the incoming electron must be added to a highernlevel, which is more difficult to
do. Group 2 (2A) has a fillednssubshell, and so the next electron added goes into the higher energynp, so,
again, the observed EA value is not as the trend would predict. Finally, group 15 (5A) has a half-fillednp
subshell and the next electron must be paired with an existingnpelectron. In all of these cases, the initial
relative stability of the electron configuration disrupts the trend in EA.
We also might expect the atom at the top of each group to have the most negative EA; their first ionization
potentials suggest that these atoms have the largest effective nuclear charges. However, as we move down a
group, we see that thesecondelement in the group most often has the most negative EA. This can be attributed
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 317
6.5 • Periodic Variations in Element Properties 303
to the small size of then= 2 shell and the resulting large electron–electron repulsions. For example, chlorine,
with an EA value of –348 kJ/mol, has the highest value of any element in the periodic table. The EA of fluorine
is –322 kJ/mol. When we add an electron to a fluorine atom to form a fluoride anion (F–), we add an electron to
then= 2 shell. The electron is attracted to the nucleus, but there is also significant repulsion from the other
electrons already present in this small valence shell. The chlorine atom has the same electron configuration in
the valence shell, but because the entering electron is going into then= 3 shell, it occupies a considerably
larger region of space and the electron–electron repulsions are reduced. The entering electron does not
experience as much repulsion and the chlorine atom accepts an additional electron more readily, resulting in a
more negative EA.
FIGURE6.35 This version of the periodic table displays the electron affinity values (in kJ/mol) for selected
elements.
The properties discussed in this section (size of atoms and ions, effective nuclear charge, ionization energies,
and electron affinities) are central to understanding chemical reactivity. For example, because fluorine has an
energetically favorable EA and a large energy barrier to ionization (IE), it is much easier to form fluorine
anions than cations. Metallic properties including conductivity and malleability (the ability to be formed into
sheets) depend on having electrons that can be removed easily. Thus, metallic character increases as we move
down a group and decreases across a period in the same trend observed for atomic size because it is easier to
remove an electron that is farther away from the nucleus.
PAGE: 318
304 6 • Key Terms
Key Terms
amplitude extent of the displacement caused by a the ground-state energy
wave forbital multilobed region of space with high
atomic orbital mathematical function that electron density, describes orbitals withl= 3
describes the behavior of an electron in an atom frequency (ν) number of wave cycles (peaks or
(also called the wavefunction) troughs) that pass a specified point in space per
Aufbau principle procedure in which the electron unit time
configuration of the elements is determined by ground state state in which the electrons in an
“building” them in order of atomic numbers, atom, ion, or molecule have the lowest energy
adding one proton to the nucleus and one possible
electron to the proper subshell at a time Heisenberg uncertainty principle rule stating
blackbody idealized perfect absorber of all that it is impossible to exactly determine both
incident electromagnetic radiation; such bodies certain conjugate dynamical properties such as
emit electromagnetic radiation in characteristic the momentum and the position of a particle at
continuous spectra called blackbody radiation the same time. The uncertainty principle is a
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom structural consequence of quantum particles exhibiting
model in which an electron moves around the wave–particle duality
nucleus only in circular orbits, each with a hertz (Hz) the unit of frequency, which is the
specific allowed radius number of cycles per second, s−1
continuous spectrum electromagnetic radiation Hund’s rule every orbital in a subshell is singly
given off in an unbroken series of wavelengths occupied with one electron before any one orbital
(e.g., white light from the sun) is doubly occupied, and all electrons in singly
core electron electron in an atom that occupies the occupied orbitals have the same spin
orbitals of the inner shells intensity property of wave-propagated energy
covalent radius one-half the distance between the related to the amplitude of the wave, such as
nuclei of two identical atoms when they are brightness of light or loudness of sound
joined by a covalent bond interference pattern pattern typically consisting
dorbital region of space with high electron density of alternating bright and dark fringes; it results
that is either four lobed or contains a dumbbell from constructive and destructive interference of
and torus shape; describes orbitals withl= 2. waves
degenerate orbitals orbitals that have the same ionization energy energy required to remove an
energy electron from a gaseous atom or ion
effective nuclear charge charge that leads to the isoelectronic group of ions or atoms that have
Coulomb force exerted by the nucleus on an identical electron configurations
electron, calculated as the nuclear charge minus line spectrum electromagnetic radiation emitted
shielding at discrete wavelengths by a specific atom (or
electromagnetic radiation energy transmitted by atoms) in an excited state
waves that have an electric-field component and a magnetic quantum number (m) quantum
l
magnetic-field component number signifying the orientation of an atomic
electromagnetic spectrum range of energies that orbital around the nucleus
electromagnetic radiation can comprise, node any point of a standing wave with zero
including radio, microwaves, infrared, visible, amplitude
ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays orbital diagram pictorial representation of the
electron affinity energy change associated with electron configuration showing each orbital as a
addition of an electron to a gaseous atom or ion box and each electron as an arrow
electron configuration listing that identifies the porbital dumbbell-shaped region of space with
electron occupancy of an atom’s shells and high electron density, describes orbitals withl= 1
subshells Pauli exclusion principle specifies that no two
electron density a measure of the probability of electrons in an atom can have the same value for
locating an electron in a particular region of all four quantum numbers
space, it is equal to the squared absolute value of photon smallest possible packet of
the wave functionψ electromagnetic radiation, a particle of light
excited state state having an energy greater than principal quantum number (n) quantum number
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 319
6 • Key Equations 305
specifying the shell an electron occupies in an wave phenomenon characterized by discrete
atom wavelengths determined by the boundary
quantization limitation of some property to conditions used to generate the waves; standing
specific discrete values, not continuous waves are inherently quantized
quantum mechanics field of study that includes subshell atomic orbitals with the same values ofn
quantization of energy, wave-particle duality, and andl
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle to describe valence electrons electrons in the high energy
matter outer shell(s) of an atom
quantum number number having only specific valence shell high energy outer shell(s) of an atom
allowed values and used to characterize the wave oscillation of a property over time or space;
arrangement of electrons in an atom can transport energy from one point to another
sorbital spherical region of space with high wave-particle duality observation that elementary
electron density, describes orbitals withl= 0 particles can exhibit both wave-like and particle-
secondary (angular momentum) quantum like properties
number (l) quantum number distinguishing the wavefunction (ψ) mathematical description of an
different shapes of orbitals; it is also a measure of atomic orbital that describes the shape of the
the orbital angular momentum orbital; it can be used to calculate the probability
shell atomic orbitals with the same principal of finding the electron at any given location in the
quantum number,n orbital, as well as dynamical variables such as the
spin quantum number (m) number specifying energy and the angular momentum
s
the electron spin direction, either or wavelength (λ) distance between two consecutive
standing wave (also, stationary wave) localized peaks or troughs in a wave
Key Equations
c=λν
whereh= 6.626 10−34J s
∞
Summary
6.1Electromagnetic Energy constructive and destructive interference of the
waves. Electromagnetic radiation also demonstrates
Light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation
properties of particles called photons. The energy of
move through a vacuum with a constant speed,c, of
a photon is related to the frequency (or alternatively,
2.998 108m s−1. This radiation shows wavelike
the wavelength) of the radiation asE=hν(or
behavior, which can be characterized by a frequency,
), wherehis Planck's constant. That light
ν, and a wavelength,λ, such thatc=λν. Light is an
demonstrates both wavelike and particle-like
example of a travelling wave. Other important wave
behavior is known as wave-particle duality. All forms
phenomena include standing waves, periodic
of electromagnetic radiation share these properties,
oscillations, and vibrations. Standing waves exhibit
although various forms including X-rays, visible
quantization, since their wavelengths are limited to
light, microwaves, and radio waves interact
discrete integer multiples of some characteristic
differently with matter and have very different
lengths. Electromagnetic radiation that passes
practical applications. Electromagnetic radiation
through two closely spaced narrow slits having
can be generated by exciting matter to higher
dimensions roughly similar to the wavelength will
energies, such as by heating it. The emitted light can
show an interference pattern that is a result of
PAGE: 320
306 6 • Summary
be either continuous (incandescent sources like the atom where electrons are most likely to be found.
sun) or discrete (from specific types of excited
An atomic orbital is characterized by three quantum
atoms). Continuous spectra often have distributions
numbers. The principal quantum number,n, can be
that can be approximated as blackbody radiation at
any positive integer. The general region for value of
some appropriate temperature. The line spectrum of
energy of the orbital and the average distance of an
hydrogen can be obtained by passing the light from
electron from the nucleus are related ton. Orbitals
an electrified tube of hydrogen gas through a prism.
having the same value ofnare said to be in the same
This line spectrum was simple enough that an
shell. The secondary (angular momentum) quantum
empirical formula called the Rydberg formula could
number,l, can have any integer value from 0 ton– 1.
be derived from the spectrum. Three historically
This quantum number describes the shape or type
important paradoxes from the late 19th and early
of the orbital. Orbitals with the same principal
20th centuries that could not be explained within
quantum number and the samelvalue belong to the
the existing framework of classical mechanics and
same subshell. The magnetic quantum number,m,
classical electromagnetism were the blackbody l
with 2l+ 1 values ranging from –lto +l, describes the
problem, the photoelectric effect, and the discrete
orientation of the orbital in space. In addition, each
spectra of atoms. The resolution of these paradoxes
electron has a spin quantum number,m, that can
ultimately led to quantum theories that superseded s
be equal to No two electrons in the same atom
the classical theories.
can have the same set of values for all the four
6.2The Bohr Model
quantum numbers.
Bohr incorporated Planck’s and Einstein’s 6.4Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron
quantization ideas into a model of the hydrogen Configurations)
atom that resolved the paradox of atom stability and
discrete spectra. The Bohr model of the hydrogen The relative energy of the subshells determine the
atom explains the connection between the order in which atomic orbitals are filled (1s, 2s, 2p,
quantization of photons and the quantized emission 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, and so on). Electron configurations
from atoms. Bohr described the hydrogen atom in and orbital diagrams can be determined by applying
terms of an electron moving in a circular orbit about the Pauli exclusion principle (no two electrons can
a nucleus. He postulated that the electron was have the same set of four quantum numbers) and
restricted to certain orbits characterized by discrete Hund’s rule (whenever possible, electrons retain
energies. Transitions between these allowed orbits unpaired spins in degenerate orbitals).
result in the absorption or emission of photons.
Electrons in the outermost orbitals, called valence
When an electron moves from a higher-energy orbit
electrons, are responsible for most of the chemical
to a more stable one, energy is emitted in the form of
behavior of elements. In the periodic table, elements
a photon. To move an electron from a stable orbit to
with analogous valence electron configurations
a more excited one, a photon of energy must be
usually occur within the same group. There are
absorbed. Using the Bohr model, we can calculate
some exceptions to the predicted filling order,
the energy of an electron and the radius of its orbit
particularly when half-filled or completely filled
in any one-electron system.
orbitals can be formed. The periodic table can be
6.3Development of Quantum Theory divided into three categories based on the orbital in
which the last electron to be added is placed: main
Macroscopic objects act as particles. Microscopic group elements (sandporbitals), transition
objects (such as electrons) have properties of both a elements (dorbitals), and inner transition elements
particle and a wave. Their exact trajectories cannot (forbitals).
be determined. The quantum mechanical model of
6.5Periodic Variations in Element
atoms describes the three-dimensional position of
Properties
the electron in aprobabilisticmanner according to a
mathematical function called a wavefunction, often
Electron configurations allow us to understand
denoted asψ. Atomic wavefunctions are also called
many periodic trends. Covalent radius increases as
orbitals. The squared magnitude of the wavefunction
we move down a group because thenlevel (orbital
describes the distribution of the probability of
size) increases. Covalent radius mostly decreases as
finding the electron in a particular region in space.
we move left to right across a period because the
Therefore, atomic orbitals describe the areas in an
effective nuclear charge experienced by the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 321
6 • Exercises 307
electrons increases, and the electrons are pulled in forming an anion) is more favorable (exothermic)
tighter to the nucleus. Anionic radii are larger than when electrons are placed into lower energy orbitals,
the parent atom, while cationic radii are smaller, closer to the nucleus. Therefore, electron affinity
because the number of valence electrons has becomes increasingly negative as we move left to
changed while the nuclear charge has remained right across the periodic table and decreases as we
constant. Ionization energy (the energy associated move down a group. For both IE and electron affinity
with forming a cation) decreases down a group and data, there are exceptions to the trends when
mostly increases across a period because it is easier dealing with completely filled or half-filled
to remove an electron from a larger, higher energy subshells.
orbital. Electron affinity (the energy associated with
Exercises
6.1Electromagnetic Energy
1. The light produced by a red neon sign is due to the emission of light by excited neon atoms. Qualitatively
describe the spectrum produced by passing light from a neon lamp through a prism.
2. An FM radio station found at 103.1 on the FM dial broadcasts at a frequency of 1.031 108s−1(103.1
MHz). What is the wavelength of these radio waves in meters?
3. FM-95, an FM radio station, broadcasts at a frequency of 9.51 107s−1(95.1 MHz). What is the wavelength
of these radio waves in meters?
4. A bright violet line occurs at 435.8 nm in the emission spectrum of mercury vapor. What amount of
energy, in joules, must be released by an electron in a mercury atom to produce a photon of this light?
5. Light with a wavelength of 614.5 nm looks orange. What is the energy, in joules, per photon of this orange
light? What is the energy in eV (1 eV = 1.602 10−19J)?
6. Heated lithium atoms emit photons of light with an energy of 2.961 10−19J. Calculate the frequency and
wavelength of one of these photons. What is the total energy in 1 mole of these photons? What is the color
of the emitted light?
7. A photon of light produced by a surgical laser has an energy of 3.027 10−19J. Calculate the frequency and
wavelength of the photon. What is the total energy in 1 mole of photons? What is the color of the emitted
light?
8. When rubidium ions are heated to a high temperature, two lines are observed in its line spectrum at
wavelengths (a) 7.9 10−7m and (b) 4.2 10−7m. What are the frequencies of the two lines? What color do
we see when we heat a rubidium compound?
9. The emission spectrum of cesium contains two lines whose frequencies are (a) 3.45 1014Hz and (b) 6.53
1014Hz. What are the wavelengths and energies per photon of the two lines? What color are the lines?
10. Photons of infrared radiation are responsible for much of the warmth we feel when holding our hands
before a fire. These photons will also warm other objects. How many infrared photons with a wavelength of
1.5 10−6m must be absorbed by the water to warm a cup of water (175 g) from 25.0 °C to 40 °C?
11. One of the radiographic devices used in a dentist's office emits an X-ray of wavelength 2.090 10−11m.
What is the energy, in joules, and frequency of this X-ray?
12. The eyes of certain reptiles pass a single visual signal to the brain when the visual receptors are struck by
photons of a wavelength of 850 nm. If a total energy of 3.15 10−14J is required to trip the signal, what is
the minimum number of photons that must strike the receptor?
13. RGB color television and computer displays use cathode ray tubes that produce colors by mixing red,
green, and blue light. If we look at the screen with a magnifying glass, we can see individual dots turn on
and off as the colors change. Using a spectrum of visible light, determine the approximate wavelength of
each of these colors. What is the frequency and energy of a photon of each of these colors?
PAGE: 322
308 6 • Exercises
14. Answer the following questions about a Blu-ray laser:
(a) The laser on a Blu-ray player has a wavelength of 405 nm. In what region of the electromagnetic
spectrum is this radiation? What is its frequency?
(b) A Blu-ray laser has a power of 5 milliwatts (1 watt = 1 J s−1). How many photons of light are produced by
the laser in 1 hour?
(c) The ideal resolution of a player using a laser (such as a Blu-ray player), which determines how close
together data can be stored on a compact disk, is determined using the following formula: Resolution =
0.60(λ/NA), whereλis the wavelength of the laser and NA is the numerical aperture. Numerical aperture
is a measure of the size of the spot of light on the disk; the larger the NA, the smaller the spot. In a typical
Blu-ray system, NA = 0.95. If the 405-nm laser is used in a Blu-ray player, what is the closest that
information can be stored on a Blu-ray disk?
(d) The data density of a Blu-ray disk using a 405-nm laser is 1.5 107bits mm−2. Disks have an outside
diameter of 120 mm and a hole of 15-mm diameter. How many data bits can be contained on the disk? If a
Blu-ray disk can hold 9,400,000 pages of text, how many data bits are needed for a typed page? (Hint:
Determine the area of the disk that is available to hold data. The area inside a circle is given by A =πr2,
where the radiusris one-half of the diameter.)
15. What is the threshold frequency for sodium metal if a photon with frequency 6.66 1014s−1ejects an
electron with 7.74 10−20J kinetic energy? Will the photoelectric effect be observed if sodium is exposed
to orange light?
6.2The Bohr Model
16. Why is the electron in a Bohr hydrogen atom bound less tightly when it has a quantum number of 3 than
when it has a quantum number of 1?
17. What does it mean to say that the energy of the electrons in an atom is quantized?
18. Using the Bohr model, determine the energy, in joules, necessary to ionize a ground-state hydrogen atom.
Show your calculations.
19. The electron volt (eV) is a convenient unit of energy for expressing atomic-scale energies. It is the amount
of energy that an electron gains when subjected to a potential of 1 volt; 1 eV = 1.602 10–19J. Using the
Bohr model, determine the energy, in electron volts, of the photon produced when an electron in a
hydrogen atom moves from the orbit withn= 5 to the orbit withn= 2. Show your calculations.
20. Using the Bohr model, determine the lowest possible energy, in joules, for the electron in the Li2+ion.
21. Using the Bohr model, determine the lowest possible energy for the electron in the He+ion.
22. Using the Bohr model, determine the energy of an electron withn= 6 in a hydrogen atom.
23. Using the Bohr model, determine the energy of an electron withn= 8 in a hydrogen atom.
24. How far from the nucleus in angstroms (1 angstrom = 1 10–10m) is the electron in a hydrogen atom if it
has an energy of –8.72 10–20J?
25. What is the radius, in angstroms, of the orbital of an electron withn= 8 in a hydrogen atom?
26. Using the Bohr model, determine the energy in joules of the photon produced when an electron in a He+
ion moves from the orbit withn= 5 to the orbit withn= 2.
27. Using the Bohr model, determine the energy in joules of the photon produced when an electron in a Li2+
ion moves from the orbit withn= 2 to the orbit withn= 1.
28. Consider a large number of hydrogen atoms with electrons randomly distributed in then= 1, 2, 3, and 4
orbits.
(a) How many different wavelengths of light are emitted by these atoms as the electrons fall into lower-
energy orbits?
(b) Calculate the lowest and highest energies of light produced by the transitions described in part (a).
(c) Calculate the frequencies and wavelengths of the light produced by the transitions described in part
(b).
29. How are the Bohr model and the Rutherford model of the atom similar? How are they different?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 323
6 • Exercises 309
30. The spectra of hydrogen and of calcium are shown here.
What causes the lines in these spectra? Why are the colors of the lines different? Suggest a reason for the
observation that the spectrum of calcium is more complicated than the spectrum of hydrogen.
6.3Development of Quantum Theory
31. How are the Bohr model and the quantum mechanical model of the hydrogen atom similar? How are they
different?
32. What are the allowed values for each of the four quantum numbers:n,l,m, andm?
l s
33. Describe the properties of an electron associated with each of the following four quantum numbers:n,l,
m, andm.
l s
34. Answer the following questions:
(a) Without using quantum numbers, describe the differences between the shells, subshells, and orbitals
of an atom.
(b) How do the quantum numbers of the shells, subshells, and orbitals of an atom differ?
35. Identify the subshell in which electrons with the following quantum numbers are found:
(a)n= 2,l= 1
(b)n= 4,l= 2
(c)n= 6,l= 0
36. Which of the subshells described in the previous question contain degenerate orbitals? How many
degenerate orbitals are in each?
37. Identify the subshell in which electrons with the following quantum numbers are found:
(a)n= 3,l= 2
(b)n= 1,l= 0
(c)n= 4,l= 3
38. Which of the subshells described in the previous question contain degenerate orbitals? How many
degenerate orbitals are in each?
39. Sketch the boundary surface of a and ap orbital. Be sure to show and label the axes.
y
40. Sketch thep andd orbitals. Be sure to show and label the coordinates.
x xz
PAGE: 324
310 6 • Exercises
41. Consider the orbitals shown here in outline.
(a) What is the maximum number of electrons contained in an orbital of type (x)? Of type (y)? Of type (z)?
(b) How many orbitals of type (x) are found in a shell withn= 2? How many of type (y)? How many of type
(z)?
(c) Write a set of quantum numbers for an electron in an orbital of type (x) in a shell withn= 4. Of an
orbital of type (y) in a shell withn= 2. Of an orbital of type (z) in a shell withn= 3.
(d) What is the smallest possiblenvalue for an orbital of type (x)? Of type (y)? Of type (z)?
(e) What are the possiblelandmvalues for an orbital of type (x)? Of type (y)? Of type (z)?
l
42. State the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Describe briefly what the principle implies.
43. How many electrons could be held in the second shell of an atom if the spin quantum numberm could
s
have three values instead of just two? (Hint: Consider the Pauli exclusion principle.)
44. Which of the following equations describe particle-like behavior? Which describe wavelike behavior? Do
any involve both types of behavior? Describe the reasons for your choices.
(a)c=λν
(b)
(c)
(d)E = hν
(e)
45. Write a set of quantum numbers for each of the electrons with annof 4 in a Se atom.
6.4Electronic Structure of Atoms (Electron Configurations)
46. Read the labels of several commercial products and identify monatomic ions of at least four transition
elements contained in the products. Write the complete electron configurations of these cations.
47. Read the labels of several commercial products and identify monatomic ions of at least six main group
elements contained in the products. Write the complete electron configurations of these cations and
anions.
48. Using complete subshell notation (not abbreviations, 1s22s22p6, and so forth), predict the electron
configuration of each of the following atoms:
(a) C
(b) P
(c) V
(d) Sb
(e) Sm
49. Using complete subshell notation (1s22s22p6, and so forth), predict the electron configuration of each of
the following atoms:
(a) N
(b) Si
(c) Fe
(d) Te
(e) Tb
50. Is 1s22s22p6the symbol for a macroscopic property or a microscopic property of an element? Explain
your answer.
51. What additional information do we need to answer the question “Which ion has the electron configuration
1s22s22p63s23p6”?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 325
6 • Exercises 311
52. Draw the orbital diagram for the valence shell of each of the following atoms:
(a) C
(b) P
(c) V
(d) Sb
(e) Ru
53. Use an orbital diagram to describe the electron configuration of the valence shell of each of the following
atoms:
(a) N
(b) Si
(c) Fe
(d) Te
(e) Mo
54. Using complete subshell notation (1s22s22p6, and so forth), predict the electron configurations of the
following ions.
(a) N3–
(b) Ca2+
(c) S–
(d) Cs2+
(e) Cr2+
(f) Gd3+
55. Which atom has the electron configuration 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d2?
56. Which atom has the electron configuration 1s22s22p63s23p63d74s2?
57. Which ion with a +1 charge has the electron configuration 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p6? Which ion with a
–2 charge has this configuration?
58. Which of the following atoms contains only three valence electrons: Li, B, N, F, Ne?
59. Which of the following has two unpaired electrons?
(a) Mg
(b) Si
(c) S
(d) Both Mg and S
(e) Both Si and S.
60. Which atom would be expected to have a half-filled 6psubshell?
61. Which atom would be expected to have a half-filled 4ssubshell?
62. In one area of Australia, the cattle did not thrive despite the presence of suitable forage. An investigation
showed the cause to be the absence of sufficient cobalt in the soil. Cobalt forms cations in two oxidation
states, Co2+and Co3+. Write the electron structure of the two cations.
63. Thallium was used as a poison in the Agatha Christie mystery story “The Pale Horse.” Thallium has two
possible cationic forms, +1 and +3. The +1 compounds are the more stable. Write the electron structure of
the +1 cation of thallium.
64. Write the electron configurations for the following atoms or ions:
(a) B3+
(b) O–
(c) Cl3+
(d) Ca2+
(e) Ti
65. Cobalt–60 and iodine–131 are radioactive isotopes commonly used in nuclear medicine. How many
protons, neutrons, and electrons are in atoms of these isotopes? Write the complete electron configuration
for each isotope.
66. Write a set of quantum numbers for each of the electrons with annof 3 in a Sc atom.
PAGE: 326
312 6 • Exercises
6.5Periodic Variations in Element Properties
67. Based on their positions in the periodic table, predict which has the smallest atomic radius: Mg, Sr, Si, Cl,
I.
68. Based on their positions in the periodic table, predict which has the largest atomic radius: Li, Rb, N, F, I.
69. Based on their positions in the periodic table, predict which has the largest first ionization energy: Mg, Ba,
B, O, Te.
70. Based on their positions in the periodic table, predict which has the smallest first ionization energy: Li, Cs,
N, F, I.
71. Based on their positions in the periodic table, rank the following atoms in order of increasing first
ionization energy: F, Li, N, Rb
72. Based on their positions in the periodic table, rank the following atoms in order of increasing first
ionization energy: Mg, O, S, Si
73. Atoms of which group in the periodic table have a valence shell electron configuration ofns2np3?
74. Atoms of which group in the periodic table have a valence shell electron configuration ofns2?
75. Based on their positions in the periodic table, list the following atoms in order of increasing radius: Mg,
Ca, Rb, Cs.
76. Based on their positions in the periodic table, list the following atoms in order of increasing radius: Sr, Ca,
Si, Cl.
77. Based on their positions in the periodic table, list the following ions in order of increasing radius: K+, Ca2+,
Al3+, Si4+.
78. List the following ions in order of increasing radius: Li+, Mg2+, Br–, Te2–.
79. Which atom and/or ion is (are) isoelectronic with Br+: Se2+, Se, As–, Kr, Ga3+, Cl–?
80. Which of the following atoms and ions is (are) isoelectronic with S2+: Si4+, Cl3+, Ar, As3+, Si, Al3+?
81. Compare both the numbers of protons and electrons present in each to rank the following ions in order of
increasing radius: As3–, Br–, K+, Mg2+.
82. Of the five elements Al, Cl, I, Na, Rb, which has the most exothermic reaction? (E represents an atom.)
What name is given to the energy for the reaction? Hint: Note the process depicted doesnotcorrespond to
electron affinity.)
83. Of the five elements Sn, Si, Sb, O, Te, which has the most endothermic reaction? (E represents an atom.)
What name is given to the energy for the reaction?
84. The ionic radii of the ions S2–, Cl–, and K+are 184, 181, 138 pm respectively. Explain why these ions have
different sizes even though they contain the same number of electrons.
85. Which main group atom would be expected to have the lowest second ionization energy?
86. Explain why Al is a member of group 13 rather than group 3?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 327
CHAPTER 7
Chemical Bonding and Molecular
Geometry
Figure7.1 Nicknamed “buckyballs,” buckminsterfullerene molecules (C ) contain only carbon atoms (left)
60
arranged to form a geometric framework of hexagons and pentagons, similar to the pattern on a soccer ball (center).
This molecular structure is named after architect R. Buckminster Fuller, whose innovative designs combined simple
geometric shapes to create large, strong structures such as this weather radar dome near Tucson, Arizona (right).
(credit middle: modification of work by “Petey21”/Wikimedia Commons; credit right: modification of work by Bill
Morrow)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1Ionic Bonding
7.2Covalent Bonding
7.3Lewis Symbols and Structures
7.4Formal Charges and Resonance
7.5Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds
7.6Molecular Structure and Polarity
INTRODUCTION It has long been known that pure carbon occurs in different forms (allotropes) including
graphite and diamonds. But it was not until 1985 that a new form of carbon was recognized:
buckminsterfullerene. This molecule was named after the architect and inventor R. BuckminsterFuller
(1895–1983), whose signature architectural design was the geodesic dome, characterized by a lattice shell
structure supporting a spherical surface. Experimental evidence revealed the formula, C , and then scientists
60
determined how 60 carbon atoms could form one symmetric, stable molecule. They were guided by bonding
theory—the topic of this chapter—which explains how individual atoms connect to form more complex
structures.
7.1 Ionic Bonding
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the formation of cations, anions, and ionic compounds
• Predict the charge of common metallic and nonmetallic elements, and write their electron configurations
PAGE: 328
314 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
As you have learned, ions are atoms or molecules bearing an electrical charge. A cation (a positive ion) forms
when a neutral atom loses one or more electrons from its valence shell, and an anion (a negative ion) forms
when a neutral atom gains one or more electrons in its valence shell.
Compounds composed of ions are called ionic compounds (or salts), and their constituent ions are held
together byionic bonds: electrostatic forces of attraction between oppositely charged cations and anions. The
properties of ionic compounds shed some light on the nature of ionic bonds. Ionic solids exhibit a crystalline
structure and tend to be rigid and brittle; they also tend to have high melting and boiling points, which
suggests that ionic bonds are very strong. Ionic solids are also poor conductors of electricity for the same
reason—the strength of ionic bonds prevents ions from moving freely in the solid state. Most ionic solids,
however, dissolve readily in water. Once dissolved or melted, ionic compounds are excellent conductors of
electricity and heat because the ions can move about freely.
Neutral atoms and their associated ions have very different physical and chemical properties. Sodiumatoms
form sodium metal, a soft, silvery-white metal that burns vigorously in air and reacts explosively with water.
Chlorineatomsform chlorine gas, Cl , a yellow-green gas that is extremely corrosive to most metals and very
2
poisonous to animals and plants. The vigorous reaction between the elements sodium and chlorine forms the
white, crystalline compound sodium chloride, common table salt, which contains sodiumcationsand chloride
anions(Figure 7.2). The compound composed of these ions exhibits properties entirely different from the
properties of the elements sodium and chlorine. Chlorine is poisonous, but sodium chloride is essential to life;
sodium atoms react vigorously with water, but sodium chloride simply dissolves in water.
FIGURE7.2 (a) Sodium is a soft metal that must be stored in mineral oil to prevent reaction with air or water. (b)
Chlorine is a pale yellow-green gas. (c) When combined, they form white crystals of sodium chloride (table salt).
(credit a: modification of work by “Jurii”/Wikimedia Commons)
The Formation of Ionic Compounds
Binary ionic compounds are composed of just two elements: a metal (which forms the cations) and a nonmetal
(which forms the anions). For example, NaCl is a binary ionic compound. We can think about the formation of
such compounds in terms of the periodic properties of the elements. Many metallic elements have relatively
low ionization potentials and lose electrons easily. These elements lie to the left in a period or near the bottom
of a group on the periodic table. Nonmetal atoms have relatively high electron affinities and thus readily gain
electrons lost by metal atoms, thereby filling their valence shells. Nonmetallic elements are found in the
upper-right corner of the periodic table.
As all substances must be electrically neutral, the total number of positive charges on the cations of an ionic
compound must equal the total number of negative charges on its anions. The formula of an ionic compound
represents the simplest ratio of the numbers of ions necessary to give identical numbers of positive and
negative charges. For example, the formula for aluminum oxide, Al O , indicates that this ionic compound
2 3
contains two aluminum cations, Al3+, for every three oxide anions, O2−[thus, (2 +3) + (3 –2) = 0].
It is important to note, however, that the formula for an ionic compound doesnotrepresent the physical
arrangement of its ions. It is incorrect to refer to a sodium chloride (NaCl) “molecule” because there is not a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 329
7.1 • Ionic Bonding 315
single ionic bond, per se, between any specific pair of sodium and chloride ions. The attractive forces between
ions are isotropic—the same in all directions—meaning that any particular ion is equally attracted to all of the
nearby ions of opposite charge. This results in the ions arranging themselves into a tightly bound, three-
dimensional lattice structure. Sodium chloride, for example, consists of a regular arrangement of equal
numbers of Na+cations and Cl–anions (Figure 7.3).
FIGURE7.3 The atoms in sodium chloride (common table salt) are arranged to (a) maximize opposite charges
interacting. The smaller spheres represent sodium ions, the larger ones represent chloride ions. In the expanded
view (b), the geometry can be seen more clearly. Note that each ion is “bonded” to all of the surrounding ions—six in
this case.
The strong electrostatic attraction between Na+and Cl–ions holds them tightly together in solid NaCl. It
requires 769 kJ of energy to dissociate one mole of solid NaCl into separate gaseous Na+and Cl–ions:
Electronic Structures of Cations
When forming a cation, an atom of a main group element tends to lose all of its valence electrons, thus
assuming the electronic structure of the noble gas that precedes it in the periodic table. For groups 1 (the alkali
metals) and 2 (the alkaline earth metals), the group numbers are equal to the numbers of valence shell
electrons and, consequently, to the charges of the cations formed from atoms of these elements when all
valence shell electrons are removed. For example, calcium is a group 2 element whose neutral atoms have 20
electrons and a ground state electron configuration of 1s22s22p63s23p64s2. When a Ca atom loses both of its
valence electrons, the result is a cation with 18 electrons, a 2+ charge, and an electron configuration of
1s22s22p63s23p6. The Ca2+ion is therefore isoelectronic with the noble gas Ar.
For groups 13–17, the group numbers exceed the number of valence electrons by 10 (accounting for the
possibility of fulldsubshells in atoms of elements in the fourth and greater periods). Thus, the charge of a
cation formed by the loss of all valence electrons is equal to the group number minus 10. For example,
aluminum (in group 13) forms 3+ ions (Al3+).
Exceptions to the expected behavior involve elements toward the bottom of the groups. In addition to the
expected ions Tl3+, Sn4+, Pb4+, and Bi5+, a partial loss of these atoms’ valence shell electrons can also lead to
the formation of Tl+, Sn2+, Pb2+, and Bi3+ions. The formation of these 1+, 2+, and 3+ cations is ascribed to the
inert pair effect, which reflects the relatively low energy of the valences-electron pair for atoms of the heavy
elements of groups 13, 14, and 15. Mercury (group 12) also exhibits an unexpected behavior: it forms a
diatomic ion, (an ion formed from two mercury atoms, with an Hg-Hg bond), in addition to the expected
monatomic ion Hg2+(formed from only one mercury atom).
Transition and inner transition metal elements behave differently than main group elements. Most transition
metal cations have 2+ or 3+ charges that result from the loss of their outermostselectron(s) first, sometimes
followed by the loss of one or twodelectrons from the next-to-outermost shell. For example, iron
(1s22s22p63s23p63d64s2) forms the ion Fe2+(1s22s22p63s23p63d6) by the loss of the 4selectrons and the ion
Fe3+(1s22s22p63s23p63d5) by the loss of the 4selectrons and one of the 3delectrons. Although thedorbitals of
PAGE: 330
316 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
the transition elements are—according to the Aufbau principle—the last to fill when building up electron
configurations, the outermostselectrons are the first to be lost when these atoms ionize. When the inner
transition metals form ions, they usually have a 3+ charge, resulting from the loss of their outermosts
electrons and adorfelectron.
EXAMPLE 7.1
Determining the Electronic Structures of Cations
There are at least 14 elements categorized as “essential trace elements” for the human body. They are called
“essential” because they are required for healthy bodily functions, “trace” because they are required only in
small amounts, and “elements” in spite of the fact that they are really ions. Two of these essential trace
elements, chromium and zinc, are required as Cr3+and Zn2+. Write the electron configurations of these
cations.
Solution
First, write the electron configuration for the neutral atoms:
Zn: [Ar]3d104s2
Cr: [Ar]3d54s1
Next, remove electrons from the highest energy orbital. For the transition metals, electrons are removed from
thesorbital first and then from thedorbital. For thep-block elements, electrons are removed from thep
orbitals and then from thesorbital. Zinc is a member of group 12, so it should have a charge of 2+, and thus
loses only the two electrons in itssorbital. Chromium is a transition element and should lose itsselectrons
and then itsdelectrons when forming a cation. Thus, we find the following electron configurations of the ions:
Zn2+: [Ar]3d10
Cr3+: [Ar]3d3
Check Your Learning
Potassium and magnesium are required in our diet. Write the electron configurations of the ions expected
from these elements.
Answer:
K+: [Ar], Mg2+: [Ne]
Electronic Structures of Anions
Most monatomic anions form when a neutral nonmetal atom gains enough electrons to completely fill its outer
sandporbitals, thereby reaching the electron configuration of the next noble gas. Thus, it is simple to
determine the charge on such a negative ion: The charge is equal to the number of electrons that must be
gained to fill thesandporbitals of the parent atom. Oxygen, for example, has the electron configuration
1s22s22p4, whereas the oxygen anion has the electron configuration of the noble gas neon (Ne), 1s22s22p6. The
two additional electrons required to fill the valence orbitals give the oxide ion the charge of 2– (O2–).
EXAMPLE 7.2
Determining the Electronic Structure of Anions
Selenium and iodine are two essential trace elements that form anions. Write the electron configurations of the
anions.
Solution
Se2–: [Ar]3d104s24p6
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 331
7.2 • Covalent Bonding 317
I–: [Kr]4d105s25p6
Check Your Learning
Write the electron configurations of a phosphorus atom and its negative ion. Give the charge on the anion.
Answer:
P: [Ne]3s23p3; P3–: [Ne]3s23p6
7.2 Covalent Bonding
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the formation of covalent bonds
• Define electronegativity and assess the polarity of covalent bonds
Ionic bonding results from the electrostatic attraction of oppositely charged ions that are typically produced by
the transfer of electrons between metallic and nonmetallic atoms. A different type of bonding results from the
mutual attraction of atoms for a “shared” pair of electrons. Such bonds are calledcovalent bonds. Covalent
bonds are formed between two atoms when both have similar tendencies to attract electrons to themselves
(i.e., when both atoms have identical or fairly similar ionization energies and electron affinities). For example,
two hydrogen atoms bond covalently to form an H molecule; each hydrogen atom in the H molecule has two
2 2
electrons stabilizing it, giving each atom the same number of valence electrons as the noble gas He.
Compounds that contain covalent bonds exhibit different physical properties than ionic compounds. Because
the attraction between molecules, which are electrically neutral, is weaker than that between electrically
charged ions, covalent compounds generally have much lower melting and boiling points than ionic
compounds. In fact, many covalent compounds are liquids or gases at room temperature, and, in their solid
states, they are typically much softer than ionic solids. Furthermore, whereas ionic compounds are good
conductors of electricity when dissolved in water, most covalent compounds are insoluble in water; since they
are electrically neutral, they are poor conductors of electricity in any state.
Formation of Covalent Bonds
Nonmetal atoms frequently form covalent bonds with other nonmetal atoms. For example, the hydrogen
molecule, H , contains a covalent bond between its two hydrogen atoms.Figure 7.4illustrates why this bond is
2
formed. Starting on the far right, we have two separate hydrogen atoms with a particular potential energy,
indicated by the red line. Along thex-axis is the distance between the two atoms. As the two atoms approach
each other (moving left along thex-axis), their valence orbitals (1s) begin to overlap. The single electrons on
each hydrogen atom then interact with both atomic nuclei, occupying the space around both atoms. The strong
attraction of each shared electron to both nuclei stabilizes the system, and the potential energy decreases as
the bond distance decreases. If the atoms continue to approach each other, the positive charges in the two
nuclei begin to repel each other, and the potential energy increases. Thebond lengthis determined by the
distance at which the lowest potential energy is achieved.
PAGE: 332
318 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.4 The potential energy of two separate hydrogen atoms (right) decreases as they approach each other,
and the single electrons on each atom are shared to form a covalent bond. The bond length is the internuclear
distance at which the lowest potential energy is achieved.
It is essential to remember that energy must be added to break chemical bonds (an endothermic process),
whereas forming chemical bonds releases energy (an exothermic process). In the case of H , the covalent bond
2
is very strong; a large amount of energy, 436 kJ, must be added to break the bonds in one mole of hydrogen
molecules and cause the atoms to separate:
Conversely, the same amount of energy is released when one mole of H molecules forms from two moles of H
2
atoms:
Pure vs. Polar Covalent Bonds
If the atoms that form a covalent bond are identical, as in H , Cl , and other diatomic molecules, then the
2 2
electrons in the bond must be shared equally. We refer to this as apure covalent bond. Electrons shared in
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 333
7.2 • Covalent Bonding 319
pure covalent bonds have an equal probability of being near each nucleus.
In the case of Cl , each atom starts off with seven valence electrons, and each Cl shares one electron with the
2
other, forming one covalent bond:
The total number of electrons around each individual atom consists of six nonbonding electrons and two
shared (i.e., bonding) electrons for eight total electrons, matching the number of valence electrons in the noble
gas argon. Since the bonding atoms are identical, Cl also features a pure covalent bond.
2
When the atoms linked by a covalent bond are different, the bonding electrons are shared, but no longer
equally. Instead, the bonding electrons are more attracted to one atom than the other, giving rise to a shift of
electron density toward that atom. This unequal distribution of electrons is known as apolar covalent bond,
characterized by a partial positive charge on one atom and a partial negative charge on the other. The atom
that attracts the electrons more strongly acquires the partial negative charge and vice versa. For example, the
electrons in the H–Cl bond of a hydrogen chloride molecule spend more time near the chlorine atom than near
the hydrogen atom. Thus, in an HCl molecule, the chlorine atom carries a partial negative charge and the
hydrogen atom has a partial positive charge.Figure 7.5shows the distribution of electrons in the H–Cl bond.
Note that the shaded area around Cl is much larger than it is around H. Compare this toFigure 7.4, which
shows the even distribution of electrons in the H nonpolar bond.
2
We sometimes designate the positive and negative atoms in a polar covalent bond using a lowercase Greek
letter “delta,” δ, with a plus sign or minus sign to indicate whether the atom has a partial positive charge (δ+) or
a partial negative charge (δ–). This symbolism is shown for the H–Cl molecule inFigure 7.5.
FIGURE7.5 (a) The distribution of electron density in the HCl molecule is uneven. The electron density is greater
around the chlorine nucleus. The small, black dots indicate the location of the hydrogen and chlorine nuclei in the
molecule. (b) Symbols δ+ and δ– indicate the polarity of the H–Cl bond.
Electronegativity
Whether a bond is nonpolar or polar covalent is determined by a property of the bonding atoms called
electronegativity. Electronegativity is a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract electrons (or electron
density) towards itself. It determines how the shared electrons are distributed between the two atoms in a
bond. The more strongly an atom attracts the electrons in its bonds, the larger its electronegativity. Electrons
in a polar covalent bond are shifted toward the more electronegative atom; thus, the more electronegative
atom is the one with the partial negative charge. The greater the difference in electronegativity, the more
polarized the electron distribution and the larger the partial charges of the atoms.
Figure 7.6shows the electronegativity values of the elements as proposed by one of the most famous chemists
of the twentieth century: Linus Pauling (Figure 7.7). In general, electronegativity increases from left to right
across a period in the periodic table and decreases down a group. Thus, the nonmetals, which lie in the upper
right, tend to have the highest electronegativities, with fluorine the most electronegative element of all (EN =
4.0). Metals tend to be less electronegative elements, and the group 1 metals have the lowest
electronegativities. Note that noble gases are excluded from this figure because these atoms usually do not
share electrons with others atoms since they have a full valence shell. (While noble gas compounds such as
XeO do exist, they can only be formed under extreme conditions, and thus they do not fit neatly into the
2
general model of electronegativity.)
PAGE: 334
320 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.6 The electronegativity values derived by Pauling follow predictable periodic trends, with the higher
electronegativities toward the upper right of the periodic table.
Electronegativity versus Electron Affinity
We must be careful not to confuse electronegativity and electron affinity. The electron affinity of an element is
a measurable physical quantity, namely, the energy released or absorbed when an isolated gas-phase atom
acquires an electron, measured in kJ/mol. Electronegativity, on the other hand, describes how tightly an atom
attracts electrons in a bond. It is a dimensionless quantity that is calculated, not measured. Pauling derived the
first electronegativity values by comparing the amounts of energy required to break different types of bonds.
He chose an arbitrary relative scale ranging from 0 to 4.
Portrait of a Chemist
Linus Pauling
LinusPauling, shown inFigure 7.7, is the only person to have received two unshared (individual) Nobel
Prizes: one for chemistry in 1954 for his work on the nature of chemical bonds and one for peace in 1962
for his opposition to weapons of mass destruction. He developed many of the theories and concepts that
are foundational to our current understanding of chemistry, including electronegativity and resonance
structures.
FIGURE7.7 Linus Pauling (1901–1994) made many important contributions to the field of chemistry. He was
also a prominent activist, publicizing issues related to health and nuclear weapons.
Pauling also contributed to many other fields besides chemistry. His research on sickle cell anemia
revealed the cause of the disease—the presence of a genetically inherited abnormal protein in the
blood—and paved the way for the field of molecular genetics. His work was also pivotal in curbing the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 335
7.2 • Covalent Bonding 321
testing of nuclear weapons; he proved that radioactive fallout from nuclear testing posed a public health
risk.
Electronegativity and Bond Type
The absolute value of the difference in electronegativity (ΔEN) of two bonded atoms provides a rough measure
of the polarity to be expected in the bond and, thus, the bond type. When the difference is very small or zero,
the bond is covalent and nonpolar. When it is large, the bond is polar covalent or ionic. The absolute values of
the electronegativity differences between the atoms in the bonds H–H, H–Cl, and Na–Cl are 0 (nonpolar), 0.9
(polar covalent), and 2.1 (ionic), respectively. The degree to which electrons are shared between atoms varies
from completely equal (pure covalent bonding) to not at all (ionic bonding).Figure 7.8shows the relationship
between electronegativity difference and bond type.
FIGURE7.8 As the electronegativity difference increases between two atoms, the bond becomes more ionic.
A rough approximation of the electronegativity differences associated with covalent, polar covalent, and ionic
bonds is shown inFigure 7.8. This table is just a general guide, however, with many exceptions. For example,
the H and F atoms in HF have an electronegativity difference of 1.9, and the N and H atoms in NH a difference
3
of 0.9, yet both of these compounds form bonds that are considered polar covalent. Likewise, the Na and Cl
atoms in NaCl have an electronegativity difference of 2.1, and the Mn and I atoms in MnI have a difference of
2
1.0, yet both of these substances form ionic compounds.
The best guide to the covalent or ionic character of a bond is to consider the types of atoms involved and their
relative positions in the periodic table. Bonds between two nonmetals are generally covalent; bonding between
a metal and a nonmetal is often ionic.
Some compounds contain both covalent and ionic bonds. The atoms in polyatomic ions, such as OH–,
and are held together by polar covalent bonds. However, these polyatomic ions form ionic compounds
by combining with ions of opposite charge. For example, potassium nitrate, KNO , contains the K+cation and
3
the polyatomic anion. Thus, bonding in potassium nitrate is ionic, resulting from the electrostatic
attraction between the ions K+and as well as covalent between the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in
EXAMPLE 7.3
Electronegativity and Bond Polarity
Bond polarities play an important role in determining the structure of proteins. Using the electronegativity
values inFigure 7.6, arrange the following covalent bonds—all commonly found in amino acids—in order of
increasing polarity. Then designate the positive and negative atoms using the symbols δ+ and δ–:
C–H, C–N, C–O, N–H, O–H, S–H
PAGE: 336
322 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Solution
The polarity of these bonds increases as the absolute value of the electronegativity difference increases. The
atom with the δ– designation is the more electronegative of the two.Table 7.1shows these bonds in order of
increasing polarity.
Bond Polarity and Electronegativity Difference
Bond ΔEN Polarity
C–H 0.4
S–H 0.4
C–N 0.5
N–H 0.9
C–O 1.0
O–H 1.4
TABLE7.1
Check Your Learning
Silicones are polymeric compounds containing, among others, the following types of covalent bonds: Si–O,
Si–C, C–H, and C–C. Using the electronegativity values inFigure 7.6, arrange the bonds in order of increasing
polarity and designate the positive and negative atoms using the symbols δ+ and δ–.
Answer:
Bond Electronegativity Difference Polarity
C–C 0.0 nonpolar
C–H 0.4
Si–C 0.7
Si–O 1.7
7.3 Lewis Symbols and Structures
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Write Lewis symbols for neutral atoms and ions
• Draw Lewis structures depicting the bonding in simple molecules
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 337
7.3 • Lewis Symbols and Structures 323
Thus far in this chapter, we have discussed the various types of bonds that form between atoms and/or ions. In
all cases, these bonds involve the sharing or transfer of valence shell electrons between atoms. In this section,
we will explore the typical method for depicting valence shell electrons and chemical bonds, namely Lewis
symbols and Lewis structures.
Lewis Symbols
We use Lewis symbols to describe valence electron configurations of atoms and monatomic ions. ALewis
symbolconsists of an elemental symbol surrounded by one dot for each of its valence electrons:
Figure 7.9shows the Lewis symbols for the elements of the third period of the periodic table.
FIGURE7.9 Lewis symbols illustrating the number of valence electrons for each element in the third period of the
periodic table.
Lewis symbols can also be used to illustrate the formation of cations from atoms, as shown here for sodium
and calcium:
Likewise, they can be used to show the formation of anions from atoms, as shown here for chlorine and sulfur:
Figure 7.10demonstrates the use of Lewis symbols to show the transfer of electrons during the formation of
ionic compounds.
PAGE: 338
324 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.10 Cations are formed when atoms lose electrons, represented by fewer Lewis dots, whereas anions are
formed by atoms gaining electrons. The total number of electrons does not change.
Lewis Structures
We also use Lewis symbols to indicate the formation of covalent bonds, which are shown inLewis structures,
drawings that describe the bonding in molecules and polyatomic ions. For example, when two chlorine atoms
form a chlorine molecule, they share one pair of electrons:
The Lewis structure indicates that each Cl atom has three pairs of electrons that are not used in bonding
(calledlone pairs) and one shared pair of electrons (written between the atoms). A dash (or line) is sometimes
used to indicate a shared pair of electrons:
A single shared pair of electrons is called asingle bond. Each Cl atom interacts with eight valence electrons:
the six in the lone pairs and the two in the single bond.
The Octet Rule
The other halogen molecules (F , Br , I , and At ) form bonds like those in the chlorine molecule: one single
2 2 2 2
bond between atoms and three lone pairs of electrons per atom. This allows each halogen atom to have a noble
gas electron configuration. The tendency of main group atoms to form enough bonds to obtain eight valence
electrons is known as theoctet rule.
The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the number of electrons needed to
reach an octet (eight valence electrons); this is especially true of the nonmetals of the second period of the
periodic table (C, N, O, and F). For example, each atom of a group 14 element has four electrons in its
outermost shell and therefore requires four more electrons to reach an octet. These four electrons can be
gained by forming four covalent bonds, as illustrated here for carbon in CCl (carbon tetrachloride) and silicon
4
in SiH (silane). Because hydrogen only needs two electrons to fill its valence shell, it is an exception to the
4
octet rule. The transition elements and inner transition elements also do not follow the octet rule:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 339
7.3 • Lewis Symbols and Structures 325
Group 15 elements such as nitrogen have five valence electrons in the atomic Lewis symbol: one lone pair and
three unpaired electrons. To obtain an octet, these atoms form three covalent bonds, as in NH (ammonia).
3
Oxygen and other atoms in group 16 obtain an octet by forming two covalent bonds:
Double and Triple Bonds
As previously mentioned, when a pair of atoms shares one pair of electrons, we call this a single bond.
However, a pair of atoms may need to share more than one pair of electrons in order to achieve the requisite
octet. Adouble bondforms when two pairs of electrons are shared between a pair of atoms, as between the
carbon and oxygen atoms in CH O (formaldehyde) and between the two carbon atoms in C H (ethylene):
2 2 4
Atriple bondforms when three electron pairs are shared by a pair of atoms, as in carbon monoxide (CO) and
the cyanide ion (CN–):
Writing Lewis Structures with the Octet Rule
For very simple molecules and molecular ions, we can write the Lewis structures by merely pairing up the
unpaired electrons on the constituent atoms. See these examples:
For more complicated molecules and molecular ions, it is helpful to follow the step-by-step procedure outlined
here:
1. Determine the total number of valence (outer shell) electrons. For cations, subtract one electron for each
positive charge. For anions, add one electron for each negative charge.
2. Draw a skeleton structure of the molecule or ion, arranging the atoms around a central atom. (Generally,
the least electronegative element should be placed in the center.) Connect each atom to the central atom
with a single bond (one electron pair).
3. Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms (except hydrogen), completing an
PAGE: 340
326 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
octet around each atom.
4. Place all remaining electrons on the central atom.
5. Rearrange the electrons of the outer atoms to make multiple bonds with the central atom in order to obtain
octets wherever possible.
Let us determine the Lewis structures of SiH , NO+, and OF as examples in following this procedure:
4 2
1. Determine the total number of valence (outer shell) electrons in the molecule or ion.
◦ For a molecule, we add the number of valence electrons on each atom in the molecule:
◦ For anegative ion, such as we add the number of valence electrons on the atoms to the number of
negative charges on the ion (one electron is gained for each single negative charge):
◦ For apositive ion, such as NO+, we add the number of valence electrons on the atoms in the ion and then
subtract the number of positive charges on the ion (one electron is lost for each single positive charge)
from the total number of valence electrons:
◦ Since OF is a neutral molecule, we simply add the number of valence electrons:
2
2. Draw a skeleton structure of the molecule or ion, arranging the atoms around a central atom and
connecting each atom to the central atom with a single (one electron pair) bond. (Note that we denote ions
with brackets around the structure, indicating the charge outside the brackets:)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 341
7.3 • Lewis Symbols and Structures 327
When several arrangements of atoms are possible, as for we must use experimental evidence to
choose the correct one. In general, the less electronegative elements are more likely to be central atoms. In
the less electronegative carbon atom occupies the central position with the oxygen and hydrogen
atoms surrounding it. Other examples include P in POCl , S in SO , and Cl in An exception is that
3 2
hydrogen is almost never a central atom. As the most electronegative element, fluorine also cannot be a
central atom.
3. Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms (except hydrogen) to complete their
valence shells with an octet of electrons.
◦ There are no remaining electrons on SiH , so it is unchanged:
4
4. Place all remaining electrons on the central atom.
◦ For SiH , and NO+, there are no remaining electrons; we already placed all of the electrons
4
determined in Step 1.
◦ For OF , we had 16 electrons remaining in Step 3, and we placed 12, leaving 4 to be placed on the central
2
atom:
5. Rearrange the electrons of the outer atoms to make multiple bonds with the central atom in order to obtain
octets wherever possible.
◦ SiH : Si already has an octet, so nothing needs to be done.
4
◦ We have distributed the valence electrons as lone pairs on the oxygen atoms, but the carbon
atom lacks an octet:
◦ NO+: For this ion, we added eight valence electrons, but neither atom has an octet. We cannot add any
more electrons since we have already used the total that we found in Step 1, so we must move electrons to
form a multiple bond:
This still does not produce an octet, so we must move another pair, forming a triple bond:
◦ In OF , each atom has an octet as drawn, so nothing changes.
2
EXAMPLE 7.4
Writing Lewis Structures
NASA’s Cassini-Huygens mission detected a large cloud of toxic hydrogen cyanide (HCN) on Titan, one of
Saturn’s moons. Titan also contains ethane (H CCH ), acetylene (HCCH), and ammonia (NH ). What are the
3 3 3
Lewis structures of these molecules?
PAGE: 342
328 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Solution
Step 1.Calculate the number of valence electrons.
HCN: (1 1) + (4 1) + (5 1) = 10
H CCH : (1 3) + (2 4) + (1 3) = 14
3 3
HCCH: (1 1) + (2 4) + (1 1) = 10
NH : (5 1) + (3 1) = 8
3
Step 2.Draw a skeleton and connect the atoms with single bonds.Remember that H is never a central
atom:
Step 3.Where needed, distribute electrons to the terminal atoms:
HCN: six electrons placed on N
H CCH : no electrons remain
3 3
HCCH: no terminal atoms capable of accepting electrons
NH : no terminal atoms capable of accepting electrons
3
Step 4.Where needed, place remaining electrons on the central atom:
HCN: no electrons remain
H CCH : no electrons remain
3 3
HCCH: four electrons placed on carbon
NH : two electrons placed on nitrogen
3
Step 5.Where needed, rearrange electrons to form multiple bonds in order to obtain an octet on each
atom:
HCN: form two more C–N bonds
H CCH : all atoms have the correct number of electrons
3 3
HCCH: form a triple bond between the two carbon atoms
NH : all atoms have the correct number of electrons
3
Check Your Learning
Both carbon monoxide, CO, and carbon dioxide, CO , are products of the combustion of fossil fuels. Both of
2
these gases also cause problems: CO is toxic and CO has been implicated in global climate change. What are
2
the Lewis structures of these two molecules?
Answer:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 343
7.3 • Lewis Symbols and Structures 329
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Fullerene Chemistry
Carbon, in various forms and compounds, has been known since prehistoric times, . Soot has been used as a
pigment (often called carbon black) for thousands of years. Charcoal, high in carbon content, has likewise been
critical to human development. Carbon is the key additive to iron in the steelmaking process, and diamonds
have a unique place in both culture and industry. With all this usage came significant study, particularly with
the emergence of organic chemistry. And even with all the known forms and functions of the element,
scientists began to uncover the potential for even more varied and extensive carbon structures.
As early as the 1960s, chemists began to observe complex carbon structures, but they had little evidence to
support their concepts, or their work did not make it into the mainstream. Eiji Osawa predicted a spherical
form based on observations of a similar structure, but his work was not widely known outside Japan. In a
similar manner, the most comprehensive advance was likely computational chemist Elena Galpern's, who in
1973 predicted a highly stable, 60-carbon molecule; her work was also isolated to her native Russia. Still later,
Harold Kroto, working with Canadian radio astronomers, sought to uncover the nature of long carbon chains
that had been discovered in interstellar space.
Kroto sought to use a machine developed by Richard Smalley's team at Rice University to learn more about
these structures. Together with Robert Curl, who had introduced them, and three graduate students—James
Heath, Sean O’Brien, and Yuan Liu—they performed an intensive series of experiments that led to a major
discovery.
In 1996, the Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to RichardSmalley(Figure 7.11), Robert Curl, and Harold
Kroto for their work in discovering a new form of carbon, the C buckminsterfullerene molecule (Figure 7.1).
60
An entire class of compounds, including spheres and tubes of various shapes, were discovered based on C
60.
This type of molecule, called a fullerene, shows promise in a variety of applications. Because of their size and
shape, fullerenes can encapsulate other molecules, so they have shown potential in various applications from
hydrogen storage to targeted drug delivery systems. They also possess unique electronic and optical
properties that have been put to good use in solar powered devices and chemical sensors.
FIGURE7.11 Richard Smalley (1943–2005), a professor of physics, chemistry, and astronomy at Rice University,
was one of the leading advocates for fullerene chemistry. Upon his death in 2005, the US Senate honored him as the
“Father of Nanotechnology.” (credit: United States Department of Energy)
Exceptions to the Octet Rule
Many covalent molecules have central atoms that do not have eight electrons in their Lewis structures. These
molecules fall into three categories:
PAGE: 344
330 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
• Odd-electron molecules have an odd number of valence electrons, and therefore have an unpaired
electron.
• Electron-deficient molecules have a central atom that has fewer electrons than needed for a noble gas
configuration.
• Hypervalent molecules have a central atom that has more electrons than needed for a noble gas
configuration.
Odd-electron Molecules
We call molecules that contain an odd number of electronsfree radicals. Nitric oxide, NO, is an example of an
odd-electron molecule; it is produced in internal combustion engines when oxygen and nitrogen react at high
temperatures.
To draw the Lewis structure for an odd-electron molecule like NO, we follow the same five steps we would for
other molecules, but with a few minor changes:
1. Determine the total number of valence (outer shell) electrons. The sum of the valence electrons is 5 (from
N) + 6 (from O) = 11. The odd number immediately tells us that we have a free radical, so we know that not
every atom can have eight electrons in its valence shell.
2. Draw a skeleton structure of the molecule. We can easily draw a skeleton with an N–O single bond:
N–O
3. Distribute the remaining electrons as lone pairs on the terminal atoms. In this case, there is no central
atom, so we distribute the electrons around both atoms. We give eight electrons to the more
electronegative atom in these situations; thus oxygen has the filled valence shell:
4. Place all remaining electrons on the central atom. Since there are no remaining electrons, this step does
not apply.
5. Rearrange the electrons to make multiple bonds with the central atom in order to obtain octets wherever
possible.We know that an odd-electron molecule cannot have an octet for every atom, but we want to get
each atom as close to an octet as possible. In this case, nitrogen has only five electrons around it. To move
closer to an octet for nitrogen, we take one of the lone pairs from oxygen and use it to form a NO double
bond. (We cannot take another lone pair of electrons on oxygen and form a triple bond because nitrogen
would then have nine electrons:)
Electron-deficient Molecules
We will also encounter a few molecules that contain central atoms that do not have a filled valence shell.
Generally, these are molecules with central atoms from groups 2 and 13, outer atoms that are hydrogen, or
other atoms that do not form multiple bonds. For example, in the Lewis structures of beryllium dihydride,
BeH , and boron trifluoride, BF , the beryllium and boron atoms each have only four and six electrons,
2 3
respectively. It is possible to draw a structure with a double bond between a boron atom and a fluorine atom in
BF , satisfying the octet rule, but experimental evidence indicates the bond lengths are closer to that expected
3
for B–F single bonds. This suggests the best Lewis structure has three B–F single bonds and an electron
deficient boron. The reactivity of the compound is also consistent with an electron deficient boron. However,
the B–F bonds are slightly shorter than what is actually expected for B–F single bonds, indicating that some
double bond character is found in the actual molecule.
An atom like the boron atom in BF , which does not have eight electrons, is very reactive. It readily combines
3
with a molecule containing an atom with a lone pair of electrons. For example, NH reacts with BF because
3 3
the lone pair on nitrogen can be shared with the boron atom:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 345
7.3 • Lewis Symbols and Structures 331
Hypervalent Molecules
Elements in the second period of the periodic table (n= 2) can accommodate only eight electrons in their
valence shell orbitals because they have only four valence orbitals (one 2sand three 2porbitals). Elements in
the third and higher periods (n≥ 3) have more than four valence orbitals and can share more than four pairs of
electrons with other atoms because they have emptydorbitals in the same shell. Molecules formed from these
elements are sometimes calledhypervalent molecules.Figure 7.12shows the Lewis structures for two
hypervalent molecules, PCl and SF
5 6.
FIGURE7.12 In PCl , the central atom phosphorus shares five pairs of electrons. In SF , sulfur shares six pairs of
5 6
electrons.
In some hypervalent molecules, such as IF and XeF , some of the electrons in the outer shell of the central
5 4
atom are lone pairs:
When we write the Lewis structures for these molecules, we find that we have electrons left over after filling the
valence shells of the outer atoms with eight electrons. These additional electrons must be assigned to the
central atom.
EXAMPLE 7.5
Writing Lewis Structures: Octet Rule Violations
Xenon is a noble gas, but it forms a number of stable compounds. We examined XeF earlier. What are the
4
Lewis structures of XeF and XeF ?
2 6
Solution
We can draw the Lewis structure of any covalent molecule by following the six steps discussed earlier. In this
case, we can condense the last few steps, since not all of them apply.
Step 1.Calculate the number of valence electrons:
XeF : 8 + (2 7) = 22
2
XeF : 8 + (6 7) = 50
6
Step 2.Draw a skeleton joining the atoms by single bonds.Xenon will be the central atom because fluorine
cannot be a central atom:
Step 3.Distribute the remaining electrons.
XeF : We place three lone pairs of electrons around each F atom, accounting for 12 electrons and giving
2
PAGE: 346
332 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
each F atom 8 electrons. Thus, six electrons (three lone pairs) remain. These lone pairs must be placed on
the Xe atom. This is acceptable because Xe atoms have empty valence shelldorbitals and can
accommodate more than eight electrons. The Lewis structure of XeF shows two bonding pairs and three
2
lone pairs of electrons around the Xe atom:
XeF : We place three lone pairs of electrons around each F atom, accounting for 36 electrons. Two
6
electrons remain, and this lone pair is placed on the Xe atom:
Check Your Learning
The halogens form a class of compounds called the interhalogens, in which halogen atoms covalently bond to
each other. Write the Lewis structures for the interhalogens BrCl and
3
Answer:
7.4 Formal Charges and Resonance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compute formal charges for atoms in any Lewis structure
• Use formal charges to identify the most reasonable Lewis structure for a given molecule
• Explain the concept of resonance and draw Lewis structures representing resonance forms for a given molecule
In the previous section, we discussed how to write Lewis structures for molecules and polyatomic ions. As we
have seen, however, in some cases, there is seemingly more than one valid structure for a molecule. We can
use the concept of formal charges to help us predict the most appropriate Lewis structure when more than one
is reasonable.
Calculating Formal Charge
Theformal chargeof an atom in a molecule is thehypotheticalcharge the atom would have if we could
redistribute the electrons in the bonds evenly between the atoms. Another way of saying this is that formal
charge results when we take the number of valence electrons of a neutral atom, subtract the nonbonding
electrons, and then subtract the number of bonds connected to that atom in the Lewis structure.
Thus, we calculate formal charge as follows:
We can double-check formal charge calculations by determining the sum of the formal charges for the whole
structure. The sum of the formal charges of all atoms in a molecule must be zero; the sum of the formal
charges in an ion should equal the charge of the ion.
We must remember that the formal charge calculated for an atom is not theactualcharge of the atom in the
molecule. Formal charge is only a useful bookkeeping procedure; it does not indicate the presence of actual
charges.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 347
7.4 • Formal Charges and Resonance 333
EXAMPLE 7.6
Calculating Formal Charge from Lewis Structures
Assign formal charges to each atom in the interhalogen ion
Solution
Step 1.We divide the bonding electron pairs equally for all I–Cl bonds:
Step 2.We assign lone pairs of electrons to their atoms. Each Cl atom now has seven electrons assigned to
it, and the I atom has eight.
Step 3.Subtract this number from the number of valence electrons for the neutral atom:
I: 7 – 8 = –1
Cl: 7 – 7 = 0
The sum of the formal charges of all the atoms equals –1, which is identical to the charge of the ion (–1).
Check Your Learning
Calculate the formal charge for each atom in the carbon monoxide molecule:
Answer:
C −1, O +1
EXAMPLE 7.7
Calculating Formal Charge from Lewis Structures
Assign formal charges to each atom in the interhalogen molecule BrCl .
3
Solution
Step 1.Assign one of the electrons in each Br–Cl bond to the Br atom and one to the Cl atom in that bond:
Step 2.Assign the lone pairs to their atom.Now each Cl atom has seven electrons and the Br atom has
seven electrons.
Step 3.Subtract this number from the number of valence electrons for the neutral atom.This gives the
formal charge:
Br: 7 – 7 = 0
Cl: 7 – 7 = 0
All atoms in BrCl have a formal charge of zero, and the sum of the formal charges totals zero, as it must in
3
a neutral molecule.
Check Your Learning
Determine the formal charge for each atom in NCl .
3
Answer:
N: 0; all three Cl atoms: 0
PAGE: 348
334 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Using Formal Charge to Predict Molecular Structure
The arrangement of atoms in a molecule or ion is called itsmolecular structure. In many cases, following the
steps for writing Lewis structures may lead to more than one possible molecular structure—different multiple
bond and lone-pair electron placements or different arrangements of atoms, for instance. A few guidelines
involving formal charge can be helpful in deciding which of the possible structures is most likely for a
particular molecule or ion:
1. A molecular structure in which all formal charges are zero is preferable to one in which some formal
charges are not zero.
2. If the Lewis structure must have nonzero formal charges, the arrangement with the smallest nonzero
formal charges is preferable.
3. Lewis structures are preferable when adjacent formal charges are zero or of the opposite sign.
4. When we must choose among several Lewis structures with similar distributions of formal charges, the
structure with the negative formal charges on the more electronegative atoms is preferable.
To see how these guidelines apply, let us consider some possible structures for carbon dioxide, CO . We know
2
from our previous discussion that the less electronegative atom typically occupies the central position, but
formal charges allow us to understandwhythis occurs. We can draw three possibilities for the structure:
carbon in the center and double bonds, carbon in the center with a single and triple bond, and oxygen in the
center with double bonds:
Comparing the three formal charges, we can definitively identify the structure on the left as preferable because
it has only formal charges of zero (Guideline 1).
As another example, the thiocyanate ion, an ion formed from a carbon atom, a nitrogen atom, and a sulfur
atom, could have three different molecular structures: NCS–, CNS–, or CSN–. The formal charges present in
each of these molecular structures can help us pick the most likely arrangement of atoms. Possible Lewis
structures and the formal charges for each of the three possible structures for the thiocyanate ion are shown
here:
Note that the sum of the formal charges in each case is equal to the charge of the ion (–1). However, the first
arrangement of atoms is preferred because it has the lowest number of atoms with nonzero formal charges
(Guideline 2). Also, it places the least electronegative atom in the center, and the negative charge on the more
electronegative element (Guideline 4).
EXAMPLE 7.8
Using Formal Charge to Determine Molecular Structure
Nitrous oxide, N O, commonly known as laughing gas, is used as an anesthetic in minor surgeries, such as the
2
routine extraction of wisdom teeth. Which is the more likely structure for nitrous oxide?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 349
7.4 • Formal Charges and Resonance 335
Solution
Determining formal charge yields the following:
The structure with a terminal oxygen atom best satisfies the criteria for the most stable distribution of formal
charge:
The number of atoms with formal charges are minimized (Guideline 2), there is no formal charge with a
magnitude greater than one (Guideline 2), the negative formal charge is on the more electronegative element
(Guideline 4), and the less electronegative atom is in the center position.
Check Your Learning
Which is the most likely molecular structure for the nitrite ion?
Answer:
ONO–
Resonance
Notice that the more likely structure for the nitrite anion inExample 7.8may actually be drawn in two different
ways, distinguished by the locations of the N-O and N=O bonds:
If nitrite ions do indeed contain a single and a double bond, we would expect for the two bond lengths to be
different. A double bond between two atoms is shorter (and stronger) than a single bond between the same two
atoms. Experiments show, however, that both N–O bonds in have the same strength and length, and are
identical in all other properties.
It is not possible to write a single Lewis structure for in which nitrogen has an octet and both bonds are
equivalent. Instead, we use the concept ofresonance: if two or more Lewis structures with the same
arrangement of atoms can be written for a molecule or ion, the actual distribution of electrons is anaverageof
that shown by the various Lewis structures. The actual distribution of electrons in each of the nitrogen-oxygen
bonds in is the average of a double bond and a single bond. We call the individual Lewis structures
resonance forms. The actual electronic structure of the molecule (the average of the resonance forms) is
called aresonance hybridof the individual resonance forms. A double-headed arrow between Lewis
structures indicates that they are resonance forms.
We should remember that a molecule described as a resonance hybridneverpossesses an electronic structure
described by either resonance form. It does not fluctuate between resonance forms; rather, the actual
electronic structure isalwaysthe average of that shown by all resonance forms. George Wheland, one of the
pioneers of resonance theory, used a historical analogy to describe the relationship between resonance forms
and resonance hybrids. A medieval traveler, having never before seen a rhinoceros, described it as a hybrid of
a dragon and a unicorn because it had many properties in common with both. Just as a rhinoceros is neither a
dragon sometimes nor a unicorn at other times, a resonance hybrid is neither of its resonance forms at any
PAGE: 350
336 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
given time. Like a rhinoceros, it is a real entity that experimental evidence has shown to exist. It has some
characteristics in common with its resonance forms, but the resonance forms themselves are convenient,
imaginary images (like the unicorn and the dragon).
The carbonate anion, provides a second example of resonance:
One oxygen atom must have a double bond to carbon to complete the octet on the central atom. All oxygen
atoms, however, are equivalent, and the double bond could form from any one of the three atoms. This gives
rise to three resonance forms of the carbonate ion. Because we can write three identical resonance structures,
we know that the actual arrangement of electrons in the carbonate ion is the average of the three structures.
Again, experiments show that all three C–O bonds are exactly the same.
LINK TO LEARNING
Use thisonline quiz(http://openstax.org/l/16LewisMake)to practice your skills in drawing resonance
structures and estimating formal charges.
7.5 Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the energetics of covalent and ionic bond formation and breakage
• Use the Born-Haber cycle to compute lattice energies for ionic compounds
• Use average covalent bond energies to estimate enthalpies of reaction
A bond’s strength describes how strongly each atom is joined to another atom, and therefore how much energy
is required to break the bond between the two atoms. In this section, you will learn about the bond strength of
covalent bonds, and then compare that to the strength of ionic bonds, which is related to the lattice energy of a
compound.
Bond Strength: Covalent Bonds
Stable molecules exist because covalent bonds hold the atoms together. We measure the strength of a covalent
bond by the energy required to break it, that is, the energy necessary to separate the bonded atoms. Separating
any pair of bonded atoms requires energy (seeFigure 7.4). The stronger a bond, the greater the energy
required to break it.
The energy required to break a specific covalent bond in one mole of gaseous molecules is called the bond
energy or the bond dissociation energy. The bond energy for a diatomic molecule, D , is defined as the
X–Y
standard enthalpy change for the endothermic reaction:
For example, the bond energy of the pure covalent H–H bond, D , is 436 kJ per mole of H–H bonds broken:
H–H
Molecules with three or more atoms have two or more bonds. The sum of all bond energies in such a molecule
is equal to the standard enthalpy change for the endothermic reaction that breaks all the bonds in the
molecule. For example, the sum of the four C–H bond energies in CH , 1660 kJ, is equal to the standard
4
enthalpy change of the reaction:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 351
7.5 • Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds 337
The average C–H bond energy, D , is 1660/4 = 415 kJ/mol because there are four moles of C–H bonds broken
C–H
per mole of the reaction. Although the four C–H bonds are equivalent in the original molecule, they do not each
require the same energy to break; once the first bond is broken (which requires 439 kJ/mol), the remaining
bonds are easier to break. The 415 kJ/mol value is the average, not the exact value required to break any one
bond.
The strength of a bond between two atoms increases as the number of electron pairs in the bond increases.
Generally, as the bond strength increases, the bond length decreases. Thus, we find that triple bonds are
stronger and shorter than double bonds between the same two atoms; likewise, double bonds are stronger and
shorter than single bonds between the same two atoms. Average bond energies for some common bonds
appear inTable 7.2, and a comparison of bond lengths and bond strengths for some common bonds appears in
Table 7.3. When one atom bonds to various atoms in a group, the bond strength typically decreases as we move
down the group. For example, C–F is 439 kJ/mol, C–Cl is 330 kJ/mol, and C–Br is 275 kJ/mol.
Bond Energies (kJ/mol)
Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy
H–H 436 C–S 260 F–Cl 255
H–C 415 C–Cl 330 F–Br 235
H–N 390 C–Br 275 Si–Si 230
H–O 464 C–I 240 Si–P 215
H–F 569 N–N 160 Si–S 225
H–Si 395 418 Si–Cl 359
H–P 320 946 Si–Br 290
H–S 340 N–O 200 Si–I 215
H–Cl 432 N–F 270 P–P 215
H–Br 370 N–P 210 P–S 230
H–I 295 N–Cl 200 P–Cl 330
C–C 345 N–Br 245 P–Br 270
611 O–O 140 P–I 215
837 498 S–S 215
C–N 290 O–F 160 S–Cl 250
PAGE: 352
338 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Bond Energies (kJ/mol)
Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy Bond Bond Energy
615 O–Si 370 S–Br 215
891 O–P 350 Cl–Cl 243
C–O 350 O–Cl 205 Cl–Br 220
741 O–I 200 Cl–I 210
1080 F–F 160 Br–Br 190
C–F 439 F–Si 540 Br–I 180
C–Si 360 F–P 489 I–I 150
C–P 265 F–S 285
TABLE7.2
Average Bond Lengths and Bond Energies for Some Common Bonds
Bond Bond Length (Å) Bond Energy (kJ/mol)
C–C 1.54 345
1.34 611
1.20 837
C–N 1.43 290
1.38 615
1.16 891
C–O 1.43 350
1.23 741
1.13 1080
TABLE7.3
We can use bond energies to calculate approximate enthalpy changes for reactions where enthalpies of
formation are not available. Calculations of this type will also tell us whether a reaction is exothermic or
endothermic. An exothermic reaction (ΔHnegative, heat produced) results when the bonds in the products are
stronger than the bonds in the reactants. An endothermic reaction (ΔHpositive, heat absorbed) results when
the bonds in the products are weaker than those in the reactants.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 353
7.5 • Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds 339
The enthalpy change, ΔH, for a chemical reaction is approximately equal to the sum of the energy required to
break all bonds in the reactants (energy “in”, positive sign) plus the energy released when all bonds are formed
in the products (energy “out,” negative sign). This can be expressed mathematically in the following way:
Ʃ Ʃ
In this expression, the symbol Ʃ means “the sum of” and D represents the bond energy in kilojoules per mole,
which is always a positive number. The bond energy is obtained from a table (likeTable 7.3) and will depend on
whether the particular bond is a single, double, or triple bond. Thus, in calculating enthalpies in this manner, it
is important that we consider the bonding in all reactants and products. Because D values are typically
averages for one type of bond in many different molecules, this calculation provides a rough estimate, not an
exact value, for the enthalpy of reaction.
Consider the following reaction:
or
To form two moles of HCl, one mole of H–H bonds and one mole of Cl–Cl bonds must be broken. The energy
required to break these bonds is the sum of the bond energy of the H–H bond (436 kJ/mol) and the Cl–Cl bond
(243 kJ/mol). During the reaction, two moles of H–Cl bonds are formed (bond energy = 432 kJ/mol), releasing 2
432 kJ; or 864 kJ. Because the bonds in the products are stronger than those in the reactants, the reaction
releases more energy than it consumes:
Ʃ Ʃ
This excess energy is released as heat, so the reaction is exothermic.Appendix Ggives a value for the standard
molar enthalpy of formation of HCl(g), of –92.307 kJ/mol. Twice that value is –184.6 kJ, which agrees
well with the answer obtained earlier for the formation of two moles of HCl.
EXAMPLE 7.9
Using Bond Energies to Calculate Approximate Enthalpy Changes
Methanol, CH OH, may be an excellent alternative fuel. The high-temperature reaction of steam and carbon
3
produces a mixture of the gases carbon monoxide, CO, and hydrogen, H , from which methanol can be
2
produced. Using the bond energies inTable 7.3, calculate the approximate enthalpy change, ΔH, for the
reaction here:
Solution
First, we need to write the Lewis structures of the reactants and the products:
From this, we see that ΔHfor this reaction involves the energy required to break a C–O triple bond and two
H–H single bonds, as well as the energy produced by the formation of three C–H single bonds, a C–O single
bond, and an O–H single bond. We can express this as follows:
PAGE: 354
340 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Ʃ Ʃ
Using the bond energy values inTable 7.3, we obtain:
We can compare this value to the value calculated based on data from Appendix G:
Note that there is a fairly significant gap between the values calculated using the two different methods. This
occurs because D values are theaverageof different bond strengths; therefore, they often give only rough
agreement with other data.
Check Your Learning
Ethyl alcohol, CH CH OH, was one of the first organic chemicals deliberately synthesized by humans. It has
3 2
many uses in industry, and it is the alcohol contained in alcoholic beverages. It can be obtained by the
fermentation of sugar or synthesized by the hydration of ethylene in the following reaction:
Using the bond energies inTable 7.3, calculate an approximate enthalpy change, ΔH, for this reaction.
Answer:
–35 kJ
Ionic Bond Strength and Lattice Energy
An ionic compound is stable because of the electrostatic attraction between its positive and negative ions. The
lattice energy of a compound is a measure of the strength of this attraction. Thelattice energy (ΔH )of an
lattice
ionic compound is defined as the energy required to separate one mole of the solid into its component gaseous
ions. For the ionic solid MX, the lattice energy is the enthalpy change of the process:
Note that we are using the convention where the ionic solid is separated into ions, so our lattice energies will
beendothermic(positive values). Some texts use the equivalent but opposite convention, defining lattice
energy as the energy released when separate ions combine to form a lattice and giving negative (exothermic)
values. Thus, if you are looking up lattice energies in another reference, be certain to check which definition is
being used. In both cases, a larger magnitude for lattice energy indicates a more stable ionic compound. For
sodium chloride, ΔH = 769 kJ. Thus, it requires 769 kJ to separate one mole of solid NaCl into gaseous Na+
lattice
and Cl–ions. When one mole each of gaseous Na+and Cl–ions form solid NaCl, 769 kJ of heat is released.
The lattice energy ΔH of an ionic crystal can be expressed by the following equation (derived from
lattice
Coulomb’s law, governing the forces between electric charges):
in which C is a constant that depends on the type of crystal structure; Z+and Z–are the charges on the ions;
and R is the interionic distance (the sum of the radii of the positive and negative ions). Thus, the lattice energy
o
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 355
7.5 • Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds 341
of an ionic crystal increases rapidly as the charges of the ions increase and the sizes of the ions decrease.
When all other parameters are kept constant, doubling the charge of both the cation and anion quadruples the
lattice energy. For example, the lattice energy of LiF (Z+and Z–= 1) is 1023 kJ/mol, whereas that of MgO (Z+and
Z–= 2) is 3900 kJ/mol (R is nearly the same—about 200 pm for both compounds).
o
Different interatomic distances produce different lattice energies. For example, we can compare the lattice
energy of MgF (2957 kJ/mol) to that of MgI (2327 kJ/mol) to observe the effect on lattice energy of the smaller
2 2
ionic size of F–as compared to I–.
EXAMPLE 7.10
Lattice Energy Comparisons
The precious gem ruby is aluminum oxide, Al O , containing traces of Cr3+. The compound Al Se is used in
2 3 2 3
the fabrication of some semiconductor devices. Which has the larger lattice energy, Al O or Al Se ?
2 3 2 3
Solution
In these two ionic compounds, the charges Z+and Z–are the same, so the difference in lattice energy will
depend upon R . The O2–ion is smaller than the Se2–ion. Thus, Al O would have a shorter interionic distance
o 2 3
than Al Se , and Al O would have the larger lattice energy.
2 3 2 3
Check Your Learning
Zinc oxide, ZnO, is a very effective sunscreen. How would the lattice energy of ZnO compare to that of NaCl?
Answer:
ZnO would have the larger lattice energy because the Z values of both the cation and the anion in ZnO are
greater, and the interionic distance of ZnO is smaller than that of NaCl.
The Born-Haber Cycle
It is not possible to measure lattice energies directly. However, the lattice energy can be calculated using the
equation given in the previous section or by using a thermochemical cycle. TheBorn-Haber cycleis an
application of Hess’s law that breaks down the formation of an ionic solid into a series of individual steps:
• the standard enthalpy of formation of the compound
• IE, the ionization energy of the metal
• EA, the electron affinity of the nonmetal
• the enthalpy of sublimation of the metal
• D, the bond dissociation energy of the nonmetal
• ΔH , the lattice energy of the compound
lattice
Figure 7.13diagrams the Born-Haber cycle for the formation of solid cesium fluoride.
PAGE: 356
342 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.13 The Born-Haber cycle shows the relative energies of each step involved in the formation of an ionic
solid from the necessary elements in their reference states.
We begin with the elements in their most common states, Cs(s) and F (g). The represents the conversion
2
of solid cesium into a gas, and then the ionization energy converts the gaseous cesium atoms into cations. In
the next step, we account for the energy required to break the F–F bond to produce fluorine atoms. Converting
one mole of fluorine atoms into fluoride ions is an exothermic process, so this step gives off energy (the
electron affinity) and is shown as decreasing along they-axis. We now have one mole of Cs cations and one
mole of F anions. These ions combine to produce solid cesium fluoride. The enthalpy change in this step is the
negative of the lattice energy, so it is also an exothermic quantity. The total energy involved in this conversion
is equal to the experimentally determined enthalpy of formation, of the compound from its elements. In
this case, the overall change is exothermic.
Hess’s law can also be used to show the relationship between the enthalpies of the individual steps and the
enthalpy of formation.Table 7.4shows this for fluoride, CsF.
Enthalpy of
sublimation of
Cs(s)
One-half of the
bond energy of
F
2
Ionization
energy of Cs(g)
Electron
affinity of F
Negative of the
lattice energy
of CsF(s)
Enthalpy of
formation of
CsF(s), add
steps 1–5
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 357
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 343
TABLE7.4
Thus, the lattice energy can be calculated from other values. For cesium fluoride, using this data, the lattice
energy is:
The Born-Haber cycle may also be used to calculate any one of the other quantities in the equation for lattice
energy, provided that the remainder is known. For example, if the relevant enthalpy of sublimation
ionization energy (IE), bond dissociation enthalpy (D), lattice energy ΔH and standard enthalpy of
lattice,
formation are known, the Born-Haber cycle can be used to determine the electron affinity of an atom.
Lattice energies calculated for ionic compounds are typically much higher than bond dissociation energies
measured for covalent bonds. Whereas lattice energies typically fall in the range of 600–4000 kJ/mol (some
even higher), covalent bond dissociation energies are typically between 150–400 kJ/mol for single bonds. Keep
in mind, however, that these are not directly comparable values. For ionic compounds, lattice energies are
associated with many interactions, as cations and anions pack together in an extended lattice. For covalent
bonds, the bond dissociation energy is associated with the interaction of just two atoms.
7.6 Molecular Structure and Polarity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Predict the structures of small molecules using valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory
• Explain the concepts of polar covalent bonds and molecular polarity
• Assess the polarity of a molecule based on its bonding and structure
Thus far, we have used two-dimensional Lewis structures to represent molecules. However, molecular
structure is actually three-dimensional, and it is important to be able to describe molecular bonds in terms of
their distances, angles, and relative arrangements in space (Figure 7.14). Abond angleis the angle between
any two bonds that include a common atom, usually measured in degrees. Abond distance(or bond length) is
the distance between the nuclei of two bonded atoms along the straight line joining the nuclei. Bond distances
are measured in Ångstroms (1 Å = 10–10m) or picometers (1 pm = 10–12m, 100 pm = 1 Å).
FIGURE7.14 Bond distances (lengths) and angles are shown for the formaldehyde molecule, H CO.
2
VSEPR Theory
Valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory (VSEPR theory)enables us to predict the molecular structure,
including approximate bond angles around a central atom, of a molecule from an examination of the number
of bonds and lone electron pairs in its Lewis structure. The VSEPR model assumes that electron pairs in the
valence shell of a central atom will adopt an arrangement that minimizes repulsions between these electron
pairs by maximizing the distance between them. The electrons in the valence shell of a central atom form
either bonding pairs of electrons, located primarily between bonded atoms, or lone pairs. The electrostatic
repulsion of these electrons is reduced when the various regions of high electron density assume positions as
far from each other as possible.
VSEPR theory predicts the arrangement of electron pairs around each central atom and, usually, the correct
PAGE: 358
344 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
arrangement of atoms in a molecule. We should understand, however, that the theory only considers electron-
pair repulsions. Other interactions, such as nuclear-nuclear repulsions and nuclear-electron attractions, are
also involved in the final arrangement that atoms adopt in a particular molecular structure.
As a simple example of VSEPR theory, let us predict the structure of a gaseous BeF molecule. The Lewis
2
structure of BeF (Figure 7.15) shows only two electron pairs around the central beryllium atom. With two
2
bonds and no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom, the bonds are as far apart as possible, and the
electrostatic repulsion between these regions of high electron density is reduced to a minimum when they are
on opposite sides of the central atom. The bond angle is 180° (Figure 7.15).
FIGURE7.15 The BeF molecule adopts a linear structure in which the two bonds are as far apart as possible, on
2
opposite sides of the Be atom.
Figure 7.16illustrates this and other electron-pair geometries that minimize the repulsions among regions of
high electron density (bonds and/or lone pairs). Two regions of electron density around a central atom in a
molecule form alineargeometry; three regions form atrigonal planargeometry; four regions form a
tetrahedralgeometry; five regions form atrigonal bipyramidalgeometry; and six regions form anoctahedral
geometry.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 359
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 345
FIGURE7.16 The basic electron-pair geometries predicted by VSEPR theory maximize the space around any
region of electron density (bonds or lone pairs).
Electron-pair Geometry versus Molecular Structure
It is important to note that electron-pair geometry around a central atom isnotthe same thing as its molecular
structure. The electron-pair geometries shown inFigure 7.16describe all regions where electrons are located,
bonds as well as lone pairs. Molecular structure describes the location of theatoms, not the electrons.
We differentiate between these two situations by naming the geometry that includesallelectron pairs the
electron-pair geometry. The structure that includes only the placement of the atoms in the molecule is called
themolecular structure. The electron-pair geometries will be the same as the molecular structures when
there are no lone electron pairs around the central atom, but they will be different when there are lone pairs
present on the central atom.
For example, the methane molecule, CH , which is the major component of natural gas, has four bonding pairs
4
of electrons around the central carbon atom; the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral, as is the molecular
structure (Figure 7.17). On the other hand, the ammonia molecule, NH , also has four electron pairs associated
3
with the nitrogen atom, and thus has a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry. One of these regions, however, is a
lone pair, which is not included in the molecular structure, and this lone pair influences the shape of the
molecule (Figure 7.18).
PAGE: 360
346 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.17 The molecular structure of the methane molecule, CH , is shown with a tetrahedral arrangement of
4
the hydrogen atoms. VSEPR structures like this one are often drawn using the wedge and dash notation, in which
solid lines represent bonds in the plane of the page, solid wedges represent bonds coming up out of the plane, and
dashed lines represent bonds going down into the plane.
FIGURE7.18 (a) The electron-pair geometry for the ammonia molecule is tetrahedral with one lone pair and three
single bonds. (b) The trigonal pyramidal molecular structure is determined from the electron-pair geometry. (c) The
actual bond angles deviate slightly from the idealized angles because the lone pair takes up a larger region of space
than do the single bonds, causing the HNH angle to be slightly smaller than 109.5°.
As seen inFigure 7.18, small distortions from the ideal angles inFigure 7.16can result from differences in
repulsion between various regions of electron density. VSEPR theory predicts these distortions by establishing
an order of repulsions and an order of the amount of space occupied by different kinds of electron pairs. The
order of electron-pair repulsions from greatest to least repulsion is:
This order of repulsions determines the amount of space occupied by different regions of electrons. A lone pair
of electrons occupies a larger region of space than the electrons in a triple bond; in turn, electrons in a triple
bond occupy more space than those in a double bond, and so on. The order of sizes from largest to smallest is:
Consider formaldehyde, H CO, which is used as a preservative for biological and anatomical specimens (Figure
2
7.14). This molecule has regions of high electron density that consist of two single bonds and one double bond.
The basic geometry is trigonal planar with 120° bond angles, but we see that the double bond causes slightly
larger angles (121°), and the angle between the single bonds is slightly smaller (118°).
In the ammonia molecule, the three hydrogen atoms attached to the central nitrogen are not arranged in a flat,
trigonal planar molecular structure, but rather in a three-dimensional trigonal pyramid (Figure 7.18) with the
nitrogen atom at the apex and the three hydrogen atoms forming the base. The ideal bond angles in a trigonal
pyramid are based on the tetrahedral electron pair geometry. Again, there are slight deviations from the ideal
because lone pairs occupy larger regions of space than do bonding electrons. The H–N–H bond angles in NH
3
are slightly smaller than the 109.5° angle in a regular tetrahedron (Figure 7.16) because the lone pair-bonding
pair repulsion is greater than the bonding pair-bonding pair repulsion (Figure 7.18).Figure 7.19illustrates the
ideal molecular structures, which are predicted based on the electron-pair geometries for various
combinations of lone pairs and bonding pairs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 361
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 347
FIGURE7.19 The molecular structures are identical to the electron-pair geometries when there are no lone pairs
present (first column). For a particular number of electron pairs (row), the molecular structures for one or more lone
pairs are determined based on modifications of the corresponding electron-pair geometry.
According to VSEPR theory, the terminal atom locations (Xs inFigure 7.19) are equivalent within the linear,
trigonal planar, and tetrahedral electron-pair geometries (the first three rows of the table). It does not matter
which X is replaced with a lone pair because the molecules can be rotated to convert positions. For trigonal
bipyramidal electron-pair geometries, however, there are two distinct X positions, as shown inFigure 7.20: an
axial position(if we hold a model of a trigonal bipyramid by the two axial positions, we have an axis around
which we can rotate the model) and anequatorial position(three positions form an equator around the
middle of the molecule). As shown inFigure 7.19, the axial position is surrounded by bond angles of 90°,
whereas the equatorial position has more space available because of the 120° bond angles. In a trigonal
bipyramidal electron-pair geometry, lone pairs always occupy equatorial positions because these more
spacious positions can more easily accommodate the larger lone pairs.
Theoretically, we can come up with three possible arrangements for the three bonds and two lone pairs for the
ClF molecule (Figure 7.20). The stable structure is the one that puts the lone pairs in equatorial locations,
3
giving a T-shaped molecular structure.
PAGE: 362
348 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.20 (a) In a trigonal bipyramid, the two axial positions are located directly across from one another,
whereas the three equatorial positions are located in a triangular arrangement. (b–d) The two lone pairs (red lines)
in ClF have several possible arrangements, but the T-shaped molecular structure (b) is the one actually observed,
3
consistent with the larger lone pairs both occupying equatorial positions.
When a central atom has two lone electron pairs and four bonding regions, we have an octahedral electron-
pair geometry. The two lone pairs are on opposite sides of the octahedron (180° apart), giving a square planar
molecular structure that minimizes lone pair-lone pair repulsions (Figure 7.19).
Predicting Electron Pair Geometry and Molecular Structure
The following procedure uses VSEPR theory to determine the electron pair geometries and the molecular
structures:
1. Write the Lewis structure of the molecule or polyatomic ion.
2. Count the number of regions of electron density (lone pairs and bonds) around the central atom. A single,
double, or triple bond counts as one region of electron density.
3. Identify the electron-pair geometry based on the number of regions of electron density: linear, trigonal
planar, tetrahedral, trigonal bipyramidal, or octahedral (Figure 7.19, first column).
4. Use the number of lone pairs to determine the molecular structure (Figure 7.19). If more than one
arrangement of lone pairs and chemical bonds is possible, choose the one that will minimize repulsions,
remembering that lone pairs occupy more space than multiple bonds, which occupy more space than
single bonds. In trigonal bipyramidal arrangements, repulsion is minimized when every lone pair is in an
equatorial position. In an octahedral arrangement with two lone pairs, repulsion is minimized when the
lone pairs are on opposite sides of the central atom.
The following examples illustrate the use of VSEPR theory to predict the molecular structure of molecules or
ions that have no lone pairs of electrons. In this case, the molecular structure is identical to the electron pair
geometry.
EXAMPLE 7.11
Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: CO and BCl
2 3
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure for each of the following:
(a) carbon dioxide, CO , a molecule produced by the combustion of fossil fuels
2
(b) boron trichloride, BCl , an important industrial chemical
3
Solution
(a) We write the Lewis structure of CO as:
2
This shows us two regions of high electron density around the carbon atom—each double bond counts as one
region, and there are no lone pairs on the carbon atom. Using VSEPR theory, we predict that the two regions of
electron density arrange themselves on opposite sides of the central atom with a bond angle of 180°. The
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 363
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 349
electron-pair geometry and molecular structure are identical, and CO molecules are linear.
2
(b) We write the Lewis structure of BCl as:
3
Thus we see that BCl contains three bonds, and there are no lone pairs of electrons on boron. The
3
arrangement of three regions of high electron density gives a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry. The B–Cl
bonds lie in a plane with 120° angles between them. BCl also has a trigonal planar molecular structure (Figure
3
7.21).
FIGURE7.21
The electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of BCl are both trigonal planar. Note that the VSEPR
3
geometry indicates the correct bond angles (120°), unlike the Lewis structure shown above.
Check Your Learning
Carbonate, is a common polyatomic ion found in various materials from eggshells to antacids. What
are the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of this polyatomic ion?
Answer:
The electron-pair geometry is trigonal planar and the molecular structure is trigonal planar. Due to resonance,
all three C–O bonds are identical. Whether they are single, double, or an average of the two, each bond counts
as one region of electron density.
EXAMPLE 7.12
Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: Ammonium
Two of the top 50 chemicals produced in the United States, ammonium nitrate and ammonium sulfate, both
used as fertilizers, contain the ammonium ion. Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of
the cation.
Solution
We write the Lewis structure of as:
We can see that contains four bonds from the nitrogen atom to hydrogen atoms and no lone pairs. We
expect the four regions of high electron density to arrange themselves so that they point to the corners of a
tetrahedron with the central nitrogen atom in the middle (Figure 7.19). Therefore, the electron pair geometry
of is tetrahedral, and the molecular structure is also tetrahedral (Figure 7.22).
PAGE: 364
350 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
FIGURE7.22 The ammonium ion displays a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry as well as a tetrahedral molecular
structure.
Check Your Learning
Identify a molecule with trigonal bipyramidal molecular structure.
Answer:
Any molecule with five electron pairs around the central atoms including no lone pairs will be trigonal
bipyramidal. PF is a common example.
5
The next several examples illustrate the effect of lone pairs of electrons on molecular structure.
EXAMPLE 7.13
Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: Lone Pairs on the Central Atom
Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of a water molecule.
Solution
The Lewis structure of H O indicates that there are four regions of high electron density around the oxygen
2
atom: two lone pairs and two chemical bonds:
We predict that these four regions are arranged in a tetrahedral fashion (Figure 7.23), as indicated inFigure
7.19. Thus, the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral and the molecular structure is bent with an angle slightly
less than 109.5°. In fact, the bond angle is 104.5°.
FIGURE7.23 (a) H O has four regions of electron density around the central atom, so it has a tetrahedral electron-
2
pair geometry. (b) Two of the electron regions are lone pairs, so the molecular structure is bent.
Check Your Learning
The hydronium ion, H O+, forms when acids are dissolved in water. Predict the electron-pair geometry and
3
molecular structure of this cation.
Answer:
electron pair geometry: tetrahedral; molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 365
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 351
EXAMPLE 7.14
Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: SF
4
Sulfur tetrafluoride, SF , is extremely valuable for the preparation of fluorine-containing compounds used as
4
herbicides (i.e., SF is used as a fluorinating agent). Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular
4
structure of a SF molecule.
4
Solution
The Lewis structure of SF indicates five regions of electron density around the sulfur atom: one lone pair and
4
four bonding pairs:
We expect these five regions to adopt a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry. To minimize lone pair
repulsions, the lone pair occupies one of the equatorial positions. The molecular structure (Figure 7.24) is that
of a seesaw (Figure 7.19).
FIGURE7.24 (a) SF4 has a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement of the five regions of electron density. (b) One of the
regions is a lone pair, which results in a seesaw-shaped molecular structure.
Check Your Learning
Predict the electron pair geometry and molecular structure for molecules of XeF .
2
Answer:
The electron-pair geometry is trigonal bipyramidal. The molecular structure is linear.
EXAMPLE 7.15
Predicting Electron-pair Geometry and Molecular Structure: XeF
4
Of all the noble gases, xenon is the most reactive, frequently reacting with elements such as oxygen and
fluorine. Predict the electron-pair geometry and molecular structure of the XeF molecule.
4
Solution
The Lewis structure of XeF indicates six regions of high electron density around the xenon atom: two lone
4
pairs and four bonds:
PAGE: 366
352 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
These six regions adopt an octahedral arrangement (Figure 7.19), which is the electron-pair geometry. To
minimize repulsions, the lone pairs should be on opposite sides of the central atom (Figure 7.25). The five
atoms are all in the same plane and have a square planar molecular structure.
FIGURE7.25 (a) XeF adopts an octahedral arrangement with two lone pairs (red lines) and four bonds in the
4
electron-pair geometry. (b) The molecular structure is square planar with the lone pairs directly across from one
another.
Check Your Learning
In a certain molecule, the central atom has three lone pairs and two bonds. What will the electron pair
geometry and molecular structure be?
Answer:
electron pair geometry: trigonal bipyramidal; molecular structure: linear
Molecular Structure for Multicenter Molecules
When a molecule or polyatomic ion has only one central atom, the molecular structure completely describes
the shape of the molecule. Larger molecules do not have a single central atom, but are connected by a chain of
interior atoms that each possess a “local” geometry. The way these local structures are oriented with respect to
each other also influences the molecular shape, but such considerations are largely beyond the scope of this
introductory discussion. For our purposes, we will only focus on determining the local structures.
EXAMPLE 7.16
Predicting Structure in Multicenter Molecules
The Lewis structure for the simplest amino acid, glycine, H NCH CO H, is shown here. Predict the local
2 2 2
geometry for the nitrogen atom, the two carbon atoms, and the oxygen atom with a hydrogen atom attached:
Solution
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 367
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 353
Consider each central atom independently. The electron-pair geometries:
• nitrogen––four regions of electron density; tetrahedral
• carbon (CH )––four regions of electron density; tetrahedral
2
• carbon (CO )—three regions of electron density; trigonal planar
2
• oxygen (OH)—four regions of electron density; tetrahedral
The local structures:
• nitrogen––three bonds, one lone pair; trigonal pyramidal
• carbon (CH )—four bonds, no lone pairs; tetrahedral
2
• carbon (CO )—three bonds (double bond counts as one bond), no lone pairs; trigonal planar
2
• oxygen (OH)—two bonds, two lone pairs; bent (109°)
Check Your Learning
Another amino acid is alanine, which has the Lewis structure shown here. Predict the electron-pair geometry
and local structure of the nitrogen atom, the three carbon atoms, and the oxygen atom with hydrogen attached:
Answer:
electron-pair geometries: nitrogen––tetrahedral; carbon (CH)—tetrahedral; carbon (CH )—tetrahedral; carbon
3
(CO )—trigonal planar; oxygen (OH)—tetrahedral; local structures: nitrogen—trigonal pyramidal; carbon
2
(CH)—tetrahedral; carbon (CH )—tetrahedral; carbon (CO )—trigonal planar; oxygen (OH)—bent (109°)
3 2
LINK TO LEARNING
Themolecular shape simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape)lets you build various molecules and
practice naming their electron-pair geometries and molecular structures.
EXAMPLE 7.17
Molecular Simulation
Usingmolecular shape simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape)allows us to control whether bond
angles and/or lone pairs are displayed by checking or unchecking the boxes under “Options” on the right. We
can also use the “Name” checkboxes at bottom-left to display or hide the electron pair geometry (called
“electron geometry” in the simulator) and/or molecular structure (called “molecular shape” in the simulator).
Build the molecule HCN in the simulator based on the following Lewis structure:
Click on each bond type or lone pair at right to add that group to the central atom. Once you have the complete
molecule, rotate it to examine the predicted molecular structure. What molecular structure is this?
Solution
The molecular structure is linear.
Check Your Learning
Build a more complex molecule in the simulator. Identify the electron-group geometry, molecular structure,
and bond angles. Then try to find a chemical formula that would match the structure you have drawn.
PAGE: 368
354 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
Answer:
Answers will vary. For example, an atom with four single bonds, a double bond, and a lone pair has an
octahedral electron-group geometry and a square pyramidal molecular structure. XeOF is a molecule that
4
adopts this structure.
Molecular Polarity and Dipole Moment
As discussed previously, polar covalent bonds connect two atoms with differing electronegativities, leaving one
atom with a partial positive charge (δ+) and the other atom with a partial negative charge (δ–), as the electrons
are pulled toward the more electronegative atom. This separation of charge gives rise to abond dipole
moment. The magnitude of a bond dipole moment is represented by the Greek letter mu (µ) and is given by the
formula shown here, where Q is the magnitude of the partial charges (determined by the electronegativity
difference) and r is the distance between the charges:
This bond moment can be represented as avector, a quantity having both direction and magnitude (Figure
7.26). Dipole vectors are shown as arrows pointing along the bond from the less electronegative atom toward
the more electronegative atom. A small plus sign is drawn on the less electronegative end to indicate the
partially positive end of the bond. The length of the arrow is proportional to the magnitude of the
electronegativity difference between the two atoms.
FIGURE7.26 (a) There is a small difference in electronegativity between C and H, represented as a short vector.
(b) The electronegativity difference between B and F is much larger, so the vector representing the bond moment is
much longer.
A whole molecule may also have a separation of charge, depending on its molecular structure and the polarity
of each of its bonds. If such a charge separation exists, the molecule is said to be apolar molecule(or dipole);
otherwise the molecule is said to be nonpolar. Thedipole momentmeasures the extent of net charge
separation in the molecule as a whole. We determine the dipole moment by adding the bond moments in
three-dimensional space, taking into account the molecular structure.
For diatomic molecules, there is only one bond, so its bond dipole moment determines the molecular polarity.
Homonuclear diatomic molecules such as Br and N have no difference in electronegativity, so their dipole
2 2
moment is zero. For heteronuclear molecules such as CO, there is a small dipole moment. For HF, there is a
larger dipole moment because there is a larger difference in electronegativity.
When a molecule contains more than one bond, the geometry must be taken into account. If the bonds in a
molecule are arranged such that their bond moments cancel (vector sum equals zero), then the molecule is
nonpolar. This is the situation in CO (Figure 7.27). Each of the bonds is polar, but the molecule as a whole is
2
nonpolar. From the Lewis structure, and using VSEPR theory, we determine that the CO molecule is linear
2
with polar C=O bonds on opposite sides of the carbon atom. The bond moments cancel because they are
pointed in opposite directions. In the case of the water molecule (Figure 7.27), the Lewis structure again shows
that there are two bonds to a central atom, and the electronegativity difference again shows that each of these
bonds has a nonzero bond moment. In this case, however, the molecular structure is bent because of the lone
pairs on O, and the two bond moments do not cancel. Therefore, water does have a net dipole moment and is a
polar molecule (dipole).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 369
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 355
FIGURE7.27 The overall dipole moment of a molecule depends on the individual bond dipole moments and how
they are arranged. (a) Each CO bond has a bond dipole moment, but they point in opposite directions so that the net
CO molecule is nonpolar. (b) In contrast, water is polar because the OH bond moments do not cancel out.
2
The OCS molecule has a structure similar to CO , but a sulfur atom has replaced one of the oxygen atoms. To
2
determine if this molecule is polar, we draw the molecular structure. VSEPR theory predicts a linear molecule:
The C-O bond is considerably polar. Although C and S have very similar electronegativity values, S is slightly
more electronegative than C, and so the C-S bond is just slightly polar. Because oxygen is more electronegative
than sulfur, the oxygen end of the molecule is the negative end.
Chloromethane, CH Cl, is a tetrahedral molecule with three slightly polar C-H bonds and a more polar C-Cl
3
bond. The relative electronegativities of the bonded atoms is H < C < Cl, and so the bond moments all point
toward the Cl end of the molecule and sum to yield a considerable dipole moment (the molecules are relatively
polar).
For molecules of high symmetry such as BF (trigonal planar), CH (tetrahedral), PF (trigonal bipyramidal),
3 4 5
and SF (octahedral), all the bonds are of identical polarity (same bond moment) and they are oriented in
6
geometries that yield nonpolar molecules (dipole moment is zero). Molecules of less geometric symmetry,
however, may be polar even when all bond moments are identical. For these molecules, the directions of the
equal bond moments are such that they sum to give a nonzero dipole moment and a polar molecule. Examples
of such molecules include hydrogen sulfide, H S (nonlinear), and ammonia, NH (trigonal pyramidal).
2 3
To summarize, to be polar, a molecule must:
1. Contain at least one polar covalent bond.
2. Have a molecular structure such that the sum of the vectors of each bond dipole moment does not cancel.
Properties of Polar Molecules
Polar molecules tend to align when placed in an electric field with the positive end of the molecule oriented
PAGE: 370
356 7 • Chemical Bonding and Molecular Geometry
toward the negative plate and the negative end toward the positive plate (Figure 7.28). We can use an
electrically charged object to attract polar molecules, but nonpolar molecules are not attracted. Also, polar
solvents are better at dissolving polar substances, and nonpolar solvents are better at dissolving nonpolar
substances.
FIGURE7.28 (a) Molecules are always randomly distributed in the liquid state in the absence of an electric field.
(b) When an electric field is applied, polar molecules like HF will align to the dipoles with the field direction.
LINK TO LEARNING
Themolecule polarity simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity)provides many ways to explore dipole
moments of bonds and molecules.
EXAMPLE 7.18
Polarity Simulations
Open themolecule polarity simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity)and select the “Three Atoms”
tab at the top. This should display a molecule ABC with three electronegativity adjustors. You can display or
hide the bond moments, molecular dipoles, and partial charges at the right. Turning on the Electric Field will
show whether the molecule moves when exposed to a field, similar toFigure 7.28.
Use the electronegativity controls to determine how the molecular dipole will look for the starting bent
molecule if:
(a) A and C are very electronegative and B is in the middle of the range.
(b) A is very electronegative, and B and C are not.
Solution
(a) Molecular dipole moment points immediately between A and C.
(b) Molecular dipole moment points along the A–B bond, toward A.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 371
7.6 • Molecular Structure and Polarity 357
Check Your Learning
Determine the partial charges that will give the largest possible bond dipoles.
Answer:
The largest bond moments will occur with the largest partial charges. The two solutions above represent how
unevenly the electrons are shared in the bond. The bond moments will be maximized when the
electronegativity difference is greatest. The controls for A and C should be set to one extreme, and B should be
set to the opposite extreme. Although the magnitude of the bond moment will not change based on whether B
is the most electronegative or the least, the direction of the bond moment will.
PAGE: 372
358 7 • Key Terms
Key Terms
axial position location in a trigonal bipyramidal between cations and anions in an ionic
geometry in which there is another atom at a compound
180° angle and the equatorial positions are at a lattice energy (ΔH ) energy required to
lattice
90° angle separate one mole of an ionic solid into its
bond angle angle between any two covalent bonds component gaseous ions
that share a common atom Lewis structure diagram showing lone pairs and
bond dipole moment separation of charge in a bonding pairs of electrons in a molecule or an ion
bond that depends on the difference in Lewis symbol symbol for an element or
electronegativity and the bond distance monatomic ion that uses a dot to represent each
represented by partial charges or a vector valence electron in the element or ion
bond distance (also, bond length) distance linear shape in which two outside groups are
between the nuclei of two bonded atoms placed on opposite sides of a central atom
bond energy (also, bond dissociation energy) lone pair two (a pair of) valence electrons that are
energy required to break a covalent bond in a not used to form a covalent bond
gaseous substance molecular structure arrangement of atoms in a
bond length distance between the nuclei of two molecule or ion
bonded atoms at which the lowest potential molecular structure structure that includes only
energy is achieved the placement of the atoms in the molecule
Born-Haber cycle thermochemical cycle relating octahedral shape in which six outside groups are
the various energetic steps involved in the placed around a central atom such that a three-
formation of an ionic solid from the relevant dimensional shape is generated with four groups
elements forming a square and the other two forming the
covalent bond bond formed when electrons are apex of two pyramids, one above and one below
shared between atoms the square plane
dipole moment property of a molecule that octet rule guideline that states main group atoms
describes the separation of charge determined by will form structures in which eight valence
the sum of the individual bond moments based electrons interact with each nucleus, counting
on the molecular structure bonding electrons as interacting with both atoms
double bond covalent bond in which two pairs of connected by the bond
electrons are shared between two atoms polar covalent bond covalent bond between atoms
electron-pair geometry arrangement around a of different electronegativities; a covalent bond
central atom of all regions of electron density with a positive end and a negative end
(bonds, lone pairs, or unpaired electrons) polar molecule (also, dipole) molecule with an
electronegativity tendency of an atom to attract overall dipole moment
electrons in a bond to itself pure covalent bond (also, nonpolar covalent bond)
equatorial position one of the three positions in a covalent bond between atoms of identical
trigonal bipyramidal geometry with 120° angles electronegativities
between them; the axial positions are located at a resonance situation in which one Lewis structure
90° angle is insufficient to describe the bonding in a
formal charge charge that would result on an atom molecule and the average of multiple structures
by taking the number of valence electrons on the is observed
neutral atom and subtracting the nonbonding resonance forms two or more Lewis structures
electrons and the number of bonds (one-half of that have the same arrangement of atoms but
the bonding electrons) different arrangements of electrons
free radical molecule that contains an odd number resonance hybrid average of the resonance forms
of electrons shown by the individual Lewis structures
hypervalent molecule molecule containing at single bond bond in which a single pair of
least one main group element that has more than electrons is shared between two atoms
eight electrons in its valence shell tetrahedral shape in which four outside groups are
inert pair effect tendency of heavy atoms to form placed around a central atom such that a three-
ions in which their valenceselectrons are not lost dimensional shape is generated with four corners
ionic bond strong electrostatic force of attraction and 109.5° angles between each pair and the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 373
7 • Key Equations 359
central atom and the central atom
trigonal bipyramidal shape in which five outside triple bond bond in which three pairs of electrons
groups are placed around a central atom such are shared between two atoms
that three form a flat triangle with 120° angles valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory
between each pair and the central atom, and the (VSEPR) theory used to predict the bond angles
other two form the apex of two pyramids, one in a molecule based on positioning regions of
above and one below the triangular plane high electron density as far apart as possible to
trigonal planar shape in which three outside minimize electrostatic repulsion
groups are placed in a flat triangle around a vector quantity having magnitude and direction
central atom with 120° angles between each pair
Key Equations
Bond energy for a diatomic molecule:
Enthalpy change: ΔH= ƩD – ƩD
bonds broken bonds formed
Lattice energy for a solid MX:
Lattice energy for an ionic crystal:
Summary
7.1Ionic Bonding 7.3Lewis Symbols and Structures
Atoms gain or lose electrons to form ions with Valence electronic structures can be visualized by
particularly stable electron configurations. The drawing Lewis symbols (for atoms and monatomic
charges of cations formed by the representative ions) and Lewis structures (for molecules and
metals may be determined readily because, with few polyatomic ions). Lone pairs, unpaired electrons,
exceptions, the electronic structures of these ions and single, double, or triple bonds are used to
have either a noble gas configuration or a completely indicate where the valence electrons are located
filled electron shell. The charges of anions formed around each atom in a Lewis structure. Most
by the nonmetals may also be readily determined structures—especially those containing second row
because these ions form when nonmetal atoms gain elements—obey the octet rule, in which every atom
enough electrons to fill their valence shells. (except H) is surrounded by eight electrons.
Exceptions to the octet rule occur for odd-electron
7.2Covalent Bonding
molecules (free radicals), electron-deficient
Covalent bonds form when electrons are shared molecules, and hypervalent molecules.
between atoms and are attracted by the nuclei of
7.4Formal Charges and Resonance
both atoms. In pure covalent bonds, the electrons
are shared equally. In polar covalent bonds, the In a Lewis structure, formal charges can be assigned
electrons are shared unequally, as one atom exerts a to each atom by treating each bond as if one-half of
stronger force of attraction on the electrons than the the electrons are assigned to each atom. These
other. The ability of an atom to attract a pair of hypothetical formal charges are a guide to
electrons in a chemical bond is called its determining the most appropriate Lewis structure. A
electronegativity. The difference in electronegativity structure in which the formal charges are as close to
between two atoms determines how polar a bond zero as possible is preferred. Resonance occurs in
will be. In a diatomic molecule with two identical cases where two or more Lewis structures with
atoms, there is no difference in electronegativity, so identical arrangements of atoms but different
the bond is nonpolar or pure covalent. When the distributions of electrons can be written. The actual
electronegativity difference is very large, as is the distribution of electrons (the resonance hybrid) is an
case between metals and nonmetals, the bonding is average of the distribution indicated by the
characterized as ionic. individual Lewis structures (the resonance forms).
PAGE: 374
360 7 • Exercises
7.5Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds arrangement of atoms in a molecule. It states that
valence electrons will assume an electron-pair
The strength of a covalent bond is measured by its
geometry that minimizes repulsions between areas
bond dissociation energy, that is, the amount of
of high electron density (bonds and/or lone pairs).
energy required to break that particular bond in a
Molecular structure, which refers only to the
mole of molecules. Multiple bonds are stronger than
placement of atoms in a molecule and not the
single bonds between the same atoms. The enthalpy
electrons, is equivalent to electron-pair geometry
of a reaction can be estimated based on the energy
only when there are no lone electron pairs around
input required to break bonds and the energy
the central atom. A dipole moment measures a
released when new bonds are formed. For ionic
separation of charge. For one bond, the bond dipole
bonds, the lattice energy is the energy required to
moment is determined by the difference in
separate one mole of a compound into its gas phase
electronegativity between the two atoms. For a
ions. Lattice energy increases for ions with higher
molecule, the overall dipole moment is determined
charges and shorter distances between ions. Lattice
by both the individual bond moments and how these
energies are often calculated using the Born-Haber
dipoles are arranged in the molecular structure.
cycle, a thermochemical cycle including all of the
Polar molecules (those with an appreciable dipole
energetic steps involved in converting elements into
moment) interact with electric fields, whereas
an ionic compound.
nonpolar molecules do not.
7.6Molecular Structure and Polarity
VSEPR theory predicts the three-dimensional
Exercises
7.1Ionic Bonding
1. Does a cation gain protons to form a positive charge or does it lose electrons?
2. Iron(III) sulfate [Fe (SO ) ] is composed of Fe3+and ions. Explain why a sample of iron(III) sulfate is
2 43
uncharged.
3. Which of the following atoms would be expected to form negative ions in binary ionic compounds and
which would be expected to form positive ions: P, I, Mg, Cl, In, Cs, O, Pb, Co?
4. Which of the following atoms would be expected to form negative ions in binary ionic compounds and
which would be expected to form positive ions: Br, Ca, Na, N, F, Al, Sn, S, Cd?
5. Predict the charge on the monatomic ions formed from the following atoms in binary ionic compounds:
(a) P
(b) Mg
(c) Al
(d) O
(e) Cl
(f) Cs
6. Predict the charge on the monatomic ions formed from the following atoms in binary ionic compounds:
(a) I
(b) Sr
(c) K
(d) N
(e) S
(f) In
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 375
7 • Exercises 361
7. Write the electron configuration for each of the following ions:
(a) As3–
(b) I–
(c) Be2+
(d) Cd2+
(e) O2–
(f) Ga3+
(g) Li+
(h) N3–
(i) Sn2+
(j) Co2+
(k) Fe2+
(l) As3+
8. Write the electron configuration for the monatomic ions formed from the following elements (which form
the greatest concentration of monatomic ions in seawater):
(a) Cl
(b) Na
(c) Mg
(d) Ca
(e) K
(f) Br
(g) Sr
(h) F
9. Write out the full electron configuration for each of the following atoms and for the monatomic ion found
in binary ionic compounds containing the element:
(a) Al
(b) Br
(c) Sr
(d) Li
(e) As
(f) S
10. From the labels of several commercial products, prepare a list of six ionic compounds in the products. For
each compound, write the formula. (You may need to look up some formulas in a suitable reference.)
7.2Covalent Bonding
11. Why is it incorrect to speak of a molecule of solid NaCl?
12. What information can you use to predict whether a bond between two atoms is covalent or ionic?
13. Predict which of the following compounds are ionic and which are covalent, based on the location of their
constituent atoms in the periodic table:
(a) Cl CO
2
(b) MnO
(c) NCl
3
(d) CoBr
2
(e) K S
2
(f) CO
(g) CaF
2
(h) HI
(i) CaO
(j) IBr
(k) CO
2
14. Explain the difference between a nonpolar covalent bond, a polar covalent bond, and an ionic bond.
PAGE: 376
362 7 • Exercises
15. From its position in the periodic table, determine which atom in each pair is more electronegative:
(a) Br or Cl
(b) N or O
(c) S or O
(d) P or S
(e) Si or N
(f) Ba or P
(g) N or K
16. From its position in the periodic table, determine which atom in each pair is more electronegative:
(a) N or P
(b) N or Ge
(c) S or F
(d) Cl or S
(e) H or C
(f) Se or P
(g) C or Si
17. From their positions in the periodic table, arrange the atoms in each of the following series in order of
increasing electronegativity:
(a) C, F, H, N, O
(b) Br, Cl, F, H, I
(c) F, H, O, P, S
(d) Al, H, Na, O, P
(e) Ba, H, N, O, As
18. From their positions in the periodic table, arrange the atoms in each of the following series in order of
increasing electronegativity:
(a) As, H, N, P, Sb
(b) Cl, H, P, S, Si
(c) Br, Cl, Ge, H, Sr
(d) Ca, H, K, N, Si
(e) Cl, Cs, Ge, H, Sr
19. Which atoms can bond to sulfur so as to produce a positive partial charge on the sulfur atom?
20. Which is the most polar bond?
(a) C–C
(b) C–H
(c) N–H
(d) O–H
(e) Se–H
21. Identify the more polar bond in each of the following pairs of bonds:
(a) HF or HCl
(b) NO or CO
(c) SH or OH
(d) PCl or SCl
(e) CH or NH
(f) SO or PO
(g) CN or NN
22. Which of the following molecules or ions contain polar bonds?
(a) O
3
(b) S
8
(c)
(d)
(e) CO
2
(f) H S
2
(g)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 377
7 • Exercises 363
7.3Lewis Symbols and Structures
23. Write the Lewis symbols for each of the following ions:
(a) As3–
(b) I–
(c) Be2+
(d) O2–
(e) Ga3+
(f) Li+
(g) N3–
24. Many monatomic ions are found in seawater, including the ions formed from the following list of elements.
Write the Lewis symbols for the monatomic ions formed from the following elements:
(a) Cl
(b) Na
(c) Mg
(d) Ca
(e) K
(f) Br
(g) Sr
(h) F
25. Write the Lewis symbols of the ions in each of the following ionic compounds and the Lewis symbols of the
atom from which they are formed:
(a) MgS
(b) Al O
2 3
(c) GaCl
3
(d) K O
2
(e) Li N
3
(f) KF
26. In the Lewis structures listed here, M and X represent various elements in the third period of the periodic
table. Write the formula of each compound using the chemical symbols of each element:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
27. Write the Lewis structure for the diatomic molecule P , an unstable form of phosphorus found in high-
2
temperature phosphorus vapor.
PAGE: 378
364 7 • Exercises
28. Write Lewis structures for the following:
(a) H
2
(b) HBr
(c) PCl
3
(d) SF
2
(e) H CCH
2 2
(f) HNNH
(g) H CNH
2
(h) NO–
(i) N
2
(j) CO
(k) CN–
29. Write Lewis structures for the following:
(a) O
2
(b) H CO
2
(c) AsF
3
(d) ClNO
(e) SiCl
4
(f) H O+
3
(g)
(h)
(i) HCCH
(j) ClCN
(k)
30. Write Lewis structures for the following:
(a) ClF
3
(b) PCl
5
(c) BF
3
(d)
31. Write Lewis structures for the following:
(a) SeF
6
(b) XeF
4
(c)
(d) Cl BBCl (contains a B–B bond)
2 2
32. Write Lewis structures for:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) HONO
33. Correct the following statement: “The bonds in solid PbCl are ionic; the bond in a HCl molecule is
2
covalent. Thus, all of the valence electrons in PbCl are located on the Cl–ions, and all of the valence
2
electrons in a HCl molecule are shared between the H and Cl atoms.”
34. Write Lewis structures for the following molecules or ions:
(a) SbH
3
(b) XeF
2
(c) Se (a cyclic molecule with a ring of eight Se atoms)
8
35. Methanol, H COH, is used as the fuel in some race cars. Ethanol, C H OH, is used extensively as motor fuel
3 2 5
in Brazil. Both methanol and ethanol produce CO and H O when they burn. Write the chemical equations
2 2
for these combustion reactions using Lewis structures instead of chemical formulas.
36. Many planets in our solar system contain organic chemicals including methane (CH ) and traces of
4
ethylene (C H ), ethane (C H ), propyne (H CCCH), and diacetylene (HCCCCH). Write the Lewis structures
2 4 2 6 3
for each of these molecules.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 379
7 • Exercises 365
37. Carbon tetrachloride was formerly used in fire extinguishers for electrical fires. It is no longer used for
this purpose because of the formation of the toxic gas phosgene, Cl CO. Write the Lewis structures for
2
carbon tetrachloride and phosgene.
38. Identify the atoms that correspond to each of the following electron configurations. Then, write the Lewis
symbol for the common ion formed from each atom:
(a) 1s22s22p5
(b) 1s22s22p63s2
(c) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d10
(d) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p4
(e) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p1
39. The arrangement of atoms in several biologically important molecules is given here. Complete the Lewis
structures of these molecules by adding multiple bonds and lone pairs. Do not add any more atoms.
(a) the amino acid serine:
(b) urea:
(c) pyruvic acid:
(d) uracil:
(e) carbonic acid:
40. A compound with a molar mass of about 28 g/mol contains 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen by mass.
Write the Lewis structure for a molecule of the compound.
41. A compound with a molar mass of about 42 g/mol contains 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen by mass.
Write the Lewis structure for a molecule of the compound.
42. Two arrangements of atoms are possible for a compound with a molar mass of about 45 g/mol that
contains 52.2% C, 13.1% H, and 34.7% O by mass. Write the Lewis structures for the two molecules.
43. How are single, double, and triple bonds similar? How do they differ?
PAGE: 380
366 7 • Exercises
7.4Formal Charges and Resonance
44. Write resonance forms that describe the distribution of electrons in each of these molecules or ions.
(a) selenium dioxide, OSeO
(b) nitrate ion,
(c) nitric acid, HNO (N is bonded to an OH group and two O atoms)
3
(d) benzene, C H :
6 6
(e) the formate ion:
45. Write resonance forms that describe the distribution of electrons in each of these molecules or ions.
(a) sulfur dioxide, SO
2
(b) carbonate ion,
(c) hydrogen carbonate ion, (C is bonded to an OH group and two O atoms)
(d) pyridine:
(e) the allyl ion:
46. Write the resonance forms of ozone, O , the component of the upper atmosphere that protects the Earth
3
from ultraviolet radiation.
47. Sodium nitrite, which has been used to preserve bacon and other meats, is an ionic compound. Write the
resonance forms of the nitrite ion,
48. In terms of the bonds present, explain why acetic acid, CH CO H, contains two distinct types of carbon-
3 2
oxygen bonds, whereas the acetate ion, formed by loss of a hydrogen ion from acetic acid, only contains
one type of carbon-oxygen bond. The skeleton structures of these species are shown:
49. Write the Lewis structures for the following, and include resonance structures where appropriate. Indicate
which has the strongest carbon-oxygen bond.
(a) CO
2
(b) CO
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 381
7 • Exercises 367
50. Toothpastes containing sodium hydrogen carbonate (sodium bicarbonate) and hydrogen peroxide are
widely used. Write Lewis structures for the hydrogen carbonate ion and hydrogen peroxide molecule, with
resonance forms where appropriate.
51. Determine the formal charge of each element in the following:
(a) HCl
(b) CF
4
(c) PCl
3
(d) PF
5
52. Determine the formal charge of each element in the following:
(a) H O+
3
(b)
(c) NH
3
(d)
(e) H O
2 2
53. Calculate the formal charge of chlorine in the molecules Cl , BeCl , and ClF .
2 2 5
54. Calculate the formal charge of each element in the following compounds and ions:
(a) F CO
2
(b) NO–
(c)
(d)
(e) H CCH
2 2
(f) ClF
3
(g) SeF
6
(h)
55. Draw all possible resonance structures for each of these compounds. Determine the formal charge on
each atom in each of the resonance structures:
(a) O
3
(b) SO
2
(c)
(d)
56. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of
atoms in nitrosyl chloride: ClNO or ClON?
57. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of
atoms in hypochlorous acid: HOCl or OClH?
58. Based on formal charge considerations, which of the following would likely be the correct arrangement of
atoms in sulfur dioxide: OSO or SOO?
59. Draw the structure of hydroxylamine, H NO, and assign formal charges; look up the structure. Is the actual
3
structure consistent with the formal charges?
60. Iodine forms a series of fluorides (listed here). Write Lewis structures for each of the four compounds and
determine the formal charge of the iodine atom in each molecule:
(a) IF
(b) IF
3
(c) IF
5
(d) IF
7
61. Write the Lewis structure and chemical formula of the compound with a molar mass of about 70 g/mol
that contains 19.7% nitrogen and 80.3% fluorine by mass, and determine the formal charge of the atoms
in this compound.
62. Which of the following structures would we expect for nitrous acid? Determine the formal charges:
PAGE: 382
368 7 • Exercises
63. Sulfuric acid is the industrial chemical produced in greatest quantity worldwide. About 90 billion pounds
are produced each year in the United States alone. Write the Lewis structure for sulfuric acid, H SO ,
2 4
which has two oxygen atoms and two OH groups bonded to the sulfur.
7.5Strengths of Ionic and Covalent Bonds
64. Which bond in each of the following pairs of bonds is the strongest?
(a) C–C or
(b) C–N or
(c) or
(d) H–F or H–Cl
(e) C–H or O–H
(f) C–N or C–O
65. Using the bond energies inTable 7.2, determine the approximate enthalpy change for each of the
following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
66. Using the bond energies inTable 7.2, determine the approximate enthalpy change for each of the
following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
67. When a molecule can form two different structures, the structure with the stronger bonds is usually the
more stable form. Use bond energies to predict the correct structure of the hydroxylamine molecule:
68. How does the bond energy of HCl(g) differ from the standard enthalpy of formation of HCl(g)?
69. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data inAppendix G, show how the standard enthalpy of
formation of HCl(g) can be used to determine the bond energy.
70. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data inAppendix G, calculate the bond energy of the carbon-
sulfur double bond in CS .
2
71. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data inAppendix G, determine which bond is stronger: the S–F
bond in SF (g) or in SF (g)?
4 6
72. Using the standard enthalpy of formation data inAppendix G, determine which bond is stronger: the P–Cl
bond in PCl (g) or in PCl (g)?
3 5
73. Complete the following Lewis structure by adding bonds (not atoms), and then indicate the longest bond:
74. Use the bond energy to calculate an approximate value of ΔHfor the following reaction. Which is the more
stable form of FNO ?
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 383
7 • Exercises 369
1
75. Use principles of atomic structure to answer each of the following:
(a) The radius of the Ca atom is 197 pm; the radius of the Ca2+ion is 99 pm. Account for the difference.
(b) The lattice energy of CaO(s) is –3460 kJ/mol; the lattice energy of K O is –2240 kJ/mol. Account for the
2
difference.
(c) Given these ionization values, explain the difference between Ca and K with regard to their first and second
ionization energies.
Second Ionization Energy (kJ/
Element First Ionization Energy (kJ/mol)
mol)
K 419 3050
Ca 590 1140
(d) The first ionization energy of Mg is 738 kJ/mol and that of Al is 578 kJ/mol. Account for this difference.
76. The lattice energy of LiF is 1023 kJ/mol, and the Li–F distance is 200.8 pm. NaF crystallizes in the same
structure as LiF but with a Na–F distance of 231 pm. Which of the following values most closely
approximates the lattice energy of NaF: 510, 890, 1023, 1175, or 4090 kJ/mol? Explain your choice.
77. For which of the following substances is the least energy required to convert one mole of the solid into
separate ions?
(a) MgO
(b) SrO
(c) KF
(d) CsF
(e) MgF
2
78. The reaction of a metal, M, with a halogen, X , proceeds by an exothermic reaction as indicated by this
2
equation: For each of the following, indicate which option will make the
reaction more exothermic. Explain your answers.
(a) a large radius vs. a small radius for M+2
(b) a high ionization energy vs. a low ionization energy for M
(c) an increasing bond energy for the halogen
(d) a decreasing electron affinity for the halogen
(e) an increasing size of the anion formed by the halogen
79. The lattice energy of LiF is 1023 kJ/mol, and the Li–F distance is 201 pm. MgO crystallizes in the same
structure as LiF but with a Mg–O distance of 205 pm. Which of the following values most closely
approximates the lattice energy of MgO: 256 kJ/mol, 512 kJ/mol, 1023 kJ/mol, 2046 kJ/mol, or 4008 kJ/
mol? Explain your choice.
80. Which compound in each of the following pairs has the larger lattice energy? Note: Mg2+and Li+have
similar radii; O2–and F–have similar radii. Explain your choices.
(a) MgO or MgSe
(b) LiF or MgO
(c) Li O or LiCl
2
(d) Li Se or MgO
2
81. Which compound in each of the following pairs has the larger lattice energy? Note: Ba2+and
K+have similar radii; S2–and Cl–have similar radii. Explain your choices.
(a) K O or Na O
2 2
(b) K S or BaS
2
(c) KCl or BaS
(d) BaS or BaCl
2
1 This question is taken from the Chemistry Advanced Placement Examination and is used with the permission of the Educational
Testing Service.
PAGE: 384
370 7 • Exercises
82. Which of the following compounds requires the most energy to convert one mole of the solid into separate
ions?
(a) MgO
(b) SrO
(c) KF
(d) CsF
(e) MgF
2
83. Which of the following compounds requires the most energy to convert one mole of the solid into separate
ions?
(a) K S
2
(b) K O
2
(c) CaS
(d) Cs S
2
(e) CaO
84. The lattice energy of KF is 794 kJ/mol, and the interionic distance is 269 pm. The Na–F
distance in NaF, which has the same structure as KF, is 231 pm. Which of the following values is the
closest approximation of the lattice energy of NaF: 682 kJ/mol, 794 kJ/mol, 924 kJ/mol, 1588 kJ/mol, or
3175 kJ/mol? Explain your answer.
7.6Molecular Structure and Polarity
85. Explain why the HOH molecule is bent, whereas the HBeH molecule is linear.
86. What feature of a Lewis structure can be used to tell if a molecule’s (or ion’s) electron-pair geometry and
molecular structure will be identical?
87. Explain the difference between electron-pair geometry and molecular structure.
88. Why is the H–N–H angle in NH smaller than the H–C–H bond angle in CH ? Why is the H–N–H angle in
3 4
identical to the H–C–H bond angle in CH ?
4
89. Explain how a molecule that contains polar bonds can be nonpolar.
90. As a general rule, MX molecules (where M represents a central atom and X represents terminal atoms; n
n
= 2 – 5) are polar if there is one or more lone pairs of electrons on M. NH (M = N, X = H, n = 3) is an
3
example. There are two molecular structures with lone pairs that are exceptions to this rule. What are
they?
91. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions:
(a) SF
6
(b) PCl
5
(c) BeH
2
(d)
92. Identify the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions:
(a)
(b) CF
4
(c) BF
3
(d)
(e) BeCl
2
93. What are the electron-pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or
ions?
(a) ClF
5
(b)
(c)
(d) PCl
3
(e) SeF
4
(f)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 385
7 • Exercises 371
94. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following ions:
(a) H O+
3
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) ICl
3
(f) XeF
4
(g) SF
2
95. Identify the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following molecules:
(a) ClNO (N is the central atom)
(b) CS
2
(c) Cl CO (C is the central atom)
2
(d) Cl SO (S is the central atom)
2
(e) SO F (S is the central atom)
2 2
(f) XeO F (Xe is the central atom)
2 2
(g) (Cl is the central atom)
96. Predict the electron pair geometry and the molecular structure of each of the following:
(a) IOF (I is the central atom)
5
(b) POCl (P is the central atom)
3
(c) Cl SeO (Se is the central atom)
2
(d) ClSO+(S is the central atom)
(e) F SO (S is the central atom)
2
(f)
(g)
97. Which of the following molecules and ions contain polar bonds? Which of these molecules and ions have
dipole moments?
(a) ClF
5
(b)
(c)
(d) PCl
3
(e) SeF
4
(f)
(g) XeF
2
98. Which of these molecules and ions contain polar bonds? Which of these molecules and ions have dipole
moments?
(a) H O+
3
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) ICl
3
(f) XeF
4
(g) SF
2
99. Which of the following molecules have dipole moments?
(a) CS
2
(b) SeS
2
(c) CCl F
2 2
(d) PCl (P is the central atom)
3
(e) ClNO (N is the central atom)
PAGE: 386
372 7 • Exercises
100. Identify the molecules with a dipole moment:
(a) SF
4
(b) CF
4
(c) Cl CCBr
2 2
(d) CH Cl
3
(e) H CO
2
101. The molecule XF has a dipole moment. Is X boron or phosphorus?
3
102. The molecule XCl has a dipole moment. Is X beryllium or sulfur?
2
103. Is the Cl BBCl molecule polar or nonpolar?
2 2
104. There are three possible structures for PCl F with phosphorus as the central atom. Draw them and
2 3
discuss how measurements of dipole moments could help distinguish among them.
105. Describe the molecular structure around the indicated atom or atoms:
(a) the sulfur atom in sulfuric acid, H SO [(HO) SO ]
2 4 2 2
(b) the chlorine atom in chloric acid, HClO [HOClO ]
3 2
(c) the oxygen atom in hydrogen peroxide, HOOH
(d) the nitrogen atom in nitric acid, HNO [HONO ]
3 2
(e) the oxygen atom in the OH group in nitric acid, HNO [HONO ]
3 2
(f) the central oxygen atom in the ozone molecule, O
3
(g) each of the carbon atoms in propyne, CH CCH
3
(h) the carbon atom in Freon, CCl F
2 2
(i) each of the carbon atoms in allene, H CCCH
2 2
106. Draw the Lewis structures and predict the shape of each compound or ion:
(a) CO
2
(b)
(c) SO
3
(d)
107. A molecule with the formula AB , in which A and B represent different atoms, could have one of three
2
different shapes. Sketch and name the three different shapes that this molecule might have. Give an
example of a molecule or ion for each shape.
108. A molecule with the formula AB , in which A and B represent different atoms, could have one of three
3
different shapes. Sketch and name the three different shapes that this molecule might have. Give an
example of a molecule or ion that has each shape.
109. Draw the Lewis electron dot structures for these molecules, including resonance structures where
appropriate:
(a)
(b) CS
2
(c) CS
(d) predict the molecular shapes for and CS and explain how you arrived at your predictions
2
110. What is the molecular structure of the stable form of FNO ? (N is the central atom.)
2
111. A compound with a molar mass of about 42 g/mol contains 85.7% carbon and 14.3% hydrogen. What is
its molecular structure?
112. Use thesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity)to perform the following exercises for a two-
atom molecule:
(a) Adjust the electronegativity value so the bond dipole is pointing toward B. Then determine what the
electronegativity values must be to switch the dipole so that it points toward A.
(b) With a partial positive charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe what happens.
(c) With a small partial negative charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe what happens.
(d) Reset all, and then with a large partial negative charge on A, turn on the electric field and describe
what happens.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 387
7 • Exercises 373
113. Use thesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecPolarity)to perform the following exercises for a real
molecule. You may need to rotate the molecules in three dimensions to see certain dipoles.
(a) Sketch the bond dipoles and molecular dipole (if any) for O Explain your observations.
3.
(b) Look at the bond dipoles for NH . Use these dipoles to predict whether N or H is more electronegative.
3
(c) Predict whether there should be a molecular dipole for NH and, if so, in which direction it will point.
3
Check the molecular dipole box to test your hypothesis.
114. Use theMolecule Shape simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape)to build a molecule. Starting
with the central atom, click on the double bond to add one double bond. Then add one single bond and
one lone pair. Rotate the molecule to observe the complete geometry. Name the electron group geometry
and molecular structure and predict the bond angle. Then click the check boxes at the bottom and right
of the simulator to check your answers.
115. Use theMolecule Shape simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape)to explore real molecules. On
the Real Molecules tab, select H O. Switch between the “real” and “model” modes. Explain the difference
2
observed.
116. Use theMolecule Shape simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecShape)to explore real molecules. On
the Real Molecules tab, select “model” mode and S O. What is the model bond angle? Explain whether
2
the “real” bond angle should be larger or smaller than the ideal model angle.
PAGE: 388
374 7 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 389
CHAPTER 8
Advanced Theories of Covalent
Bonding
Figure8.1 Oxygen molecules orient randomly most of the time, as shown in the top magnified view. However,
when we pour liquid oxygen through a magnet, the molecules line up with the magnetic field, and the attraction
allows them to stay suspended between the poles of the magnet where the magnetic field is strongest. Other
diatomic molecules (like N ) flow past the magnet. The detailed explanation of bonding described in this chapter
2
allows us to understand this phenomenon. (credit: modification of work by Jefferson Lab)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1Valence Bond Theory
8.2Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
8.3Multiple Bonds
8.4Molecular Orbital Theory
INTRODUCTION We have examined the basic ideas of bonding, showing that atoms share electrons to form
molecules with stable Lewis structures and that we can predict the shapes of those molecules by valence shell
electron pair repulsion (VSEPR) theory. These ideas provide an important starting point for understanding
chemical bonding. But these models sometimes fall short in their abilities to predict the behavior of real
substances. How can we reconcile the geometries ofs, p,anddatomic orbitals with molecular shapes that
show angles like 120° and 109.5°? Furthermore, we know that electrons and magnetic behavior are related
through electromagnetic fields. Both N and O have fairly similar Lewis structures that contain lone pairs of
2 2
electrons.
Yet oxygen demonstrates very different magnetic behavior than nitrogen. We can pour liquid nitrogen through
PAGE: 390
376 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
a magnetic field with no visible interactions, while liquid oxygen (shown inFigure 8.1) is attracted to the
magnet and floats in the magnetic field. We need to understand the additional concepts of valence bond theory,
orbital hybridization, and molecular orbital theory to understand these observations.
8.1 Valence Bond Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the formation of covalent bonds in terms of atomic orbital overlap
• Define and give examples of σ and π bonds
As we know, a scientific theory is a strongly supported explanation for observed natural laws or large bodies of
experimental data. For a theory to be accepted, it must explain experimental data and be able to predict
behavior. For example, VSEPR theory has gained widespread acceptance because it predicts three-
dimensional molecular shapes that are consistent with experimental data collected for thousands of different
molecules. However, VSEPR theory does not provide an explanation of chemical bonding.
There are successful theories that describe the electronic structure of atoms. We can use quantum mechanics
to predict the specific regions around an atom where electrons are likely to be located: A spherical shape for an
sorbital, a dumbbell shape for aporbital, and so forth. However, these predictions only describe the orbitals
around free atoms. When atoms bond to form molecules, atomic orbitals are not sufficient to describe the
regions where electrons will be located in the molecule. A more complete understanding of electron
distributions requires a model that can account for the electronic structure of molecules. One popular theory
holds that a covalent bond forms when a pair of electrons is shared by two atoms and is simultaneously
attracted by the nuclei of both atoms. In the following sections, we will discuss how such bonds are described
by valence bond theory and hybridization.
Valence bond theorydescribes a covalent bond as the overlap of half-filled atomic orbitals (each containing a
single electron) that yield a pair of electrons shared between the two bonded atoms. We say that orbitals on two
different atomsoverlapwhen a portion of one orbital and a portion of a second orbital occupy the same region
of space. According to valence bond theory, a covalent bond results when two conditions are met: (1) an orbital
on one atom overlaps an orbital on a second atom and (2) the single electrons in each orbital combine to form
an electron pair. The mutual attraction between this negatively charged electron pair and the two atoms’
positively charged nuclei serves to physically link the two atoms through a force we define as a covalent bond.
The strength of a covalent bond depends on the extent of overlap of the orbitals involved. Orbitals that overlap
extensively form bonds that are stronger than those that have less overlap.
The energy of the system depends on how much the orbitals overlap.Figure 8.2illustrates how the sum of the
energies of two hydrogen atoms (the colored curve) changes as they approach each other. When the atoms are
far apart there is no overlap, and by convention we set the sum of the energies at zero. As the atoms move
together, their orbitals begin to overlap. Each electron begins to feel the attraction of the nucleus in the other
atom. In addition, the electrons begin to repel each other, as do the nuclei. While the atoms are still widely
separated, the attractions are slightly stronger than the repulsions, and the energy of the system decreases. (A
bond begins to form.) As the atoms move closer together, the overlap increases, so the attraction of the nuclei
for the electrons continues to increase (as do the repulsions among electrons and between the nuclei). At some
specific distance between the atoms, which varies depending on the atoms involved, the energy reaches its
lowest (most stable) value. This optimum distance between the two bonded nuclei is the bond distance
between the two atoms. The bond is stable because at this point, the attractive and repulsive forces combine to
create the lowest possible energy configuration. If the distance between the nuclei were to decrease further,
the repulsions between nuclei and the repulsions as electrons are confined in closer proximity to each other
would become stronger than the attractive forces. The energy of the system would then rise (making the
system destabilized), as shown at the far left ofFigure 8.2.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 391
8.1 • Valence Bond Theory 377
FIGURE8.2 (a) The interaction of two hydrogen atoms changes as a function of distance. (b) The energy of the
system changes as the atoms interact. The lowest (most stable) energy occurs at a distance of 74 pm, which is the
bond length observed for the H molecule.
2
The bond energy is the difference between the energy minimum (which occurs at the bond distance) and the
energy of the two separated atoms. This is the quantity of energy released when the bond is formed.
Conversely, the same amount of energy is required to break the bond. For the H molecule shown inFigure 8.2,
2
at the bond distance of 74 pm the system is 7.24 10−19J lower in energy than the two separated hydrogen
atoms. This may seem like a small number. However, we know from our earlier description of
thermochemistry that bond energies are often discussed on a per-mole basis. For example, it requires 7.24
10−19J to break one H–H bond, but it takes 4.36 105J to break 1 mole of H–H bonds. A comparison of some
bond lengths and energies is shown inTable 8.1. We can find many of these bonds in a variety of molecules,
and this table provides average values. For example, breaking the first C–H bond in CH requires 439.3 kJ/mol,
4
while breaking the first C–H bond in H–CH C H (a common paint thinner) requires 375.5 kJ/mol.
2 6 5
Representative Bond Energies and Lengths
Bond Length (pm) Energy (kJ/mol) Bond Length (pm) Energy (kJ/mol)
H–H 74 436 C–O 140.1 358
H–C 106.8 413 119.7 745
H–N 101.5 391 113.7 1072
H–O 97.5 467 H–Cl 127.5 431
TABLE8.1
PAGE: 392
378 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
Bond Length (pm) Energy (kJ/mol) Bond Length (pm) Energy (kJ/mol)
C–C 150.6 347 H–Br 141.4 366
133.5 614 H–I 160.9 298
120.8 839 O–O 148 146
C–N 142.1 305 120.8 498
130.0 615 F–F 141.2 159
116.1 891 Cl–Cl 198.8 243
TABLE8.1
In addition to the distance between two orbitals, the orientation of orbitals also affects their overlap (other than
for twosorbitals, which are spherically symmetric). Greater overlap is possible when orbitals are oriented
such that they overlap on a direct line between the two nuclei.Figure 8.3illustrates this for twoporbitals from
different atoms; the overlap is greater when the orbitals overlap end to end rather than at an angle.
FIGURE8.3 (a) The overlap of twoporbitals is greatest when the orbitals are directed end to end. (b) Any other
arrangement results in less overlap. The dots indicate the locations of the nuclei.
The overlap of twosorbitals (as in H ), the overlap of ansorbital and aporbital (as in HCl), and the end-to-end
2
overlap of twoporbitals (as in Cl ) all producesigma bonds (σ bonds), as illustrated inFigure 8.4. A σ bond is
2
a covalent bond in which the electron density is concentrated in the region along the internuclear axis; that is,
a line between the nuclei would pass through the center of the overlap region. Single bonds in Lewis structures
are described as σ bonds in valence bond theory.
FIGURE8.4 Sigma (σ) bonds form from the overlap of the following: (a) twosorbitals, (b) ansorbital and ap
orbital, and (c) twoporbitals. The dots indicate the locations of the nuclei.
Api bond (π bond)is a type of covalent bond that results from the side-by-side overlap of twoporbitals, as
illustrated inFigure 8.5. In a π bond, the regions of orbital overlap lie on opposite sides of the internuclear axis.
Along the axis itself, there is anode, that is, a plane with no probability of finding an electron.
FIGURE8.5 Pi (π) bonds form from the side-by-side overlap of twoporbitals. The dots indicate the location of the
nuclei.
While all single bonds are σ bonds, multiple bonds consist of both σ and π bonds. As the Lewis structures
below suggest, O contains a double bond, and N contains a triple bond. The double bond consists of one σ
2 2
bond and one π bond, and the triple bond consists of one σ bond and two π bonds. Between any two atoms, the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 393
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 379
first bond formed will always be a σ bond, but there can only be one σ bond in any one location. In any multiple
bond, there will be one σ bond, and the remaining one or two bonds will be π bonds. These bonds are
described in more detail later in this chapter.
As seen inTable 8.1, an average carbon-carbon single bond is 347 kJ/mol, while in a carbon-carbon double
bond, the π bond increases the bond strength by 267 kJ/mol. Adding an additional π bond causes a further
increase of 225 kJ/mol. We can see a similar pattern when we compare other σ and π bonds. Thus, each
individual π bond is generally weaker than a corresponding σ bond between the same two atoms. In a σ bond,
there is a greater degree of orbital overlap than in a π bond.
EXAMPLE 8.1
Counting σ and π Bonds
Butadiene, C H , is used to make synthetic rubber. Identify the number of σ and π bonds contained in this
4 6
molecule.
Solution
There are six σ C–H bonds and one σ C–C bond, for a total of seven from the single bonds. There are two
double bonds that each have a π bond in addition to the σ bond. This gives a total nine σ and two π bonds
overall.
Check Your Learning
Identify each illustration as depicting a σ or π bond:
(a) side-by-side overlap of a 4pand a 2porbital
(b) end-to-end overlap of a 4pand 4porbital
(c) end-to-end overlap of a 4pand a 2porbital
Answer:
(a) is a π bond with a node along the axis connecting the nuclei while (b) and (c) are σ bonds that overlap along
the axis.
8.2 Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of atomic orbital hybridization
• Determine the hybrid orbitals associated with various molecular geometries
PAGE: 394
380 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
Thinking in terms of overlapping atomic orbitals is one way for us to explain how chemical bonds form in
diatomic molecules. However, to understand how molecules with more than two atoms form stable bonds, we
require a more detailed model. As an example, let us consider the water molecule, in which we have one
oxygen atom bonding to two hydrogen atoms. Oxygen has the electron configuration 1s22s22p4, with two
unpaired electrons (one in each of the two 2porbitals). Valence bond theory would predict that the two O–H
bonds form from the overlap of these two 2porbitals with the 1sorbitals of the hydrogen atoms. If this were the
case, the bond angle would be 90°, as shown inFigure 8.6, becauseporbitals are perpendicular to each other.
Experimental evidence shows that the bond angle is 104.5°, not 90°. The prediction of the valence bond theory
model does not match the real-world observations of a water molecule; a different model is needed.
FIGURE8.6 The hypothetical overlap of two of the 2porbitals on an oxygen atom (red) with the 1sorbitals of two
1
hydrogen atoms (blue) would produce a bond angle of 90°. This is not consistent with experimental evidence.
Quantum-mechanical calculations suggest why the observed bond angles in H O differ from those predicted
2
by the overlap of the 1sorbital of the hydrogen atoms with the 2porbitals of the oxygen atom. The
mathematical expression known as the wave function,ψ, contains information about each orbital and the
wavelike properties of electrons in an isolated atom. When atoms are bound together in a molecule, the wave
functions combine to produce new mathematical descriptions that have different shapes. This process of
combining the wave functions for atomic orbitals is calledhybridizationand is mathematically accomplished
by thelinear combination of atomic orbitals, LCAO, (a technique that we will encounter again later). The new
orbitals that result are calledhybrid orbitals. The valence orbitals in anisolatedoxygen atom are a 2sorbital
and three 2porbitals. The valence orbitals in an oxygen atom in a water molecule differ; they consist of four
equivalent hybrid orbitals that point approximately toward the corners of a tetrahedron (Figure 8.7).
Consequently, the overlap of the O and H orbitals should result in a tetrahedral bond angle (109.5°). The
observed angle of 104.5° is experimental evidence for which quantum-mechanical calculations give a useful
explanation: Valence bond theory must include a hybridization component to give accurate predictions.
FIGURE8.7 (a) A water molecule has four regions of electron density, so VSEPR theory predicts a tetrahedral
arrangement of hybrid orbitals. (b) Two of the hybrid orbitals on oxygen contain lone pairs, and the other two overlap
with the 1sorbitals of hydrogen atoms to form the O–H bonds in H O. This description is more consistent with the
2
experimental structure.
The following ideas are important in understanding hybridization:
1. Hybrid orbitals do not exist in isolated atoms. They are formed only in covalently bonded atoms.
2. Hybrid orbitals have shapes and orientations that are very different from those of the atomic orbitals in
isolated atoms.
3. A set of hybrid orbitals is generated by combining atomic orbitals. The number of hybrid orbitals in a set is
equal to the number of atomic orbitals that were combined to produce the set.
1 Note that orbitals may sometimes be drawn in an elongated “balloon” shape rather than in a more realistic “plump” shape in
order to make the geometry easier to visualize.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 395
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 381
4. All orbitals in a set of hybrid orbitals are equivalent in shape and energy.
5. The type of hybrid orbitals formed in a bonded atom depends on its electron-pair geometry as predicted
by the VSEPR theory.
6. Hybrid orbitals overlap to form σ bonds. Unhybridized orbitals overlap to form π bonds.
In the following sections, we shall discuss the common types of hybrid orbitals.
spHybridization
The beryllium atom in a gaseous BeCl molecule is an example of a central atom with no lone pairs of electrons
2
in a linear arrangement of three atoms. There are two regions of valence electron density in the BeCl molecule
2
that correspond to the two covalent Be–Cl bonds. To accommodate these two electron domains, two of the Be
atom’s four valence orbitals will mix to yield two hybrid orbitals. This hybridization process involves mixing of
the valencesorbital with one of the valenceporbitals to yield two equivalentsphybrid orbitalsthat are
oriented in a linear geometry (Figure 8.8). In this figure, the set ofsporbitals appears similar in shape to the
originalporbital, but there is an important difference. The number of atomic orbitals combined always equals
the number of hybrid orbitals formed. Theporbital is one orbital that can hold up to two electrons. Thespset
is two equivalent orbitals that point 180° from each other. The two electrons that were originally in thesorbital
are now distributed to the twosporbitals, which are half filled. In gaseous BeCl , these half-filled hybrid
2
orbitals will overlap with orbitals from the chlorine atoms to form two identical σ bonds.
FIGURE8.8 Hybridization of ansorbital (blue) and aporbital (red) of the same atom produces twosphybrid
orbitals (yellow). Each hybrid orbital is oriented primarily in just one direction. Note that eachsporbital contains one
lobe that is significantly larger than the other. The set of twosporbitals are oriented at 180°, which is consistent
with the geometry for two domains.
We illustrate the electronic differences in an isolated Be atom and in the bonded Be atom in the orbital energy-
level diagram inFigure 8.9. These diagrams represent each orbital by a horizontal line (indicating its energy)
and each electron by an arrow. Energy increases toward the top of the diagram. We use one upward arrow to
indicate one electron in an orbital and two arrows (up and down) to indicate two electrons of opposite spin.
PAGE: 396
382 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.9 This orbital energy-level diagram shows thesphybridized orbitals on Be in the linear BeCl molecule.
2
Each of the twosphybrid orbitals holds one electron and is thus half filled and available for bonding via overlap with
a Cl 3porbital.
When atomic orbitals hybridize, the valence electrons occupy the newly created orbitals. The Be atom had two
valence electrons, so each of thesporbitals gets one of these electrons. Each of these electrons pairs up with
the unpaired electron on a chlorine atom when a hybrid orbital and a chlorine orbital overlap during the
formation of the Be–Cl bonds.
Any central atom surrounded by just two regions of valence electron density in a molecule will exhibitsp
hybridization. Other examples include the mercury atom in the linear HgCl molecule, the zinc atom in
2
Zn(CH ) , which contains a linear C–Zn–C arrangement, and the carbon atoms in HCCH and CO .
32 2
LINK TO LEARNING
Check out the University of Wisconsin-Oshkoshwebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16hybridorbital)to learn about
visualizing hybrid orbitals in three dimensions.
sp2Hybridization
The valence orbitals of a central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density consist of a set of three
sp2hybrid orbitalsand one unhybridizedporbital. This arrangement results fromsp2hybridization, the
mixing of onesorbital and twoporbitals to produce three identical hybrid orbitals oriented in a trigonal
planar geometry (Figure 8.10).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 397
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 383
FIGURE8.10 The hybridization of ansorbital (blue) and twoporbitals (red) produces three equivalentsp2
hybridized orbitals (yellow) oriented at 120° with respect to each other. The remaining unhybridizedporbital is not
shown here, but is located along the z axis.
Although quantum mechanics yields the “plump” orbital lobes as depicted inFigure 8.10, sometimes for
clarity these orbitals are drawn thinner and without the minor lobes, as inFigure 8.11, to avoid obscuring
other features of a given illustration. We will use these “thinner” representations whenever the true view is too
crowded to easily visualize.
FIGURE8.11 This alternate way of drawing the trigonal planarsp2hybrid orbitals is sometimes used in more
crowded figures.
The observed structure of the borane molecule, BH suggestssp2hybridization for boron in this compound.
3,
The molecule is trigonal planar, and the boron atom is involved in three bonds to hydrogen atoms (Figure
8.12). We can illustrate the comparison of orbitals and electron distribution in an isolated boron atom and in
the bonded atom in BH as shown in the orbital energy level diagram inFigure 8.13. We redistribute the three
3
valence electrons of the boron atom in the threesp2hybrid orbitals, and each boron electron pairs with a
hydrogen electron when B–H bonds form.
FIGURE8.12 BH is an electron-deficient molecule with a trigonal planar structure.
3
PAGE: 398
384 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.13 In an isolated B atom, there are one 2sand three 2pvalence orbitals. When boron is in a molecule
with three regions of electron density, three of the orbitals hybridize and create a set of threesp2orbitals and one
unhybridized 2porbital. The three half-filled hybrid orbitals each overlap with an orbital from a hydrogen atom to
form three σ bonds in BH .
3
Any central atom surrounded by three regions of electron density will exhibitsp2hybridization. This includes
molecules with a lone pair on the central atom, such as ClNO (Figure 8.14), or molecules with two single bonds
and a double bond connected to the central atom, as in formaldehyde, CH O, and ethene, H CCH .
2 2 2
FIGURE8.14 The central atom(s) in each of the structures shown contain three regions of electron density and are
sp2hybridized. As we know from the discussion of VSEPR theory, a region of electron density contains all of the
electrons that point in one direction. A lone pair, an unpaired electron, a single bond, or a multiple bond would each
count as one region of electron density.
sp3Hybridization
The valence orbitals of an atom surrounded by a tetrahedral arrangement of bonding pairs and lone pairs
consist of a set of foursp3hybrid orbitals. The hybrids result from the mixing of onesorbital and all threep
orbitals that produces four identicalsp3hybrid orbitals (Figure 8.15). Each of these hybrid orbitals points
toward a different corner of a tetrahedron.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 399
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 385
FIGURE8.15 The hybridization of ansorbital (blue) and threeporbitals (red) produces four equivalentsp3
hybridized orbitals (yellow) oriented at 109.5° with respect to each other.
A molecule of methane, CH , consists of a carbon atom surrounded by four hydrogen atoms at the corners of a
4
tetrahedron. The carbon atom in methane exhibitssp3hybridization. We illustrate the orbitals and electron
distribution in an isolated carbon atom and in the bonded atom in CH inFigure 8.16. The four valence
4
electrons of the carbon atom are distributed equally in the hybrid orbitals, and each carbon electron pairs with
a hydrogen electron when the C–H bonds form.
FIGURE8.16 The four valence atomic orbitals from an isolated carbon atom all hybridize when the carbon bonds
PAGE: 400
386 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
in a molecule like CH with four regions of electron density. This creates four equivalentsp3hybridized orbitals.
4
Overlap of each of the hybrid orbitals with a hydrogen orbital creates a C–H σ bond.
In a methane molecule, the 1sorbital of each of the four hydrogen atoms overlaps with one of the foursp3
orbitals of the carbon atom to form a sigma (σ) bond. This results in the formation of four strong, equivalent
covalent bonds between the carbon atom and each of the hydrogen atoms to produce the methane molecule,
CH .
4
The structure of ethane, C H is similar to that of methane in that each carbon in ethane has four neighboring
2 6,
atoms arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron—three hydrogen atoms and one carbon atom (Figure 8.17).
However, in ethane ansp3orbital of one carbon atom overlaps end to end with ansp3orbital of a second
carbon atom to form a σ bond between the two carbon atoms. Each of the remainingsp3hybrid orbitals
overlaps with ansorbital of a hydrogen atom to form carbon–hydrogen σ bonds. The structure and overall
outline of the bonding orbitals of ethane are shown inFigure 8.17. The orientation of the two CH groups is not
3
fixed relative to each other. Experimental evidence shows that rotation around σ bonds occurs easily.
FIGURE8.17 (a) In the ethane molecule, C H , each carbon has foursp3orbitals. (b) These four orbitals overlap to
2 6
form seven σ bonds.
Ansp3hybrid orbital can also hold a lone pair of electrons. For example, the nitrogen atom in ammonia is
surrounded by three bonding pairs and a lone pair of electrons directed to the four corners of a tetrahedron.
The nitrogen atom issp3hybridized with one hybrid orbital occupied by the lone pair.
The molecular structure of water is consistent with a tetrahedral arrangement of two lone pairs and two
bonding pairs of electrons. Thus we say that the oxygen atom issp3hybridized, with two of the hybrid orbitals
occupied by lone pairs and two by bonding pairs. Since lone pairs occupy more space than bonding pairs,
structures that contain lone pairs have bond angles slightly distorted from the ideal. Perfect tetrahedra have
angles of 109.5°, but the observed angles in ammonia (107.3°) and water (104.5°) are slightly smaller. Other
examples ofsp3hybridization include CCl , PCl , and NCl .
4 3 3
sp3dandsp3d2Hybridization
To describe the five bonding orbitals in a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement, we must use five of the valence
shell atomic orbitals (thesorbital, the threeporbitals, and one of thedorbitals), which gives fivesp3dhybrid
orbitals. With an octahedral arrangement of six hybrid orbitals, we must use six valence shell atomic orbitals
(thesorbital, the threeporbitals, and two of thedorbitals in its valence shell), which gives sixsp3d2hybrid
orbitals. These hybridizations are only possible for atoms that havedorbitals in their valence subshells (that
is, not those in the first or second period).
In a molecule of phosphorus pentachloride, PCl , there are five P–Cl bonds (thus five pairs of valence electrons
5
around the phosphorus atom) directed toward the corners of a trigonal bipyramid. We use the 3sorbital, the
three 3porbitals, and one of the 3dorbitals to form the set of fivesp3dhybrid orbitals (Figure 8.19) that are
involved in the P–Cl bonds. Other atoms that exhibitsp3dhybridization include the sulfur atom in SF and the
4
chlorine atoms in ClF and in (The electrons on fluorine atoms are omitted for clarity.)
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 401
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 387
FIGURE8.18 The three compounds pictured exhibitsp3dhybridization in the central atom and a trigonal
bipyramid form. SF and have one lone pair of electrons on the central atom, and ClF has two lone pairs
4 3
giving it the T-shape shown.
FIGURE8.19 (a) The five regions of electron density around phosphorus in PCl require five hybridsp3dorbitals.
5
(b) These orbitals combine to form a trigonal bipyramidal structure with each large lobe of the hybrid orbital pointing
at a vertex. As before, there are also small lobes pointing in the opposite direction for each orbital (not shown for
clarity).
The sulfur atom in sulfur hexafluoride, SF , exhibitssp3d2hybridization. A molecule of sulfur hexafluoride has
6
six bonding pairs of electrons connecting six fluorine atoms to a single sulfur atom. There are no lone pairs of
electrons on the central atom. To bond six fluorine atoms, the 3sorbital, the three 3porbitals, and two of the 3d
orbitals form six equivalentsp3d2hybrid orbitals, each directed toward a different corner of an octahedron.
Other atoms that exhibitsp3d2hybridization include the phosphorus atom in the iodine atom in the
interhalogens IF , and the xenon atom in XeF .
5 4
FIGURE8.20 (a) Sulfur hexafluoride, SF , has an octahedral structure that requiressp3d2hybridization. (b) The six
6
sp3d2orbitals form an octahedral structure around sulfur. Again, the minor lobe of each orbital is not shown for
clarity.
Assignment of Hybrid Orbitals to Central Atoms
The hybridization of an atom is determined based on the number of regions of electron density that surround
it. The geometrical arrangements characteristic of the various sets of hybrid orbitals are shown inFigure 8.21.
These arrangements are identical to those of the electron-pair geometries predicted by VSEPR theory. VSEPR
theory predicts the shapes of molecules, and hybrid orbital theory provides an explanation for how those
shapes are formed. To find the hybridization of a central atom, we can use the following guidelines:
1. Determine the Lewis structure of the molecule.
2. Determine the number of regions of electron density around an atom using VSEPR theory, in which single
bonds, multiple bonds, radicals, and lone pairs each count as one region.
3. Assign the set of hybridized orbitals fromFigure 8.21that corresponds to this geometry.
PAGE: 402
388 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.21 The shapes of hybridized orbital sets are consistent with the electron-pair geometries. For example,
an atom surrounded by three regions of electron density issp2hybridized, and the threesp2orbitals are arranged in
a trigonal planar fashion.
It is important to remember that hybridization was devised to rationalize experimentally observed molecular
geometries. The model works well for molecules containing small central atoms, in which the valence electron
pairs are close together in space. However, for larger central atoms, the valence-shell electron pairs are farther
from the nucleus, and there are fewer repulsions. Their compounds exhibit structures that are often not
consistent with VSEPR theory, and hybridized orbitals are not necessary to explain the observed data. For
example, we have discussed the H–O–H bond angle in H O, 104.5°, which is more consistent withsp3hybrid
2
orbitals (109.5°) on the central atom than with 2porbitals (90°). Sulfur is in the same group as oxygen, and H S
2
has a similar Lewis structure. However, it has a much smaller bond angle (92.1°), which indicates much less
hybridization on sulfur than oxygen. Continuing down the group, tellurium is even larger than sulfur, and for
H Te, the observed bond angle (90°) is consistent with overlap of the 5porbitals, without invoking
2
hybridization. We invoke hybridization where it is necessary to explain the observed structures.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 403
8.2 • Hybrid Atomic Orbitals 389
EXAMPLE 8.2
Assigning Hybridization
Ammonium sulfate is important as a fertilizer. What is the hybridization of the sulfur atom in the sulfate ion,
Solution
The Lewis structure of sulfate shows there are four regions of electron density. The hybridization issp3.
Check Your Learning
What is the hybridization of the selenium atom in SeF ?
4
Answer:
The selenium atom issp3dhybridized.
EXAMPLE 8.3
Assigning Hybridization
Urea, NH C(O)NH , is sometimes used as a source of nitrogen in fertilizers. What is the hybridization of the
2 2
carbon atom in urea?
Solution
The Lewis structure of urea is
PAGE: 404
390 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
The carbon atom is surrounded by three regions of electron density, positioned in a trigonal planar
arrangement. The hybridization in a trigonal planar electron pair geometry issp2(Figure 8.21), which is the
hybridization of the carbon atom in urea.
Check Your Learning
Acetic acid, H CC(O)OH, is the molecule that gives vinegar its odor and sour taste. What is the hybridization of
3
the two carbon atoms in acetic acid?
Answer:
H C,sp3;C(O)OH,sp2
3
8.3 Multiple Bonds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe multiple covalent bonding in terms of atomic orbital overlap
• Relate the concept of resonance to π-bonding and electron delocalization
The hybrid orbital model appears to account well for the geometry of molecules involving single covalent
bonds. Is it also capable of describing molecules containing double and triple bonds? We have already
discussed that multiple bonds consist of σ and π bonds. Next we can consider how we visualize these
components and how they relate to hybrid orbitals. The Lewis structure of ethene, C H , shows us that each
2 4
carbon atom is surrounded by one other carbon atom and two hydrogen atoms.
The three bonding regions form a trigonal planar electron-pair geometry. Thus we expect the σ bonds from
each carbon atom are formed using a set ofsp2hybrid orbitals that result from hybridization of two of the 2p
orbitals and the 2sorbital (Figure 8.22). These orbitals form the C–H single bonds and the σ bond in the
double bond (Figure 8.23).The π bond in the double bond results from the overlap of the third
(remaining) 2porbital on each carbon atom that is not involved in hybridization. This unhybridizedporbital
(lobes shown in red and blue inFigure 8.23) is perpendicular to the plane of thesp2hybrid orbitals. Thus the
unhybridized 2porbitals overlap in a side-by-side fashion, above and below the internuclear axis (Figure 8.23)
and form a π bond.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 405
8.3 • Multiple Bonds 391
FIGURE8.22 In ethene, each carbon atom issp2hybridized, and thesp2orbitals and theporbital are singly
occupied. The hybrid orbitals overlap to form σ bonds, while theporbitals on each carbon atom overlap to form a π
bond.
FIGURE8.23 In the ethene molecule, C H there are (a) five σ bonds. One C–C σ bond results from overlap ofsp2
2 4,
hybrid orbitals on the carbon atom with onesp2hybrid orbital on the other carbon atom. Four C–H bonds result from
the overlap between the C atoms'sp2orbitals withsorbitals on the hydrogen atoms. (b) The π bond is formed by
the side-by-side overlap of the two unhybridizedporbitals in the two carbon atoms. The two lobes of the π bond are
above and below the plane of the σ system.
In an ethene molecule, the four hydrogen atoms and the two carbon atoms are all in the same plane. If the two
planes ofsp2hybrid orbitals tilted relative to each other, theporbitals would not be oriented to overlap
efficiently to create the π bond. The planar configuration for the ethene molecule occurs because it is the most
stable bonding arrangement. This is a significant difference between σ and π bonds; rotation around single (σ)
bonds occurs easily because the end-to-end orbital overlap does not depend on the relative orientation of the
orbitals on each atom in the bond. In other words, rotation around the internuclear axis does not change the
extent to which the σ bonding orbitals overlap because the bonding electron density is symmetric about the
axis. Rotation about the internuclear axis is much more difficult for multiple bonds; however, this would
drastically alter the off-axis overlap of the π bonding orbitals, essentially breaking the π bond.
In molecules withsphybrid orbitals, two unhybridizedporbitals remain on the atom (Figure 8.24). We find
this situation in acetylene, which is a linear molecule. Thesphybrid orbitals of the two carbon
atoms overlap end to end to form a σ bond between the carbon atoms (Figure 8.25). The remainingsporbitals
form σ bonds with hydrogen atoms. The two unhybridizedporbitals per carbon are positioned such that they
overlap side by side and, hence, form two π bonds. The two carbon atoms of acetylene are thus bound together
by one σ bond and two π bonds, giving a triple bond.
PAGE: 406
392 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.24 Diagram of the two linearsphybrid orbitals of a carbon atom, which lie in a straight line, and the two
unhybridizedporbitals at perpendicular angles.
FIGURE8.25 (a) In the acetylene molecule, C H there are two C–H σ bonds and a triple bond involving
2 2,
one C–C σ bond and two C–C π bonds. The dashed lines, each connecting two lobes, indicate the side-by-side
overlap of the four unhybridizedporbitals. (b) This shows the overall outline of the bonds in C H . The two lobes of
2 2
each of the π bonds are positioned across from each other around the line of the C–C σ bond.
Hybridization involves only σ bonds, lone pairs of electrons, and single unpaired electrons (radicals).
Structures that account for these features describe the correct hybridization of the atoms. However, many
structures also include resonance forms. Remember that resonance forms occur when various arrangements
of π bonds are possible. Since the arrangement of π bonds involves only the unhybridized orbitals, resonance
does not influence the assignment of hybridization.
For example, molecule benzene has two resonance forms (Figure 8.26). We can use either of these forms to
determine that each of the carbon atoms is bonded to three other atoms with no lone pairs, so the correct
hybridization issp2. The electrons in the unhybridizedporbitals form π bonds. Neither resonance structure
completely describes the electrons in the π bonds. They are not located in one position or the other, but in
reality are delocalized throughout the ring. Valence bond theory does not easily address delocalization.
Bonding in molecules with resonance forms is better described by molecular orbital theory. (See the next
module.)
FIGURE8.26 Each carbon atom in benzene, C H , issp2hybridized, independently of which resonance form is
6 6
considered. The electrons in the π bonds are not located in one set ofporbitals or the other, but rather delocalized
throughout the molecule.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 407
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 393
EXAMPLE 8.4
Assignment of Hybridization Involving Resonance
Some acid rain results from the reaction of sulfur dioxide with atmospheric water vapor, followed by the
formation of sulfuric acid. Sulfur dioxide, SO , is a major component of volcanic gases as well as a product of
2
the combustion of sulfur-containing coal. What is the hybridization of the S atom in SO ?
2
Solution
The resonance structures of SO are
2
The sulfur atom is surrounded by two bonds and one lone pair of electrons in either resonance structure.
Therefore, the electron-pair geometry is trigonal planar, and the hybridization of the sulfur atom issp2.
Check Your Learning
Another acid in acid rain is nitric acid, HNO , which is produced by the reaction of nitrogen dioxide, NO , with
3 2
atmospheric water vapor. What is the hybridization of the nitrogen atom in NO ? (Note: the lone electron on
2
nitrogen occupies a hybridized orbital just as a lone pair would.)
Answer:
sp2
8.4 Molecular Orbital Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline the basic quantum-mechanical approach to deriving molecular orbitals from atomic orbitals
• Describe traits of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals
• Calculate bond orders based on molecular electron configurations
• Write molecular electron configurations for first- and second-row diatomic molecules
• Relate these electron configurations to the molecules’ stabilities and magnetic properties
For almost every covalent molecule that exists, we can now draw the Lewis structure, predict the electron-pair
geometry, predict the molecular geometry, and come close to predicting bond angles. However, one of the most
important molecules we know, the oxygen molecule O , presents a problem with respect to its Lewis structure.
2
We would write the following Lewis structure for O :
2
This electronic structure adheres to all the rules governing Lewis theory. There is an O=O double bond, and
each oxygen atom has eight electrons around it. However, this picture is at odds with the magnetic behavior of
oxygen. By itself, O is not magnetic, but it is attracted to magnetic fields. Thus, when we pour liquid oxygen
2
past a strong magnet, it collects between the poles of the magnet and defies gravity, as inFigure 8.1. Such
attraction to a magnetic field is calledparamagnetism, and it arises in molecules that have unpaired
electrons. And yet, the Lewis structure of O indicates that all electrons are paired. How do we account for this
2
discrepancy?
Magnetic susceptibility measures the force experienced by a substance in a magnetic field. When we compare
the weight of a sample to the weight measured in a magnetic field (Figure 8.27), paramagnetic samples that are
attracted to the magnet will appear heavier because of the force exerted by the magnetic field. We can calculate
the number of unpaired electrons based on the increase in weight.
PAGE: 408
394 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.27 AGouybalance compares the mass of a sample in the presence of a magnetic field with the mass
with the electromagnet turned off to determine the number of unpaired electrons in a sample.
Experiments show that each O molecule has two unpaired electrons. The Lewis-structure model does not
2
predict the presence of these two unpaired electrons. Unlike oxygen, the apparent weight of most molecules
decreases slightly in the presence of an inhomogeneous magnetic field. Materials in which all of the electrons
are paired arediamagneticand weakly repel a magnetic field. Paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials do not
act as permanent magnets. Only in the presence of an applied magnetic field do they demonstrate attraction or
repulsion.
LINK TO LEARNING
Water, like most molecules, contains all paired electrons. Living things contain a large percentage of water, so
they demonstrate diamagnetic behavior. If you place a frog near a sufficiently large magnet, it will levitate. You
can seevideos(http://openstax.org/l/16diamagnetic)of diamagnetic floating frogs, strawberries, and more.
Molecular orbital theory (MO theory) provides an explanation of chemical bonding that accounts for the
paramagnetism of the oxygen molecule. It also explains the bonding in a number of other molecules, such as
violations of the octet rule and more molecules with more complicated bonding (beyond the scope of this text)
that are difficult to describe with Lewis structures. Additionally, it provides a model for describing the energies
of electrons in a molecule and the probable location of these electrons. Unlike valence bond theory, which uses
hybrid orbitals that are assigned to one specific atom, MO theory uses the combination of atomic orbitals to
yield molecular orbitals that aredelocalizedover the entire molecule rather than being localized on its
constituent atoms. MO theory also helps us understand why some substances are electrical conductors, others
are semiconductors, and still others are insulators.Table 8.2summarizes the main points of the two
complementary bonding theories. Both theories provide different, useful ways of describing molecular
structure.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 409
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 395
Comparison of Bonding Theories
Valence Bond Theory Molecular Orbital Theory
considers bonds as localized between one pair of considers electrons delocalized throughout the
atoms entire molecule
creates bonds from overlap of atomic orbitals (s, p, d…) combines atomic orbitals to form molecular
and hybrid orbitals (sp, sp2,sp3…) orbitals (σ, σ*, π, π*)
creates bonding and antibonding interactions
forms σ or π bonds
based on which orbitals are filled
predicts molecular shape based on the number of predicts the arrangement of electrons in
regions of electron density molecules
needs multiple structures to describe resonance
TABLE8.2
Molecular orbital theorydescribes the distribution of electrons in molecules in much the same way that the
distribution of electrons in atoms is described using atomic orbitals. Using quantum mechanics, the behavior
of an electron in a molecule is still described by a wave function,Ψ, analogous to the behavior in an atom. Just
like electrons around isolated atoms, electrons around atoms in molecules are limited to discrete (quantized)
energies. The region of space in which a valence electron in a molecule is likely to be found is called a
molecular orbital (Ψ2). Like an atomic orbital, a molecular orbital is full when it contains two electrons with
opposite spin.
We will consider the molecular orbitals in molecules composed of two identical atoms (H or Cl , for example).
2 2
Such molecules are calledhomonuclear diatomic molecules. In these diatomic molecules, several types of
molecular orbitals occur.
The mathematical process of combining atomic orbitals to generate molecular orbitals is called thelinear
combination of atomic orbitals (LCAO). The wave function describes the wavelike properties of an electron.
Molecular orbitals are combinations of atomic orbital wave functions. Combining waves can lead to
constructive interference, in which peaks line up with peaks, or destructive interference, in which peaks line
up with troughs (Figure 8.28). In orbitals, the waves are three dimensional, and they combine with in-phase
waves producing regions with a higher probability of electron density and out-of-phase waves producing
nodes, or regions of no electron density.
FIGURE8.28 (a) When in-phase waves combine, constructive interference produces a wave with greater
amplitude. (b) When out-of-phase waves combine, destructive interference produces a wave with less (or no)
amplitude.
There are two types of molecular orbitals that can form from the overlap of two atomicsorbitals on adjacent
atoms. The two types are illustrated inFigure 8.29. The in-phase combination produces a lower energyσ
s
PAGE: 410
396 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
molecular orbital(read as "sigma-s") in which most of the electron density is directly between the nuclei. The
out-of-phase addition (which can also be thought of as subtracting the wave functions) produces a higher
energy molecular orbital(read as "sigma-s-star") molecular orbital in which there is a node between the
nuclei. The asterisk signifies that the orbital is an antibonding orbital. Electrons in a σ orbital are attracted by
s
both nuclei at the same time and are more stable (of lower energy) than they would be in the isolated atoms.
Adding electrons to these orbitals creates a force that holds the two nuclei together, so we call these orbitals
bonding orbitals. Electrons in the orbitals are located well away from the region between the two nuclei.
The attractive force between the nuclei and these electrons pulls the two nuclei apart. Hence, these orbitals are
calledantibonding orbitals. Electrons fill the lower-energy bonding orbital before the higher-energy
antibonding orbital, just as they fill lower-energy atomic orbitals before they fill higher-energy atomic orbitals.
FIGURE8.29 Sigma (σ) and sigma-star (σ*) molecular orbitals are formed by the combination of twosatomic
orbitals. The dots (·) indicate the locations of nuclei.
LINK TO LEARNING
You can watchanimations(http://openstax.org/l/16molecorbital)visualizing the calculated atomic orbitals
combining to form various molecular orbitals at the Orbitron website.
Inporbitals, the wave function gives rise to two lobes with opposite phases, analogous to how a two-
dimensional wave has both parts above and below the average. We indicate the phases by shading the orbital
lobes different colors. When orbital lobes of the same phase overlap, constructive wave interference increases
the electron density. When regions of opposite phase overlap, the destructive wave interference decreases
electron density and creates nodes. Whenporbitals overlap end to end, they create σ and σ* orbitals (Figure
8.30). If two atoms are located along thex-axis in a Cartesian coordinate system, the twop orbitals overlap
x
end to end and form σ (bonding) and (antibonding) (read as "sigma-p-x" and "sigma-p-x star,"
px
respectively). Just as withs-orbital overlap, the asterisk indicates the orbital with a node between the nuclei,
which is a higher-energy, antibonding orbital.
FIGURE8.30 Combining wave functions of twopatomic orbitals along the internuclear axis creates two molecular
orbitals, σ and
p
The side-by-side overlap of twoporbitals gives rise to api (π) bonding molecular orbitaland aπ*
antibonding molecular orbital, as shown inFigure 8.31. In valence bond theory, we describe π bonds as
containing a nodal plane containing the internuclear axis and perpendicular to the lobes of theporbitals, with
electron density on either side of the node. In molecular orbital theory, we describe the π orbital by this same
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 411
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 397
shape, and a π bond exists when this orbital contains electrons. Electrons in this orbital interact with both
nuclei and help hold the two atoms together, making it a bonding orbital. For the out-of-phase combination,
there are two nodal planes created, one along the internuclear axis and a perpendicular one between the
nuclei.
FIGURE8.31 Side-by-side overlap of each twoporbitals results in the formation of two π molecular orbitals.
Combining the out-of-phase orbitals results in an antibonding molecular orbital with two nodes. One contains the
internuclear axis, and one is perpendicular to the axis. Combining the in-phase orbitals results in a bonding orbital.
There is a node (blue) containing the internuclear axis with the two lobes of the orbital located above and below this
node.
In the molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules, each atom also has two sets ofporbitals oriented side by side
(p andp), so these four atomic orbitals combine pairwise to create two π orbitals and two π* orbitals. The π
y z py
and orbitals are oriented at right angles to the π and orbitals. Except for their orientation, the π and
pz py
π orbitals are identical and have the same energy; they aredegenerate orbitals. The and
pz
antibonding orbitals are also degenerate and identical except for their orientation. A total of six molecular
orbitals results from the combination of the six atomicporbitals in two atoms: σ and π and π
px py pz
and
EXAMPLE 8.5
Molecular Orbitals
Predict what type (if any) of molecular orbital would result from adding the wave functions so each pair of
orbitals shown overlap. The orbitals are all similar in energy.
Solution
(a) is an in-phase combination, resulting in a σ orbital
3p
(b) will not result in a new orbital because the in-phase component (bottom) and out-of-phase component (top)
cancel out. Only orbitals with the correct alignment can combine.
PAGE: 412
398 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
(c) is an out-of-phase combination, resulting in a orbital.
Check Your Learning
Label the molecular orbital shown asσor π, bonding or antibonding and indicate where the node occurs.
Answer:
The orbital is located along the internuclear axis, so it is a σ orbital. There is a node bisecting the internuclear
axis, so it is an antibonding orbital.
Portrait of a Chemist
Walter Kohn: Nobel Laureate
WalterKohn(Figure 8.32) is a theoretical physicist who studies the electronic structure of solids. His work
combines the principles of quantum mechanics with advanced mathematical techniques. This technique,
called density functional theory, makes it possible to compute properties of molecular orbitals, including
their shape and energies. Kohn and mathematician John Pople were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry
in 1998 for their contributions to our understanding of electronic structure. Kohn also made significant
contributions to the physics of semiconductors.
FIGURE8.32 Walter Kohn developed methods to describe molecular orbitals. (credit: image courtesy of Walter
Kohn)
Kohn’s biography has been remarkable outside the realm of physical chemistry as well. He was born in
Austria, and during World War II he was part of the Kindertransport program that rescued 10,000 children
from the Nazi regime. His summer jobs included discovering gold deposits in Canada and helping Polaroid
explain how its instant film worked. Dr. Kohn passed away in 2016 at the age of 93.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 413
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 399
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Computational Chemistry in Drug Design
While the descriptions of bonding described in this chapter involve many theoretical concepts, they also have
many practical, real-world applications. For example, drug design is an important field that uses our
understanding of chemical bonding to develop pharmaceuticals. This interdisciplinary area of study uses
biology (understanding diseases and how they operate) to identify specific targets, such as a binding site that is
involved in a disease pathway. By modeling the structures of the binding site and potential drugs,
computational chemists can predict which structures can fit together and how effectively they will bind (see
Figure 8.33). Thousands of potential candidates can be narrowed down to a few of the most promising
candidates. These candidate molecules are then carefully tested to determine side effects, how effectively they
can be transported through the body, and other factors. Dozens of important new pharmaceuticals have been
discovered with the aid of computational chemistry, and new research projects are underway.
FIGURE8.33 The molecule shown, HIV-1 protease, is an important target for pharmaceutical research. By
designing molecules that bind to this protein, scientists are able to drastically inhibit the progress of the disease.
Molecular Orbital Energy Diagrams
The relative energy levels of atomic and molecular orbitals are typically shown in amolecular orbital diagram
(Figure 8.34). For a diatomic molecule, the atomic orbitals of one atom are shown on the left, and those of the
other atom are shown on the right. Each horizontal line represents one orbital that can hold two electrons. The
molecular orbitals formed by the combination of the atomic orbitals are shown in the center. Dashed lines
show which of the atomic orbitals combine to form the molecular orbitals. For each pair of atomic orbitals that
combine, one lower-energy (bonding) molecular orbital and one higher-energy (antibonding) orbital result.
Thus we can see that combining the six 2patomic orbitals results in three bonding orbitals (one σ and two π)
and three antibonding orbitals (one σ* and two π*).
We predict the distribution of electrons in these molecular orbitals by filling the orbitals in the same way that
we fill atomic orbitals, by the Aufbau principle. Lower-energy orbitals fill first, electrons spread out among
degenerate orbitals before pairing, and each orbital can hold a maximum of two electrons with opposite spins
(Figure 8.34). Just as we write electron configurations for atoms, we can write the molecular electronic
configuration by listing the orbitals with superscripts indicating the number of electrons present. For clarity,
we place parentheses around molecular orbitals with the same energy. In this case, each orbital is at a different
energy, so parentheses separate each orbital. Thus we would expect a diatomic molecule or ion containing
seven electrons (such as would have the molecular electron configuration It
is common to omit the core electrons from molecular orbital diagrams and configurations and include only the
valence electrons.
PAGE: 414
400 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.34 This is the molecular orbital diagram for the homonuclear diatomic showing the molecular
orbitals of the valence shell only. The molecular orbitals are filled in the same manner as atomic orbitals, using the
Aufbau principle and Hund’s rule.
Bond Order
The filled molecular orbital diagram shows the number of electrons in both bonding and antibonding
molecular orbitals. The net contribution of the electrons to the bond strength of a molecule is identified by
determining thebond orderthat results from the filling of the molecular orbitals by electrons.
When using Lewis structures to describe the distribution of electrons in molecules, we define bond order as
the number of bonding pairs of electrons between two atoms. Thus a single bond has a bond order of 1, a
double bond has a bond order of 2, and a triple bond has a bond order of 3. We define bond order differently
when we use the molecular orbital description of the distribution of electrons, but the resulting bond order is
usually the same. The MO technique is more accurate and can handle cases when the Lewis structure method
fails, but both methods describe the same phenomenon.
In the molecular orbital model, an electron contributes to a bonding interaction if it occupies a bonding orbital
and it contributes to an antibonding interaction if it occupies an antibonding orbital. The bond order is
calculated by subtracting the destabilizing (antibonding) electrons from the stabilizing (bonding) electrons.
Since a bond consists of two electrons, we divide by two to get the bond order. We can determine bond order
with the following equation:
The order of a covalent bond is a guide to its strength; a bond between two given atoms becomes stronger as
the bond order increases (Table 8.1). If the distribution of electrons in the molecular orbitals between two
atoms is such that the resulting bond would have a bond order of zero, a stable bond does not form. We next
look at some specific examples of MO diagrams and bond orders.
Bonding in Diatomic Molecules
A dihydrogen molecule (H ) forms from two hydrogen atoms. When the atomic orbitals of the two atoms
2
combine, the electrons occupy the molecular orbital of lowest energy, the σ bonding orbital. A dihydrogen
1s
molecule, H , readily forms because the energy of a H molecule is lower than that of two H atoms. The σ
2 2 1s
orbital that contains both electrons is lower in energy than either of the two 1satomic orbitals.
A molecular orbital can hold two electrons, so both electrons in the H molecule are in the σ bonding orbital;
2 1s
the electron configuration is We represent this configuration by a molecular orbital energy diagram
(Figure 8.35) in which a single upward arrow indicates one electron in an orbital, and two (upward and
downward) arrows indicate two electrons of opposite spin.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 415
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 401
FIGURE8.35 The molecular orbital energy diagram predicts that H will be a stable molecule with lower energy
2
than the separated atoms.
A dihydrogen molecule contains two bonding electrons and no antibonding electrons so we have
Because the bond order for the H–H bond is equal to 1, the bond is a single bond.
A helium atom has two electrons, both of which are in its 1sorbital. Two helium atoms do not combine to form
a dihelium molecule, He , with four electrons, because the stabilizing effect of the two electrons in the lower-
2
energy bonding orbital would be offset by the destabilizing effect of the two electrons in the higher-energy
antibonding molecular orbital. We would write the hypothetical electron configuration of He as
2
as inFigure 8.36. The net energy change would be zero, so there is no driving force for helium atoms to form
the diatomic molecule. In fact, helium exists as discrete atoms rather than as diatomic molecules. The bond
order in a hypothetical dihelium molecule would be zero.
A bond order of zero indicates that no bond is formed between two atoms.
FIGURE8.36 The molecular orbital energy diagram predicts that He will not be a stable molecule, since it has
2
equal numbers of bonding and antibonding electrons.
The Diatomic Molecules of the Second Period
Eight possible homonuclear diatomic molecules might be formed by the atoms of the second period of the
periodic table: Li , Be , B , C , N , O ,F , and Ne . However, we can predict that the Be molecule and the Ne
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
molecule would not be stable. We can see this by a consideration of the molecular electron configurations
(Table 8.3).
We predict valence molecular orbital electron configurations just as we predict electron configurations of
atoms. Valence electrons are assigned to valence molecular orbitals with the lowest possible energies.
PAGE: 416
402 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
Consistent with Hund’s rule, whenever there are two or more degenerate molecular orbitals, electrons fill each
orbital of that type singly before any pairing of electrons takes place.
As we saw in valence bond theory, σ bonds are generally more stable than π bonds formed from degenerate
atomic orbitals. Similarly, in molecular orbital theory, σ orbitals are usually more stable than π orbitals.
However, this is not always the case. The MOs for the valence orbitals of the second period are shown inFigure
8.37. Looking at Ne molecular orbitals, we see that the order is consistent with the generic diagram shown in
2
the previous section. However, for atoms with three or fewer electrons in theporbitals (Li through N) we
observe a different pattern, in which the σ orbital is higher in energy than the π set. Obtain the molecular
p p
orbital diagram for a homonuclear diatomic ion by adding or subtracting electrons from the diagram for the
neutral molecule.
FIGURE8.37 This shows the MO diagrams for each homonuclear diatomic molecule in the second period. The
orbital energies decrease across the period as the effective nuclear charge increases and atomic radius decreases.
Between N and O , the order of the orbitals changes.
2 2
This switch in orbital ordering occurs because of a phenomenon calleds-p mixing. s-p mixing does not create
new orbitals; it merely influences the energies of the existing molecular orbitals. The σ wavefunction
s
mathematically combines with the σ wavefunction, with the result that the σ orbital becomes more stable,
p s
and the σ orbital becomes less stable (Figure 8.38). Similarly, the antibonding orbitals also undergo s-p
p
mixing, with the σ becoming more stable and the σ becoming less stable.
s* p*
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 417
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 403
FIGURE8.38 Without mixing, the MO pattern occurs as expected, with the σ orbital lower in energy than the π
p p
orbitals. When s-p mixing occurs, the orbitals shift as shown, with the σ orbital higher in energy than the π orbitals.
p p
s-p mixing occurs when thesandporbitals have similar energies. The energy difference between 2sand 2p
orbitals in O, F, and Ne is greater than that in Li, Be, B, C, and N. Because of this, O , F , and Ne exhibit
2 2 2
negligible s-p mixing (not sufficient to change the energy ordering), and their MO diagrams follow the normal
pattern, as shown inFigure 8.37. All of the other period 2 diatomic molecules do have s-p mixing, which leads
to the pattern where the σ orbital is raised above the π set.
p p
Using the MO diagrams shown inFigure 8.37, we can add in the electrons and determine the molecular
electron configuration and bond order for each of the diatomic molecules. As shown inTable 8.3, Be and Ne
2 2
molecules would have a bond order of 0, and these molecules do not exist.
Electron Configuration and Bond Order for Molecular Orbitals in Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules of
Period Two Elements
Molecule Electron Configuration Bond Order
Li 1
2
Be (unstable) 0
2
B 1
2
C 2
2
TABLE8.3
PAGE: 418
404 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
Molecule Electron Configuration Bond Order
N 3
2
O 2
2
F 1
2
Ne (unstable) 0
2
TABLE8.3
The combination of two lithium atoms to form a lithium molecule, Li , is analogous to the formation of H , but
2 2
the atomic orbitals involved are the valence 2sorbitals. Each of the two lithium atoms has one valence
electron. Hence, we have two valence electrons available for the σ bonding molecular orbital. Because both
2s
valence electrons would be in a bonding orbital, we would predict the Li molecule to be stable. The molecule
2
is, in fact, present in appreciable concentration in lithium vapor at temperatures near the boiling point of the
element. All of the other molecules inTable 8.3with a bond order greater than zero are also known.
The O molecule has enough electrons to half fill the level. We expect the two electrons that
2
occupy these two degenerate orbitals to be unpaired, and this molecular electronic configuration for O is in
2
accord with the fact that the oxygen molecule has two unpaired electrons (Figure 8.40). The presence of two
unpaired electrons has proved to be difficult to explain using Lewis structures, but the molecular orbital
theory explains it quite well. In fact, the unpaired electrons of the oxygen molecule provide a strong piece of
support for the molecular orbital theory.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Band Theory
When two identical atomic orbitals on different atoms combine, two molecular orbitals result (seeFigure 8.29).
The bonding orbital is lower in energy than the original atomic orbitals because the atomic orbitals are in-
phase in the molecular orbital. The antibonding orbital is higher in energy than the original atomic orbitals
because the atomic orbitals are out-of-phase.
In a solid, similar things happen, but on a much larger scale. Remember that even in a small sample there are
a huge number of atoms (typically > 1023atoms), and therefore a huge number of atomic orbitals that may be
combined into molecular orbitals. WhenNvalence atomic orbitals, all of the same energy and each containing
one (1) electron, are combined,N/2 (filled) bonding orbitals andN/2 (empty) antibonding orbitals will result.
Each bonding orbital will show an energy lowering as the atomic orbitals aremostlyin-phase, but each of the
bonding orbitals will be a little different and have slightly different energies. The antibonding orbitals will
show an increase in energy as the atomic orbitals aremostlyout-of-phase, but each of the antibonding orbitals
will also be a little different and have slightly different energies. The allowed energy levels for all the bonding
orbitals are so close together that they form a band, called the valence band. Likewise, all the antibonding
orbitals are very close together and form a band, called the conduction band.Figure 8.39shows the bands for
three important classes of materials: insulators, semiconductors, and conductors.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 419
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 405
FIGURE8.39 Molecular orbitals in solids are so closely spaced that they are described as bands. The valence band
is lower in energy and the conduction band is higher in energy. The type of solid is determined by the size of the
“band gap” between the valence and conduction bands. Only a very small amount of energy is required to move
electrons from the valence band to the conduction band in a conductor, and so they conduct electricity well. In an
insulator, the band gap is large, so that very few electrons move, and they are poor conductors of electricity.
Semiconductors are in between: they conduct electricity better than insulators, but not as well as conductors.
In order to conduct electricity, electrons must move from the filled valence band to the empty conduction band
where they can move throughout the solid. The size of the band gap, or the energy difference between the top
of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band, determines how easy it is to move electrons
between the bands. Only a small amount of energy is required in a conductor because the band gap is very
small. This small energy difference is “easy” to overcome, so they are good conductors of electricity. In an
insulator, the band gap is so “large” that very few electrons move into the conduction band; as a result,
insulators are poor conductors of electricity. Semiconductors conduct electricity when “moderate” amounts of
energy are provided to move electrons out of the valence band and into the conduction band. Semiconductors,
such as silicon, are found in many electronics.
Semiconductors are used in devices such as computers, smartphones, and solar cells. Solar cells produce
electricity when light provides the energy to move electrons out of the valence band. The electricity that is
generated may then be used to power a light or tool, or it can be stored for later use by charging a battery. As of
December 2014, up to 46% of the energy in sunlight could be converted into electricity using solar cells.
EXAMPLE 8.6
Molecular Orbital Diagrams, Bond Order, and Number of Unpaired Electrons
Draw the molecular orbital diagram for the oxygen molecule, O . From this diagram, calculate the bond order
2
for O . How does this diagram account for the paramagnetism of O ?
2 2
Solution
We draw a molecular orbital energy diagram similar to that shown inFigure 8.37. Each oxygen atom
contributes six electrons, so the diagram appears as shown inFigure 8.40.
PAGE: 420
406 8 • Advanced Theories of Covalent Bonding
FIGURE8.40 The molecular orbital energy diagram for O predicts two unpaired electrons.
2
We calculate the bond order as
Oxygen's paramagnetism is explained by the presence of two unpaired electrons in the (π , π )* molecular
2py 2pz
orbitals.
Check Your Learning
The main component of air is N . From the molecular orbital diagram of N , predict its bond order and
2 2
whether it is diamagnetic or paramagnetic.
Answer:
N has a bond order of 3 and is diamagnetic.
2
EXAMPLE 8.7
Ion Predictions with MO Diagrams
Give the molecular orbital configuration for the valence electrons in Will this ion be stable?
Solution
Looking at the appropriate MO diagram, we see that the π orbitals are lower in energy than the σ orbital. The
p
valence electron configuration for C is Adding two more electrons to generate the
2
anion will give a valence electron configuration of Since this has six
more bonding electrons than antibonding, the bond order will be 3, and the ion should be stable.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 421
8.4 • Molecular Orbital Theory 407
Check Your Learning
How many unpaired electrons would be present on a ion? Would it be paramagnetic or diamagnetic?
Answer:
two, paramagnetic
LINK TO LEARNING
Creating molecular orbital diagrams for molecules with more than two atoms relies on the same basic ideas as
the diatomic examples presented here. However, with more atoms, computers are required to calculate how
the atomic orbitals combine. Seethree-dimensional drawings(http://openstax.org/l/16orbitaldiag)of the
molecular orbitals for C H .
6 6
PAGE: 422
408 8 • Key Terms
Key Terms
antibonding orbital molecular orbital located pi bond (π bond) covalent bond formed by side-by-
outside of the region between two nuclei; side overlap of atomic orbitals; the electron
electrons in an antibonding orbital destabilize the density is found on opposite sides of the
molecule internuclear axis
bond order number of pairs of electrons between s-p mixing change that causes σ orbitals to be
p
two atoms; it can be found by the number of less stable than π orbitals due to the mixing ofs
p
bonds in a Lewis structure or by the difference andp-based molecular orbitals of similar
between the number of bonding and antibonding energies.
electrons divided by two sigma bond (σ bond) covalent bond formed by
bonding orbital molecular orbital located between overlap of atomic orbitals along the internuclear
two nuclei; electrons in a bonding orbital stabilize axis
a molecule sphybrid orbital one of a set of two orbitals with a
degenerate orbitals orbitals that have the same linear arrangement that results from combining
energy onesand oneporbital
diamagnetism phenomenon in which a material is sp2hybrid orbital one of a set of three orbitals with
not magnetic itself but is repelled by a magnetic a trigonal planar arrangement that results from
field; it occurs when there are only paired combining onesand twoporbitals
electrons present sp3hybrid orbital one of a set of four orbitals with
homonuclear diatomic molecule molecule a tetrahedral arrangement that results from
consisting of two identical atoms combining onesand threeporbitals
hybrid orbital orbital created by combining atomic sp3dhybrid orbital one of a set of five orbitals with
orbitals on a central atom a trigonal bipyramidal arrangement that results
hybridization model that describes the changes in from combining ones, threep, and onedorbital
the atomic orbitals of an atom when it forms a sp3d2hybrid orbital one of a set of six orbitals with
covalent compound an octahedral arrangement that results from
linear combination of atomic orbitals technique combining ones, threep, and twodorbitals
for combining atomic orbitals to create molecular valence bond theory description of bonding that
orbitals involves atomic orbitals overlapping to form σ or
molecular orbital region of space in which an π bonds, within which pairs of electrons are
electron has a high probability of being found in a shared
molecule π bonding orbital molecular orbital formed by
molecular orbital diagram visual representation of side-by-side overlap of atomic orbitals, in which
the relative energy levels of molecular orbitals the electron density is found on opposite sides of
molecular orbital theory model that describes the the internuclear axis
behavior of electrons delocalized throughout a π* bonding orbital antibonding molecular orbital
molecule in terms of the combination of atomic formed by out of phase side-by-side overlap of
wave functions atomic orbitals, in which the electron density is
node plane separating different lobes of orbitals, found on both sides of the internuclear axis, and
where the probability of finding an electron is there is a node between the nuclei
zero σ bonding orbital molecular orbital in which the
overlap coexistence of orbitals from two different electron density is found along the axis of the
atoms sharing the same region of space, leading bond
to the formation of a covalent bond σ* bonding orbital antibonding molecular orbital
paramagnetism phenomenon in which a material formed by out-of-phase overlap of atomic orbital
is not magnetic itself but is attracted to a along the axis of the bond, generating a node
magnetic field; it occurs when there are unpaired between the nuclei
electrons present
Key Equations
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 423
8 • Summary 409
Summary
8.1Valence Bond Theory 8.4Molecular Orbital Theory
Valence bond theory describes bonding as a Molecular orbital (MO) theory describes the behavior
consequence of the overlap of two separate atomic of electrons in a molecule in terms of combinations
orbitals on different atoms that creates a region with of the atomic wave functions. The resulting
one pair of electrons shared between the two atoms. molecular orbitals may extend over all the atoms in
When the orbitals overlap along an axis containing the molecule. Bonding molecular orbitals are
the nuclei, they form a σ bond. When they overlap in formed by in-phase combinations of atomic wave
a fashion that creates a node along this axis, they functions, and electrons in these orbitals stabilize a
form a π bond. molecule. Antibonding molecular orbitals result
from out-of-phase combinations of atomic wave
8.2Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
functions and electrons in these orbitals make a
We can use hybrid orbitals, which are mathematical molecule less stable. Molecular orbitals located
combinations of some or all of the valence atomic along an internuclear axis are called σ MOs. They
orbitals, to describe the electron density around can be formed fromsorbitals or fromporbitals
covalently bonded atoms. These hybrid orbitals oriented in an end-to-end fashion. Molecular
either form sigma (σ) bonds directed toward other orbitals formed fromporbitals oriented in a side-
atoms of the molecule or contain lone pairs of by-side fashion have electron density on opposite
electrons. We can determine the type of sides of the internuclear axis and are called π
hybridization around a central atom from the orbitals.
geometry of the regions of electron density about it.
We can describe the electronic structure of diatomic
Two such regions implysphybridization; three,sp2
molecules by applying molecular orbital theory to
hybridization; four,sp3hybridization; five,sp3d
the valence electrons of the atoms. Electrons fill
hybridization; and six,sp3d2hybridization. Pi (π)
molecular orbitals following the same rules that
bonds are formed from unhybridized atomic orbitals
apply to filling atomic orbitals; Hund’s rule and the
(pordorbitals).
Aufbau principle tell us that lower-energy orbitals
8.3Multiple Bonds will fill first, electrons will spread out before they
pair up, and each orbital can hold a maximum of two
Multiple bonds consist of a σ bond located along the
electrons with opposite spins. Materials with
axis between two atoms and one or two π bonds. The
unpaired electrons are paramagnetic and attracted
σ bonds are usually formed by the overlap of
to a magnetic field, while those with all-paired
hybridized atomic orbitals, while the π bonds are
electrons are diamagnetic and repelled by a
formed by the side-by-side overlap of unhybridized
magnetic field. Correctly predicting the magnetic
orbitals. Resonance occurs when there are multiple
properties of molecules is in advantage of molecular
unhybridized orbitals with the appropriate
orbital theory over Lewis structures and valence
alignment to overlap, so the placement of π bonds
bond theory.
can vary.
Exercises
8.1Valence Bond Theory
1. Explain how σ and π bonds are similar and how they are different.
2. Draw a curve that describes the energy of a system with H and Cl atoms at varying distances. Then, find
the minimum energy of this curve two ways.
(a) Use the bond energy found inTable 8.1to calculate the energy for one single HCl bond (Hint: How many
bonds are in a mole?)
(b) Use the enthalpy of reaction and the bond energies for H and Cl to solve for the energy of one mole of
2 2
HCl bonds.
3. Explain why bonds occur at specific average bond distances instead of the atoms approaching each other
infinitely close.
PAGE: 424
410 8 • Exercises
4. Use valence bond theory to explain the bonding in F , HF, and ClBr. Sketch the overlap of the atomic
2
orbitals involved in the bonds.
5. Use valence bond theory to explain the bonding in O . Sketch the overlap of the atomic orbitals involved in
2
the bonds in O .
2
6. How many σ and π bonds are present in the molecule HCN?
7. A friend tells you N has three π bonds due to overlap of the threep-orbitals on each N atom. Do you agree?
2
8. Draw the Lewis structures for CO and CO, and predict the number of σ and π bonds for each molecule.
2
(a) CO
2
(b) CO
8.2Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
9. Why is the concept of hybridization required in valence bond theory?
10. Give the shape that describes each hybrid orbital set:
(a)sp2
(b)sp3d
(c)sp
(d)sp3d2
11. Explain why a carbon atom cannot form five bonds usingsp3dhybrid orbitals.
12. What is the hybridization of the central atom in each of the following?
(a) BeH
2
(b) SF
6
(c)
(d) PCl
5
13. A molecule with the formula AB could have one of four different shapes. Give the shape and the
3
hybridization of the central A atom for each.
14. Methionine, CH SCH CH CH(NH )CO H, is an amino acid found in proteins. The Lewis structure of this
3 2 2 2 2
compound is shown below. What is the hybridization type of each carbon, oxygen, the nitrogen, and the
sulfur?
15. Sulfuric acid is manufactured by a series of reactions represented by the following equations:
Draw a Lewis structure, predict the molecular geometry by VSEPR, and determine the hybridization of
sulfur for the following:
(a) circular S molecule
8
(b) SO molecule
2
(c) SO molecule
3
(d) H SO molecule (the hydrogen atoms are bonded to oxygen atoms)
2 4
16. Two important industrial chemicals, ethene, C H , and propene, C H , are produced by the steam (or
2 4 3 6
thermal) cracking process:
For each of the four carbon compounds, do the following:
(a) Draw a Lewis structure.
(b) Predict the geometry about the carbon atom.
(c) Determine the hybridization of each type of carbon atom.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 425
8 • Exercises 411
17. Analysis of a compound indicates that it contains 77.55% Xe and 22.45% F by mass.
(a) What is the empirical formula for this compound?(Assume this is also the molecular formula in
responding to the remaining parts of this exercise).
(b) Write a Lewis structure for the compound.
(c) Predict the shape of the molecules of the compound.
(d) What hybridization is consistent with the shape you predicted?
18. Consider nitrous acid, HNO (HONO).
2
(a) Write a Lewis structure.
(b) What are the electron pair and molecular geometries of the internal oxygen and nitrogen atoms in the
HNO molecule?
2
(c) What is the hybridization on the internal oxygen and nitrogen atoms in HNO ?
2
19. Strike-anywhere matches contain a layer of KClO and a layer of P S . The heat produced by the friction of
3 4 3
striking the match causes these two compounds to react vigorously, which sets fire to the wooden stem of
the match. KClO contains the ion. P S is an unusual molecule with the skeletal structure.
3 4 3
(a) Write Lewis structures for P S and the ion.
4 3
(b) Describe the geometry about the P atoms, the S atom, and the Cl atom in these species.
(c) Assign a hybridization to the P atoms, the S atom, and the Cl atom in these species.
(d) Determine the oxidation states and formal charge of the atoms in P S and the ion.
4 3
20. Identify the hybridization of each carbon atom in the following molecule. (The arrangement of atoms is
given; you need to determine how many bonds connect each pair of atoms.)
21. Write Lewis structures for NF and PF . On the basis of hybrid orbitals, explain the fact that NF , PF , and
3 5 3 3
PF are stable molecules, but NF does not exist.
5 5
22. In addition to NF , two other fluoro derivatives of nitrogen are known: N F and N F . What shapes do you
3 2 4 2 2
predict for these two molecules? What is the hybridization for the nitrogen in each molecule?
8.3Multiple Bonds
23. The bond energy of a C–C single bond averages 347 kJ mol−1; that of a triple bond averages 839 kJ
mol−1. Explain why the triple bond is not three times as strong as a single bond.
24. For the carbonate ion, draw all of the resonance structures. Identify which orbitals overlap to
create each bond.
25. A useful solvent that will dissolve salts as well as organic compounds is the compound acetonitrile,
H CCN. It is present in paint strippers.
3
(a) Write the Lewis structure for acetonitrile, and indicate the direction of the dipole moment in the
molecule.
(b) Identify the hybrid orbitals used by the carbon atoms in the molecule to form σ bonds.
(c) Describe the atomic orbitals that form the π bonds in the molecule. Note that it is not necessary to
hybridize the nitrogen atom.
26. For the molecule allene, give the hybridization of each carbon atom. Will the hydrogen
atoms be in the same plane or perpendicular planes?
PAGE: 426
412 8 • Exercises
27. Identify the hybridization of the central atom in each of the following molecules and ions that contain
multiple bonds:
(a) ClNO (N is the central atom)
(b) CS
2
(c) Cl CO (C is the central atom)
2
(d) Cl SO (S is the central atom)
2
(e) SO F (S is the central atom)
2 2
(f) XeO F (Xe is the central atom)
2 2
(g) (Cl is the central atom)
28. Describe the molecular geometry and hybridization of the N, P, or S atoms in each of the following
compounds.
(a) H PO , phosphoric acid, used in cola soft drinks
3 4
(b) NH NO , ammonium nitrate, a fertilizer and explosive
4 3
(c) S Cl , disulfur dichloride, used in vulcanizing rubber
2 2
(d) K [O POPO ], potassium pyrophosphate, an ingredient in some toothpastes
4 3 3
29. For each of the following molecules, indicate the hybridization requested and whether or not the electrons
will be delocalized:
(a) ozone (O ) central O hybridization
3
(b) carbon dioxide (CO ) central C hybridization
2
(c) nitrogen dioxide (NO ) central N hybridization
2
(d) phosphate ion central P hybridization
30. For each of the following structures, determine the hybridization requested and whether the electrons will
be delocalized:
(a) Hybridization of each carbon
(b) Hybridization of sulfur
(c) All atoms
31. Draw the orbital diagram for carbon in CO showing how many carbon atom electrons are in each orbital.
2
8.4Molecular Orbital Theory
32. Sketch the distribution of electron density in the bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed
from twosorbitals and from twoporbitals.
33. How are the following similar, and how do they differ?
(a) σ molecular orbitals and π molecular orbitals
(b)ψfor an atomic orbital andψfor a molecular orbital
(c) bonding orbitals and antibonding orbitals
34. If molecular orbitals are created by combining five atomic orbitals from atom A and five atomic orbitals
from atom B combine, how many molecular orbitals will result?
35. Can a molecule with an odd number of electrons ever be diamagnetic? Explain why or why not.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 427
8 • Exercises 413
36. Can a molecule with an even number of electrons ever be paramagnetic? Explain why or why not.
37. Why are bonding molecular orbitals lower in energy than the parent atomic orbitals?
38. Calculate the bond order for an ion with this configuration:
39. Explain why an electron in the bonding molecular orbital in the H molecule has a lower energy than an
2
electron in the 1satomic orbital of either of the separated hydrogen atoms.
40. Predict the valence electron molecular orbital configurations for the following, and state whether they will
be stable or unstable ions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
41. Determine the bond order of each member of the following groups, and determine which member of each
group is predicted by the molecular orbital model to have the strongest bond.
(a) H ,
2
(b) O ,
2
(c) Li , Be
2 2
(d) F ,
2
(e) N ,
2
42. For the first ionization energy for an N molecule, what molecular orbital is the electron removed from?
2
43. Compare the atomic and molecular orbital diagrams to identify the member of each of the following pairs
that has the highest first ionization energy (the most tightly bound electron) in the gas phase:
(a) H and H
2
(b) N and N
2
(c) O and O
2
(d) C and C
2
(e) B and B
2
44. Which of the period 2 homonuclear diatomic molecules are predicted to be paramagnetic?
45. A friend tells you that the 2sorbital for fluorine starts off at a much lower energy than the 2sorbital for
lithium, so the resulting σ molecular orbital in F is more stable than in Li . Do you agree?
2s 2 2
46. True or false: Boron contains 2s22p1valence electrons, so only oneporbital is needed to form molecular
orbitals.
47. What charge would be needed on F to generate an ion with a bond order of 2?
2
48. Predict whether the MO diagram for S would show s-p mixing or not.
2
49. Explain why is diamagnetic, while which has the same number of valence electrons, is
paramagnetic.
50. Using the MO diagrams, predict the bond order for the stronger bond in each pair:
(a) B or
2
(b) F or
2
(c) O or
2
(d) or
PAGE: 428
414 8 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 429
CHAPTER 9
Gases
Figure9.1 The hot air inside these balloons is less dense than the surrounding cool air. This results in a buoyant
force that causes the balloons to rise when their guy lines are untied. (credit: modification of work by Anthony
Quintano)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1Gas Pressure
9.2Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law
9.3Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions
9.4Effusion and Diffusion of Gases
9.5The Kinetic-Molecular Theory
9.6Non-Ideal Gas Behavior
INTRODUCTION We are surrounded by an ocean of gas—the atmosphere—and many of the properties of
gases are familiar to us from our daily activities. Heated gases expand, which can make a hot air balloon rise
(Figure 9.1) or cause a blowout in a bicycle tire left in the sun on a hot day.
Gases have played an important part in the development of chemistry. In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, many scientists investigated gas behavior, providing the first mathematical descriptions of the
behavior of matter.
In this chapter, we will examine the relationships between gas temperature, pressure, amount, and volume. We
will study a simple theoretical model and use it to analyze the experimental behavior of gases. The results of
these analyses will show us the limitations of the theory and how to improve on it.
PAGE: 430
416 9 • Gases
9.1 Gas Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the property of pressure
• Define and convert among the units of pressure measurements
• Describe the operation of common tools for measuring gas pressure
• Calculate pressure from manometer data
The earth’s atmosphere exerts a pressure, as does any other gas. Although we do not normally notice
atmospheric pressure, we are sensitive to pressure changes—for example, when your ears “pop” during take-
off and landing while flying, or when you dive underwater. Gas pressure is caused by the force exerted by gas
molecules colliding with the surfaces of objects (Figure 9.2). Although the force of each collision is very small,
any surface of appreciable area experiences a large number of collisions in a short time, which can result in a
high pressure. In fact, normal air pressure is strong enough to crush a metal container when not balanced by
equal pressure from inside the container.
FIGURE9.2 The atmosphere above us exerts a large pressure on objects at the surface of the earth, roughly equal
to the weight of a bowling ball pressing on an area the size of a human thumbnail.
LINK TO LEARNING
A dramaticillustration(http://openstax.org/l/16atmospressur1)of atmospheric pressure is provided in this
brief video, which shows a railway tanker car imploding when its internal pressure is decreased.
A smaller scaledemonstration(http://openstax.org/l/16atmospressur2)of this phenomenon is briefly
explained.
Atmospheric pressure is caused by the weight of the column of air molecules in the atmosphere above an
object, such as the tanker car. At sea level, this pressure is roughly the same as that exerted by a full-grown
African elephant standing on a doormat, or a typical bowling ball resting on your thumbnail. These may seem
like huge amounts, and they are, but life on earth has evolved under such atmospheric pressure. If you actually
perch a bowling ball on your thumbnail, the pressure experienced istwicethe usual pressure, and the
sensation is unpleasant.
In general,pressureis defined as the force exerted on a given area: Note that pressure is directly
proportional to force and inversely proportional to area. Thus, pressure can be increased either by increasing
the amount of force or by decreasing the area over which it is applied; pressure can be decreased by
decreasing the force or increasing the area.
Let’s apply this concept to determine which exerts a greater pressure inFigure 9.3—the elephant or the figure
skater? A large African elephant can weigh 7 tons, supported on four feet, each with a diameter of about 1.5 ft
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 431
9.1 • Gas Pressure 417
(footprint area of 250 in2), so the pressure exerted by each foot is about 14 lb/in2:
The figure skater weighs about 120 lbs, supported on two skate blades, each with an area of about 2 in2, so the
pressure exerted by each blade is about 30 lb/in2:
Even though the elephant is more than one hundred-times heavier than the skater, it exerts less than one-half
of the pressure. On the other hand, if the skater removes their skates and stands with bare feet (or regular
footwear) on the ice, the larger area over which their weight is applied greatly reduces the pressure exerted:
FIGURE9.3 Although (a) an elephant’s weight is large, creating a very large force on the ground, (b) the figure
skater exerts a much higher pressure on the ice due to the small surface area of the skates. (credit a: modification of
work by Guido da Rozze; credit b: modification of work by Ryosuke Yagi)
The SI unit of pressure is thepascal (Pa), with 1 Pa = 1 N/m2, where N is the newton, a unit of force defined as 1
kg m/s2. One pascal is a small pressure; in many cases, it is more convenient to use units of kilopascal (1 kPa =
1000 Pa) orbar(1 bar = 100,000 Pa). In the United States, pressure is often measured in pounds of force on an
area of one square inch—pounds per square inch (psi)—for example, in car tires. Pressure can also be
measured using the unitatmosphere (atm), which originally represented the average sea level air pressure at
the approximate latitude of Paris (45°).Table 9.1provides some information on these and a few other common
units for pressure measurements
Pressure Units
Unit Name and Abbreviation Definition or Relation to Other Unit
1 Pa = 1 N/m2
pascal (Pa)
recommended IUPAC unit
kilopascal (kPa) 1 kPa = 1000 Pa
pounds per square inch (psi) air pressure at sea level is ~14.7 psi
1 atm = 101,325 Pa = 760 torr
atmosphere (atm)
air pressure at sea level is ~1 atm
TABLE9.1
PAGE: 432
418 9 • Gases
Unit Name and Abbreviation Definition or Relation to Other Unit
1 bar = 100,000 Pa (exactly)
bar (bar, or b)
commonly used in meteorology
millibar (mbar, or mb) 1000 mbar = 1 bar
1 in. Hg = 3386 Pa
inches of mercury (in. Hg)
used by aviation industry, also some weather reports
torr
named after Evangelista Torricelli, inventor of the barometer
millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) 1 mm Hg ~1 torr
TABLE9.1
EXAMPLE 9.1
Conversion of Pressure Units
The United States National Weather Service reports pressure in both inches of Hg and millibars. Convert a
pressure of 29.2 in. Hg into:
(a) torr
(b) atm
(c) kPa
(d) mbar
Solution
This is a unit conversion problem. The relationships between the various pressure units are given inTable 9.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Check Your Learning
A typical barometric pressure in Kansas City is 740 torr. What is this pressure in atmospheres, in millimeters
of mercury, in kilopascals, and in bar?
Answer:
0.974 atm; 740 mm Hg; 98.7 kPa; 0.987 bar
We can measure atmospheric pressure, the force exerted by the atmosphere on the earth’s surface, with a
barometer(Figure 9.4). A barometer is a glass tube that is closed at one end, filled with a nonvolatile liquid
such as mercury, and then inverted and immersed in a container of that liquid. The atmosphere exerts
pressure on the liquid outside the tube, the column of liquid exerts pressure inside the tube, and the pressure
at the liquid surface is the same inside and outside the tube. The height of the liquid in the tube is therefore
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 433
9.1 • Gas Pressure 419
proportional to the pressure exerted by the atmosphere.
FIGURE9.4 In a barometer, the height,h, of the column of liquid is used as a measurement of the air pressure.
Using very dense liquid mercury (left) permits the construction of reasonably sized barometers, whereas using
water (right) would require a barometer more than 30 feet tall.
If the liquid is water, normal atmospheric pressure will support a column of water over 10 meters high, which
is rather inconvenient for making (and reading) a barometer. Because mercury (Hg) is about 13.6-times denser
than water, a mercury barometer only needs to be as tall as a water barometer—a more suitable size.
Standard atmospheric pressure of 1 atm at sea level (101,325 Pa) corresponds to a column of mercury that is
about 760 mm (29.92 in.) high. Thetorrwas originally intended to be a unit equal to one millimeter of
mercury, but it no longer corresponds exactly. The pressure exerted by a fluid due to gravity is known as
hydrostatic pressure,p:
wherehis the height of the fluid,ρis the density of the fluid, andgis acceleration due to gravity.
EXAMPLE 9.2
Calculation of Barometric Pressure
Show the calculation supporting the claim that atmospheric pressure near sea level corresponds to the
pressure exerted by a column of mercury that is about 760 mm high. The density of mercury = 13.6 g/cm3.
Solution
The hydrostatic pressure is given byp=hρg, withh= 760 mm,ρ= 13.6 g/cm3, andg= 9.81 m/s2. Plugging
these values into the equation and doing the necessary unit conversions will give us the value we seek. (Note:
We are expecting to find a pressure of ~101,325 Pa.)
PAGE: 434
420 9 • Gases
Check Your Learning
Calculate the height of a column of water at 25 °C that corresponds to normal atmospheric pressure. The
density of water at this temperature is 1.0 g/cm3.
Answer:
10.3 m
Amanometeris a device similar to a barometer that can be used to measure the pressure of a gas trapped in a
container. A closed-end manometer is a U-shaped tube with one closed arm, one arm that connects to the gas
to be measured, and a nonvolatile liquid (usually mercury) in between. As with a barometer, the distance
between the liquid levels in the two arms of the tube (hin the diagram) is proportional to the pressure of the
gas in the container. An open-end manometer (Figure 9.5) is the same as a closed-end manometer, but one of
its arms is open to the atmosphere. In this case, the distance between the liquid levels corresponds to the
difference in pressure between the gas in the container and the atmosphere.
FIGURE9.5 A manometer can be used to measure the pressure of a gas. The (difference in) height between the
liquid levels (h) is a measure of the pressure. Mercury is usually used because of its large density.
EXAMPLE 9.3
Calculation of Pressure Using a Closed-End Manometer
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with a closed-end manometer, as shown to the right. The liquid in
the manometer is mercury. Determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) torr
(b) Pa
(c) bar
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 435
9.1 • Gas Pressure 421
Solution
The pressure of the gas is equal to a column of mercury of height 26.4 cm. (The pressure at the bottom
horizontal line is equal on both sides of the tube. The pressure on the left is due to the gas and the pressure on
the right is due to 26.4 cm Hg, or mercury.) We could use the equationp=hρgas inExample 9.2, but it is
simpler to just convert between units usingTable 9.1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Check Your Learning
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with a closed-end manometer. The liquid in the manometer is
mercury. Determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) torr
(b) Pa
(c) bar
Answer:
(a) ~150 torr; (b) ~20,000 Pa; (c) ~0.20 bar
EXAMPLE 9.4
Calculation of Pressure Using an Open-End Manometer
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end Hg (mercury) manometer, as shown
to the right. Determine the pressure of the gas in:
PAGE: 436
422 9 • Gases
(a) mm Hg
(b) atm
(c) kPa
Solution
The pressure of the gas equals the hydrostatic pressure due to a column of mercury of height 13.7 cm plus the
pressure of the atmosphere at sea level. (The pressure at the bottom horizontal line is equal on both sides of
the tube. The pressure on the left is due to the gas and the pressure on the right is due to 13.7 cm of Hg plus
atmospheric pressure.)
(a) In mm Hg, this is: 137 mm Hg + 760 mm Hg = 897 mm Hg
(b)
(c)
Check Your Learning
The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end Hg manometer, as shown to the
right. Determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) mm Hg
(b) atm
(c) kPa
Answer:
(a) 642 mm Hg; (b) 0.845 atm; (c) 85.6 kPa
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 437
9.1 • Gas Pressure 423
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Measuring Blood Pressure
Blood pressure is measured using a device called a sphygmomanometer (Greeksphygmos= “pulse”). It
consists of an inflatable cuff to restrict blood flow, a manometer to measure the pressure, and a method of
determining when blood flow begins and when it becomes impeded (Figure 9.6). Since its invention in
1881, it has been an essential medical device. There are many types of sphygmomanometers: manual ones
that require a stethoscope and are used by medical professionals; mercury ones, used when the most
accuracy is required; less accurate mechanical ones; and digital ones that can be used with little training
but that have limitations. When using a sphygmomanometer, the cuff is placed around the upper arm and
inflated until blood flow is completely blocked, then slowly released. As the heart beats, blood forced
through the arteries causes a rise in pressure. This rise in pressure at which blood flow begins is the
systolic pressure—the peak pressure in the cardiac cycle. When the cuff’s pressure equals the arterial
systolic pressure, blood flows past the cuff, creating audible sounds that can be heard using a stethoscope.
This is followed by a decrease in pressure as the heart’s ventricles prepare for another beat. As cuff
pressure continues to decrease, eventually sound is no longer heard; this is thediastolic pressure—the
lowest pressure (resting phase) in the cardiac cycle. Blood pressure units from a sphygmomanometer are
in terms of millimeters of mercury (mm Hg).
FIGURE9.6 (a) A medical technician prepares to measure a patient’s blood pressure with a
sphygmomanometer. (b) A typical sphygmomanometer uses a valved rubber bulb to inflate the cuff and a
diaphragm gauge to measure pressure. (credit a: modification of work by Master Sgt. Jeffrey Allen)
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Meteorology, Climatology, and Atmospheric Science
Throughout the ages, people have observed clouds, winds, and precipitation, trying to discern patterns and
make predictions: when it is best to plant and harvest; whether it is safe to set out on a sea voyage; and much
more. We now face complex weather and atmosphere-related challenges that will have a major impact on our
civilization and the ecosystem. Several different scientific disciplines use chemical principles to help us better
understand weather, the atmosphere, and climate. These are meteorology, climatology, and atmospheric
science. Meteorology is the study of the atmosphere, atmospheric phenomena, and atmospheric effects on
earth’s weather. Meteorologists seek to understand and predict the weather in the short term, which can save
lives and benefit the economy. Weather forecasts (Figure 9.7) are the result of thousands of measurements of
air pressure, temperature, and the like, which are compiled, modeled, and analyzed in weather centers
worldwide.
PAGE: 438
424 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.7 Meteorologists use weather maps to describe and predict weather. Regions of high (H) and low (L)
pressure have large effects on weather conditions. The gray lines represent locations of constant pressure known as
isobars. (credit: modification of work by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
In terms of weather, low-pressure systems occur when the earth’s surface atmospheric pressure is lower than
the surrounding environment: Moist air rises and condenses, producing clouds. Movement of moisture and air
within various weather fronts instigates most weather events.
The atmosphere is the gaseous layer that surrounds a planet. Earth’s atmosphere, which is roughly 100–125
km thick, consists of roughly 78.1% nitrogen and 21.0% oxygen, and can be subdivided further into the
regions shown inFigure 9.8: the exosphere (furthest from earth, > 700 km above sea level), the thermosphere
(80–700 km), the mesosphere (50–80 km), the stratosphere (second lowest level of our atmosphere, 12–50 km
above sea level), and the troposphere (up to 12 km above sea level, roughly 80% of the earth’s atmosphere by
mass and the layer where most weather events originate). As you go higher in the troposphere, air density and
temperature both decrease.
FIGURE9.8 Earth’s atmosphere has five layers: the troposphere, the stratosphere, the mesosphere, the
thermosphere, and the exosphere.
Climatology is the study of the climate, averaged weather conditions over long time periods, using atmospheric
data. However, climatologists study patterns and effects that occur over decades, centuries, and millennia,
rather than shorter time frames of hours, days, and weeks like meteorologists. Atmospheric science is an even
broader field, combining meteorology, climatology, and other scientific disciplines that study the atmosphere.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 439
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 425
9.2 Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the mathematical relationships between the various properties of gases
• Use the ideal gas law, and related gas laws, to compute the values of various gas properties under specified
conditions
During the seventeenth and especially eighteenth centuries, driven both by a desire to understand nature and
a quest to make balloons in which they could fly (Figure 9.9), a number of scientists established the
relationships between the macroscopic physical properties of gases, that is, pressure, volume, temperature,
and amount of gas. Although their measurements were not precise by today’s standards, they were able to
determine the mathematical relationships between pairs of these variables (e.g., pressure and temperature,
pressure and volume) that hold for anidealgas—a hypothetical construct that real gases approximate under
certain conditions. Eventually, these individual laws were combined into a single equation—theideal gas
law—that relates gas quantities for gases and is quite accurate for low pressures and moderate temperatures.
We will consider the key developments in individual relationships (for pedagogical reasons not quite in
historical order), then put them together in the ideal gas law.
FIGURE9.9 In 1783, the first (a) hydrogen-filled balloon flight, (b) manned hot air balloon flight, and (c) manned
hydrogen-filled balloon flight occurred. When the hydrogen-filled balloon depicted in (a) landed, the frightened
villagers of Gonesse reportedly destroyed it with pitchforks and knives. The launch of the latter was reportedly
viewed by 400,000 people in Paris.
Pressure and Temperature: Amontons’s Law
Imagine filling a rigid container attached to a pressure gauge with gas and then sealing the container so that no
gas may escape. If the container is cooled, the gas inside likewise gets colder and its pressure is observed to
decrease. Since the container is rigid and tightly sealed, both the volume and number of moles of gas remain
constant. If we heat the sphere, the gas inside gets hotter (Figure 9.10) and the pressure increases.
PAGE: 440
426 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.10 The effect of temperature on gas pressure: When the hot plate is off, the pressure of the gas in the
sphere is relatively low. As the gas is heated, the pressure of the gas in the sphere increases.
This relationship between temperature and pressure is observed for any sample of gas confined to a constant
volume. An example of experimental pressure-temperature data is shown for a sample of air under these
conditions inFigure 9.11. We find that temperature and pressure are linearly related, and if the temperature is
on the kelvin scale, thenPandTare directly proportional (again, whenvolume and moles of gas are held
constant); if the temperature on the kelvin scale increases by a certain factor, the gas pressure increases by the
same factor.
FIGURE9.11 For a constant volume and amount of air, the pressure and temperature are directly proportional,
provided the temperature is in kelvin. (Measurements cannot be made at lower temperatures because of the
condensation of the gas.) When this line is extrapolated to lower pressures, it reaches a pressure of 0 at –273 °C,
which is 0 on the kelvin scale and the lowest possible temperature, called absolute zero.
Guillaume Amontons was the first to empirically establish the relationship between the pressure and the
temperature of a gas (~1700), and Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac determined the relationship more precisely
(~1800). Because of this, theP-Trelationship for gases is known as eitherAmontons’s laworGay-Lussac’s
law. Under either name, it states thatthe pressure of a given amount of gas is directly proportional to its
temperature on the kelvin scale when the volume is held constant. Mathematically, this can be written:
where ∝ means “is proportional to,” andkis a proportionality constant that depends on the identity, amount,
and volume of the gas.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 441
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 427
For a confined, constant volume of gas, the ratio is therefore constant (i.e., ). If the gas is initially in
“Condition 1” (withP=P andT=T), and then changes to “Condition 2” (withP=P andT=T), we have that
1 1 2 2
and which reduces to This equation is useful for pressure-temperature
calculations for a confined gas at constant volume. Note that temperatures must be on the kelvin scale for any
gas law calculations (0 on the kelvin scale and the lowest possible temperature is calledabsolute zero). (Also
note that there are at least three ways we can describe how the pressure of a gas changes as its temperature
changes: We can use a table of values, a graph, or a mathematical equation.)
EXAMPLE 9.5
Predicting Change in Pressure with Temperature
A can of hair spray is used until it is empty except for the propellant, isobutane gas.
(a) On the can is the warning “Store only at temperatures below 120 °F (48.8 °C). Do not incinerate.” Why?
(b) The gas in the can is initially at 24 °C and 360 kPa, and the can has a volume of 350 mL. If the can is left in a
car that reaches 50 °C on a hot day, what is the new pressure in the can?
Solution
(a) The can contains an amount of isobutane gas at a constant volume, so if the temperature is increased by
heating, the pressure will increase proportionately. High temperature could lead to high pressure, causing the
can to burst. (Also, isobutane is combustible, so incineration could cause the can to explode.)
(b) We are looking for a pressure change due to a temperature change at constant volume, so we will use
Amontons’s/Gay-Lussac’s law. TakingP andT as the initial values,T as the temperature where the pressure
1 1 2
is unknown andP as the unknown pressure, and converting °C to K, we have:
2
Rearranging and solving gives:
Check Your Learning
A sample of nitrogen, N , occupies 45.0 mL at 27 °C and 600 torr. What pressure will it have if cooled to –73 °C
2
while the volume remains constant?
Answer:
400 torr
Volume and Temperature: Charles’s Law
If we fill a balloon with air and seal it, the balloon contains a specific amount of air at atmospheric pressure,
let’s say 1 atm. If we put the balloon in a refrigerator, the gas inside gets cold and the balloon shrinks (although
both the amount of gas and its pressure remain constant). If we make the balloon very cold, it will shrink a
great deal, and it expands again when it warms up.
LINK TO LEARNING
Thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16CharlesLaw)shows how cooling and heating a gas causes its volume to
decrease or increase, respectively.
These examples of the effect of temperature on the volume of a given amount of a confined gas at constant
pressure are true in general: The volume increases as the temperature increases, and decreases as the
temperature decreases. Volume-temperature data for a 1-mole sample of methane gas at 1 atm are listed and
graphed inFigure 9.12.
PAGE: 442
428 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.12 The volume and temperature are linearly related for 1 mole of methane gas at a constant pressure of
1 atm. If the temperature is in kelvin, volume and temperature are directly proportional. The line stops at 111 K
because methane liquefies at this temperature; when extrapolated, it intersects the graph’s origin, representing a
temperature of absolute zero.
The relationship between the volume and temperature of a given amount of gas at constant pressure is known
as Charles’s law in recognition of the French scientist and balloon flight pioneer Jacques Alexandre César
Charles.Charles’s lawstates thatthe volume of a given amount of gas is directly proportional to its
temperature on the kelvin scale when the pressure is held constant.
Mathematically, this can be written as:
withkbeing a proportionality constant that depends on the amount and pressure of the gas.
For a confined, constant pressure gas sample, is constant (i.e., the ratio =k), and as seen with theP-T
relationship, this leads to another form of Charles’s law:
EXAMPLE 9.6
Predicting Change in Volume with Temperature
A sample of carbon dioxide, CO , occupies 0.300 L at 10 °C and 750 torr. What volume will the gas have at 30 °C
2
and 750 torr?
Solution
Because we are looking for the volume change caused by a temperature change at constant pressure, this is a
job for Charles’s law. TakingV andT as the initial values,T as the temperature at which the volume is
1 1 2
unknown andV as the unknown volume, and converting °C into K we have:
2
Rearranging and solving gives:
This answer supports our expectation from Charles’s law, namely, that raising the gas temperature (from 283 K
to 303 K) at a constant pressure will yield an increase in its volume (from 0.300 L to 0.321 L).
Check Your Learning
A sample of oxygen, O , occupies 32.2 mL at 30 °C and 452 torr. What volume will it occupy at –70 °C and the
2
same pressure?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 443
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 429
Answer:
21.6 mL
EXAMPLE 9.7
Measuring Temperature with a Volume Change
Temperature is sometimes measured with a gas thermometer by observing the change in the volume of the
gas as the temperature changes at constant pressure. The hydrogen in a particular hydrogen gas thermometer
has a volume of 150.0 cm3when immersed in a mixture of ice and water (0.00 °C). When immersed in boiling
liquid ammonia, the volume of the hydrogen, at the same pressure, is 131.7 cm3. Find the temperature of
boiling ammonia on the kelvin and Celsius scales.
Solution
A volume change caused by a temperature change at constant pressure means we should use Charles’s law.
TakingV andT as the initial values,T as the temperature at which the volume is unknown andV as the
1 1 2 2
unknown volume, and converting °C into K we have:
Rearrangement gives
Subtracting 273.15 from 239.8 K, we find that the temperature of the boiling ammonia on the Celsius scale is
–33.4 °C.
Check Your Learning
What is the volume of a sample of ethane at 467 K and 1.1 atm if it occupies 405 mL at 298 K and 1.1 atm?
Answer:
635 mL
Volume and Pressure: Boyle’s Law
If we partially fill an airtight syringe with air, the syringe contains a specific amount of air at constant
temperature, say 25 °C. If we slowly push in the plunger while keeping temperature constant, the gas in the
syringe is compressed into a smaller volume and its pressure increases; if we pull out the plunger, the volume
increases and the pressure decreases. This example of the effect of volume on the pressure of a given amount
of a confined gas is true in general. Decreasing the volume of a contained gas will increase its pressure, and
increasing its volume will decrease its pressure. In fact, if the volume increases by a certain factor, the
pressure decreases by the same factor, and vice versa. Volume-pressure data for an air sample at room
temperature are graphed inFigure 9.13.
PAGE: 444
430 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.13 When a gas occupies a smaller volume, it exerts a higher pressure; when it occupies a larger volume,
it exerts a lower pressure (assuming the amount of gas and the temperature do not change). SincePandVare
inversely proportional, a graph of vs.Vis linear.
Unlike theP-TandV-Trelationships, pressure and volume are not directly proportional to each other. Instead,
PandVexhibit inverse proportionality: Increasing the pressure results in a decrease of the volume of the gas.
Mathematically this can be written:
withkbeing a constant. Graphically, this relationship is shown by the straight line that results when plotting
the inverse of the pressure versus the volume (V), or the inverse of volume versus the pressure (P).
Graphs with curved lines are difficult to read accurately at low or high values of the variables, and they are
more difficult to use in fitting theoretical equations and parameters to experimental data. For those reasons,
scientists often try to find a way to “linearize” their data. If we plotPversusV, we obtain a hyperbola (see
Figure 9.14).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 445
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 431
FIGURE9.14 The relationship between pressure and volume is inversely proportional. (a) The graph ofPvs.Vis a
hyperbola, whereas (b) the graph of vs.Vis linear.
The relationship between the volume and pressure of a given amount of gas at constant temperature was first
published by the English natural philosopher Robert Boyle over 300 years ago. It is summarized in the
statement now known asBoyle’s law:The volume of a given amount of gas held at constant temperature is
inversely proportional to the pressure under which it is measured.
EXAMPLE 9.8
Volume of a Gas Sample
The sample of gas inFigure 9.13has a volume of 15.0 mL at a pressure of 13.0 psi. Determine the pressure of
the gas at a volume of 7.5 mL, using:
(a) theP-Vgraph inFigure 9.13
(b) the vs.Vgraph inFigure 9.13
(c) the Boyle’s law equation
Comment on the likely accuracy of each method.
Solution
(a) Estimating from theP-Vgraph gives a value forPsomewhere around 27 psi.
(b) Estimating from the versusVgraph give a value of about 26 psi.
(c) From Boyle’s law, we know that the product of pressure and volume (PV) for a given sample of gas at a
constant temperature is always equal to the same value. Therefore we havePV =kandPV =kwhich means
1 1 2 2
thatPV =PV.
1 1 2 2
UsingP andV as the known values 13.0 psi and 15.0 mL,P as the pressure at which the volume is unknown,
1 1 2
andV as the unknown volume, we have:
2
Solving:
It was more difficult to estimate well from theP-Vgraph, so (a) is likely more inaccurate than (b) or (c). The
calculation will be as accurate as the equation and measurements allow.
Check Your Learning
The sample of gas inFigure 9.13has a volume of 30.0 mL at a pressure of 6.5 psi. Determine the volume of the
gas at a pressure of 11.0 psi, using:
(a) theP-Vgraph inFigure 9.13
PAGE: 446
432 9 • Gases
(b) the vs.Vgraph inFigure 9.13
(c) the Boyle’s law equation
Comment on the likely accuracy of each method.
Answer:
(a) about 17–18 mL; (b) ~18 mL; (c) 17.7 mL; it was more difficult to estimate well from theP-Vgraph, so (a) is
likely more inaccurate than (b); the calculation will be as accurate as the equation and measurements allow
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Breathing and Boyle’s Law
What do you do about 20 times per minute for your whole life, without break, and often without even being
aware of it? The answer, of course, is respiration, or breathing. How does it work? It turns out that the gas
laws apply here. Your lungs take in gas that your body needs (oxygen) and get rid of waste gas (carbon
dioxide). Lungs are made of spongy, stretchy tissue that expands and contracts while you breathe. When
you inhale, your diaphragm and intercostal muscles (the muscles between your ribs) contract, expanding
your chest cavity and making your lung volume larger. The increase in volume leads to a decrease in
pressure (Boyle’s law). This causes air to flow into the lungs (from high pressure to low pressure). When you
exhale, the process reverses: Your diaphragm and rib muscles relax, your chest cavity contracts, and your
lung volume decreases, causing the pressure to increase (Boyle’s law again), and air flows out of the lungs
(from high pressure to low pressure). You then breathe in and out again, and again, repeating this Boyle’s
law cycle for the rest of your life (Figure 9.15).
FIGURE9.15 Breathing occurs because expanding and contracting lung volume creates small pressure
differences between your lungs and your surroundings, causing air to be drawn into and forced out of your lungs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 447
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 433
Moles of Gas and Volume: Avogadro’s Law
The Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro advanced a hypothesis in 1811 to account for the behavior of gases,
stating that equal volumes of all gases, measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure,
contain the same number of molecules. Over time, this relationship was supported by many experimental
observations as expressed byAvogadro’s law:For a confined gas, the volume (V) and number of moles (n) are
directly proportional if the pressure and temperature both remain constant.
In equation form, this is written as:
Mathematical relationships can also be determined for the other variable pairs, such asPversusn, andn
versusT.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thisinteractive PhET simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16IdealGasLaw)to investigate the relationships
between pressure, volume, temperature, and amount of gas. Use the simulation to examine the effect of
changing one parameter on another while holding the other parameters constant (as described in the
preceding sections on the various gas laws).
The Ideal Gas Law
To this point, four separate laws have been discussed that relate pressure, volume, temperature, and the
number of moles of the gas:
• Boyle’s law:PV= constant at constantTandn
• Amontons’s law: = constant at constantVandn
• Charles’s law: = constant at constantPandn
• Avogadro’s law: = constant at constantPandT
Combining these four laws yields theideal gas law, a relation between the pressure, volume, temperature, and
number of moles of a gas:
wherePis the pressure of a gas,Vis its volume,nis the number of moles of the gas,Tis its temperature on the
kelvin scale, andRis a constant called theideal gas constantor the universal gas constant. The units used to
express pressure, volume, and temperature will determine the proper form of the gas constant as required by
dimensional analysis, the most commonly encountered values being 0.08206 L atm mol–1K–1and 8.314 kPa L
mol–1K–1.
Gases whose properties ofP,V, andTare accurately described by the ideal gas law (or the other gas laws) are
said to exhibitideal behavioror to approximate the traits of anideal gas. An ideal gas is a hypothetical
construct that may be used along withkinetic molecular theoryto effectively explain the gas laws as will be
described in a later module of this chapter. Although all the calculations presented in this module assume
ideal behavior, this assumption is only reasonable for gases under conditions of relatively low pressure and
high temperature. In the final module of this chapter, a modified gas law will be introduced that accounts for
thenon-idealbehavior observed for many gases at relatively high pressures and low temperatures.
The ideal gas equation contains five terms, the gas constantRand the variable propertiesP,V,n, andT.
Specifying any four of these terms will permit use of the ideal gas law to calculate the fifth term as
demonstrated in the following example exercises.
PAGE: 448
434 9 • Gases
EXAMPLE 9.9
Using the Ideal Gas Law
Methane, CH , is being considered for use as an alternative automotive fuel to replace gasoline. One gallon of
4
gasoline could be replaced by 655 g of CH . What is the volume of this much methane at 25 °C and 745 torr?
4
Solution
We must rearrangePV=nRTto solve forV:
If we choose to useR= 0.08206 L atm mol–1K–1, then the amount must be in moles, temperature must be in
kelvin, and pressure must be in atm.
Converting into the “right” units:
It would require 1020 L (269 gal) of gaseous methane at about 1 atm of pressure to replace 1 gal of gasoline. It
requires a large container to hold enough methane at 1 atm to replace several gallons of gasoline.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the pressure in bar of 2520 moles of hydrogen gas stored at 27 °C in the 180-L storage tank of a
modern hydrogen-powered car.
Answer:
350 bar
If the number of moles of an ideal gas are kept constant under two different sets of conditions, a useful
mathematical relationship called the combined gas law is obtained: using units of atm, L, and
K. Both sets of conditions are equal to the product ofn R(wheren= the number of moles of the gas andRis
the ideal gas law constant).
EXAMPLE 9.10
Using the Combined Gas Law
When filled with air, a typical scuba tank with a volume of 13.2 L has a pressure of 153 atm (Figure 9.16). If the
water temperature is 27 °C, how many liters of air will such a tank provide to a diver’s lungs at a depth of
approximately 70 feet in the ocean where the pressure is 3.13 atm?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 449
9.2 • Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law 435
FIGURE9.16 Scuba divers use compressed air to breathe while underwater. (credit: modification of work by Mark
Goodchild)
Letting1represent the air in the scuba tank and2represent the air in the lungs, and noting that body
temperature (the temperature the air will be in the lungs) is 37 °C, we have:
Solving forV:
2
(Note: Be advised that this particular example is one in which the assumption of ideal gas behavior is not very
reasonable, since it involves gases at relatively high pressures and low temperatures. Despite this limitation,
the calculated volume can be viewed as a good “ballpark” estimate.)
Check Your Learning
A sample of ammonia is found to occupy 0.250 L under laboratory conditions of 27 °C and 0.850 atm. Find the
volume of this sample at 0 °C and 1.00 atm.
Answer:
0.193 L
Chemistry in Everyday Life
The Interdependence between Ocean Depth and Pressure in Scuba Diving
Whether scuba diving at the Great Barrier Reef in Australia (shown inFigure 9.17) or in the Caribbean,
divers must understand how pressure affects a number of issues related to their comfort and safety.
PAGE: 450
436 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.17 Scuba divers, whether at the Great Barrier Reef or in the Caribbean, must be aware of buoyancy,
pressure equalization, and the amount of time they spend underwater, to avoid the risks associated with
pressurized gases in the body. (credit: Kyle Taylor)
Pressure increases with ocean depth, and the pressure changes most rapidly as divers reach the surface.
The pressure a diver experiences is the sum of all pressures above the diver (from the water and the air).
Most pressure measurements are given in units of atmospheres, expressed as “atmospheres absolute” or
ATA in the diving community: Every 33 feet of salt water represents 1 ATA of pressure in addition to 1 ATA
of pressure from the atmosphere at sea level. As a diver descends, the increase in pressure causes the
body’s air pockets in the ears and lungs to compress; on the ascent, the decrease in pressure causes these
air pockets to expand, potentially rupturing eardrums or bursting the lungs. Divers must therefore
undergo equalization by adding air to body airspaces on the descent by breathing normally and adding air
to the mask by breathing out of the nose or adding air to the ears and sinuses by equalization techniques;
the corollary is also true on ascent, divers must release air from the body to maintain equalization.
Buoyancy, or the ability to control whether a diver sinks or floats, is controlled by the buoyancy
compensator (BCD). If a diver is ascending, the air in their BCD expands because of lower pressure
according to Boyle’s law (decreasing the pressure of gases increases the volume). The expanding air
increases the buoyancy of the diver, and they begin to ascend. The diver must vent air from the BCD or risk
an uncontrolled ascent that could rupture the lungs. In descending, the increased pressure causes the air
in the BCD to compress and the diver sinks much more quickly; the diver must add air to the BCD or risk an
uncontrolled descent, facing much higher pressures near the ocean floor. The pressure also impacts how
long a diver can stay underwater before ascending. The deeper a diver dives, the more compressed the air
that is breathed because of increased pressure: If a diver dives 33 feet, the pressure is 2 ATA and the air
would be compressed to one-half of its original volume. The diver uses up available air twice as fast as at
the surface.
Standard Conditions of Temperature and Pressure
We have seen that the volume of a given quantity of gas and the number of molecules (moles) in a given volume
of gas vary with changes in pressure and temperature. Chemists sometimes make comparisons against a
standard temperature and pressure (STP)for reporting properties of gases: 273.15 K and 1 atm (101.325
1
kPa). At STP, one mole of an ideal gas has a volume of about 22.4 L—this is referred to as thestandard molar
volume(Figure 9.18).
1 The IUPAC definition of standard pressure was changed from 1 atm to 1 bar (100 kPa) in 1982, but the prior definition remains in
use by many literature resources and will be used in this text.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 451
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 437
FIGURE9.18 Regardless of its chemical identity, one mole of gas behaving ideally occupies a volume of ~22.4 L at
STP.
9.3 Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the ideal gas law to compute gas densities and molar masses
• Perform stoichiometric calculations involving gaseous substances
• State Dalton’s law of partial pressures and use it in calculations involving gaseous mixtures
The study of the chemical behavior of gases was part of the basis of perhaps the most fundamental chemical
revolution in history. French nobleman AntoineLavoisier, widely regarded as the “father of modern
chemistry,” changed chemistry from a qualitative to a quantitative science through his work with gases. He
discovered the law of conservation of matter, discovered the role of oxygen in combustion reactions,
determined the composition of air, explained respiration in terms of chemical reactions, and more. He was a
casualty of the French Revolution, guillotined in 1794. Of his death, mathematician and astronomer Joseph-
Louis Lagrange said, “It took the mob only a moment to remove his head; a century will not suffice to
2
reproduce it.” Much of the knowledge we do have about Lavoisier's contributions is due to his wife, Marie-
Anne Paulze Lavoisier, who worked with him in his lab. A trained artist fluent in several languages, she created
detailed illustrations of the equipment in his lab, and translated texts from foreign scientists to complement
his knowledge. After his execution, she was instrumental in publishing Lavoisier's major treatise, which
unified many concepts of chemistry and laid the groundwork for significant further study.
As described in an earlier chapter of this text, we can turn to chemical stoichiometry for answers to many of
the questions that ask “How much?” The essential property involved in such use of stoichiometry is the
amount of substance, typically measured in moles (n). For gases, molar amount can be derived from
convenient experimental measurements of pressure, temperature, and volume. Therefore, these
measurements are useful in assessing the stoichiometry of pure gases, gas mixtures, and chemical reactions
involving gases. This section will not introduce any new material or ideas, but will provide examples of
applications and ways to integrate concepts already discussed.
2 “Quotations by Joseph-Louis Lagrange,” last modified February 2006, accessed February 10, 2015, http://www-history.mcs.st-
andrews.ac.uk/Quotations/Lagrange.html
PAGE: 452
438 9 • Gases
Gas Density and Molar Mass
The ideal gas law described previously in this chapter relates the properties of pressureP, volumeV,
temperatureT, and molar amountn. This law is universal, relating these properties in identical fashion
regardless of the chemical identity of the gas:
The densitydof a gas, on the other hand, is determined by its identity. As described in another chapter of this
text, the density of a substance is a characteristic property that may be used to identify the substance.
Rearranging the ideal gas equation to isolateVand substituting into the density equation yields
The ratiom/nis the definition of molar mass,ℳ:
The density equation can then be written
This relation may be used for calculating the densities of gases of known identities at specified values of
pressure and temperature as demonstrated inExample 9.11.
EXAMPLE 9.11
Measuring Gas Density
What is the density of molecular nitrogen gas at STP?
Solution
The molar mass of molecular nitrogen, N , is 28.01 g/mol. Substituting this value along with standard
2
temperature and pressure into the gas density equation yields
Check Your Learning
What is the density of molecular hydrogen gas at 17.0 °C and a pressure of 760 torr?
Answer:
d = 0.0847 g/L
When the identity of a gas is unknown, measurements of the mass, pressure, volume, and temperature of a
sample can be used to calculate the molar mass of the gas (a useful property for identification purposes).
Combining the ideal gas equation
and the definition of molar mass
yields the following equation:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 453
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 439
Determining the molar mass of a gas via this approach is demonstrated inExample 9.12.
EXAMPLE 9.12
Determining the Molecular Formula of a Gas from its Molar Mass and Empirical Formula
Cyclopropane, a gas once used with oxygen as a general anesthetic, is composed of 85.7% carbon and 14.3%
hydrogen by mass. Find the empirical formula. If 1.56 g of cyclopropane occupies a volume of 1.00 L at 0.984
atm and 50 °C, what is the molecular formula for cyclopropane?
Solution
First determine the empirical formula of the gas. Assume 100 g and convert the percentage of each element
into grams. Determine the number of moles of carbon and hydrogen in the 100-g sample of cyclopropane.
Divide by the smallest number of moles to relate the number of moles of carbon to the number of moles of
hydrogen. In the last step, realize that the smallest whole number ratio is the empirical formula:
Empirical formula is CH [empirical mass (EM) of 14.03 g/empirical unit].
2
Next, use the provided values for mass, pressure, temperature and volume to compute the molar mass of the
gas:
Comparing the molar mass to the empirical formula mass shows how many empirical formula units make up a
molecule:
The molecular formula is thus derived from the empirical formula by multiplying each of its subscripts by
three:
Check Your Learning
Acetylene, a fuel used welding torches, is composed of 92.3% C and 7.7% H by mass. Find the empirical
formula. If 1.10 g of acetylene occupies of volume of 1.00 L at 1.15 atm and 59.5 °C, what is the molecular
formula for acetylene?
Answer:
Empirical formula, CH; Molecular formula, C H
2 2
EXAMPLE 9.13
Determining the Molar Mass of a Volatile Liquid
The approximate molar mass of a volatile liquid can be determined by:
1. Heating a sample of the liquid in a flask with a tiny hole at the top, which converts the liquid into gas that
PAGE: 454
440 9 • Gases
may escape through the hole
2. Removing the flask from heat at the instant when the last bit of liquid becomes gas, at which time the flask
will be filled with only gaseous sample at ambient pressure
3. Sealing the flask and permitting the gaseous sample to condense to liquid, and then weighing the flask to
determine the sample’s mass (seeFigure 9.19)
FIGURE9.19 When the volatile liquid in the flask is heated past its boiling point, it becomes gas and drives air out
of the flask. At the flask is filled with volatile liquid gas at the same pressure as the atmosphere. If the flask
is then cooled to room temperature, the gas condenses and the mass of the gas that filled the flask, and is now
liquid, can be measured. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
Using this procedure, a sample of chloroform gas weighing 0.494 g is collected in a flask with a volume of 129
cm3at 99.6 °C when the atmospheric pressure is 742.1 mm Hg. What is the approximate molar mass of
chloroform?
Solution
Sinceℳ and substituting and rearranging givesℳ
then
ℳ
Check Your Learning
A sample of phosphorus that weighs 3.243 10−2g exerts a pressure of 31.89 kPa in a 56.0-mL bulb at 550 °C.
What are the molar mass and molecular formula of phosphorus vapor?
Answer:
124 g/mol P
4
The Pressure of a Mixture of Gases: Dalton’s Law
Unless they chemically react with each other, the individual gases in a mixture of gases do not affect each
other’s pressure. Each individual gas in a mixture exerts the same pressure that it would exert if it were
present alone in the container (Figure 9.20). The pressure exerted by each individual gas in a mixture is called
itspartial pressure. This observation is summarized byDalton’s law of partial pressures:The total pressure
of a mixture of ideal gases is equal to the sum of the partial pressures of the component gases:
In the equationP is the total pressure of a mixture of gases,P is the partial pressure of gas A;P is the
Total A B
partial pressure of gas B;P is the partial pressure of gas C; and so on.
C
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 455
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 441
FIGURE9.20 If equal-volume cylinders containing gasses at pressures of 300 kPa, 450 kPa, and 600 kPa are all
combined in the same-size cylinder, the total pressure of the gas mixture is 1350 kPa.
The partial pressure of gas A is related to the total pressure of the gas mixture via itsmole fraction (X), a unit
of concentration defined as the number of moles of a component of a solution divided by the total number of
moles of all components:
whereP ,X , andn are the partial pressure, mole fraction, and number of moles of gas A, respectively, and
A A A
n is the number of moles of all components in the mixture.
Total
EXAMPLE 9.14
The Pressure of a Mixture of Gases
A 10.0-L vessel contains 2.50 10−3mol of H , 1.00 10−3mol of He, and 3.00 10−4mol of Ne at 35 °C.
2
(a) What are the partial pressures of each of the gases?
(b) What is the total pressure in atmospheres?
Solution
The gases behave independently, so the partial pressure of each gas can be determined from the ideal gas
equation, using :
The total pressure is given by the sum of the partial pressures:
PAGE: 456
442 9 • Gases
Check Your Learning
A 5.73-L flask at 25 °C contains 0.0388 mol of N , 0.147 mol of CO, and 0.0803 mol of H . What is the total
2 2
pressure in the flask in atmospheres?
Answer:
1.137 atm
Here is another example of this concept, but dealing with mole fraction calculations.
EXAMPLE 9.15
The Pressure of a Mixture of Gases
A gas mixture used for anesthesia contains 2.83 mol oxygen, O , and 8.41 mol nitrous oxide, N O. The total
2 2
pressure of the mixture is 192 kPa.
(a) What are the mole fractions of O and N O?
2 2
(b) What are the partial pressures of O and N O?
2 2
Solution
The mole fraction is given by and the partial pressure isP =X P .
A A Total
For O ,
2
and
For N O,
2
and
Check Your Learning
What is the pressure of a mixture of 0.200 g of H , 1.00 g of N , and 0.820 g of Ar in a container with a volume
2 2
of 2.00 L at 20 °C?
Answer:
1.87 atm
Collection of Gases over Water
A simple way to collect gases that do not react with water is to capture them in a bottle that has been filled with
water and inverted into a dish filled with water. The pressure of the gas inside the bottle can be made equal to
the air pressure outside by raising or lowering the bottle. When the water level is the same both inside and
outside the bottle (Figure 9.21), the pressure of the gas is equal to the atmospheric pressure, which can be
measured with a barometer.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 457
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 443
FIGURE9.21 When a reaction produces a gas that is collected above water, the trapped gas is a mixture of the gas
produced by the reaction and water vapor. If the collection flask is appropriately positioned to equalize the water
levels both within and outside the flask, the pressure of the trapped gas mixture will equal the atmospheric pressure
outside the flask (see the earlier discussion of manometers).
However, there is another factor we must consider when we measure the pressure of the gas by this method.
Water evaporates and there is always gaseous water (water vapor) above a sample of liquid water. As a gas is
collected over water, it becomes saturated with water vapor and the total pressure of the mixture equals the
partial pressure of the gas plus the partial pressure of the water vapor. The pressure of the pure gas is
therefore equal to the total pressure minus the pressure of the water vapor—this is referred to as the “dry” gas
pressure, that is, the pressure of the gas only, without water vapor. Thevapor pressure of water, which is the
pressure exerted by water vapor in equilibrium with liquid water in a closed container, depends on the
temperature (Figure 9.22); more detailed information on the temperature dependence of water vapor can be
found inTable 9.2, and vapor pressure will be discussed in more detail in the next chapter on liquids.
FIGURE9.22 This graph shows the vapor pressure of water at sea level as a function of temperature.
PAGE: 458
444 9 • Gases
Vapor Pressure of Ice and Water in Various Temperatures at Sea Level
Temperature Pressure Temperature Pressure Temperature Pressure
(°C) (torr) (°C) (torr) (°C) (torr)
–10 1.95 18 15.5 30 31.8
–5 3.0 19 16.5 35 42.2
–2 3.9 20 17.5 40 55.3
0 4.6 21 18.7 50 92.5
2 5.3 22 19.8 60 149.4
4 6.1 23 21.1 70 233.7
6 7.0 24 22.4 80 355.1
8 8.0 25 23.8 90 525.8
10 9.2 26 25.2 95 633.9
12 10.5 27 26.7 99 733.2
14 12.0 28 28.3 100.0 760.0
16 13.6 29 30.0 101.0 787.6
TABLE9.2
EXAMPLE 9.16
Pressure of a Gas Collected Over Water
If 0.200 L of argon is collected over water at a temperature of 26 °C and a pressure of 750 torr in a system like
that shown inFigure 9.21, what is the partial pressure of argon?
Solution
According to Dalton’s law, the total pressure in the bottle (750 torr) is the sum of the partial pressure of argon
and the partial pressure of gaseous water:
Rearranging this equation to solve for the pressure of argon gives:
The pressure of water vapor above a sample of liquid water at 26 °C is 25.2 torr (Appendix E), so:
Check Your Learning
A sample of oxygen collected over water at a temperature of 29.0 °C and a pressure of 764 torr has a volume of
0.560 L. What volume would the dry oxygen from this sample have under the same conditions of temperature
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 459
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 445
and pressure?
Answer:
0.537 L
Chemical Stoichiometry and Gases
Chemical stoichiometry describes the quantitative relationships between reactants and products in chemical
reactions.
We have previously measured quantities of reactants and products using masses for solids and volumes in
conjunction with the molarity for solutions; now we can also use gas volumes to indicate quantities. If we know
the volume, pressure, and temperature of a gas, we can use the ideal gas equation to calculate how many moles
of the gas are present. If we know how many moles of a gas are involved, we can calculate the volume of a gas at
any temperature and pressure.
Avogadro’s Law Revisited
Sometimes we can take advantage of a simplifying feature of the stoichiometry of gases that solids and
solutions do not exhibit: All gases that show ideal behavior contain the same number of molecules in the same
volume (at the same temperature and pressure). Thus, the ratios of volumes of gases involved in a chemical
reaction are given by the coefficients in the equation for the reaction, provided that the gas volumes are
measured at the same temperature and pressure.
We can extend Avogadro’s law (that the volume of a gas is directly proportional to the number of moles of the
gas) to chemical reactions with gases: Gases combine, or react, in definite and simple proportions by volume,
provided that all gas volumes are measured at the same temperature and pressure. For example, since
nitrogen and hydrogen gases react to produce ammonia gas according to a
given volume of nitrogen gas reacts with three times that volume of hydrogen gas to produce two times that
volume of ammonia gas, if pressure and temperature remain constant.
The explanation for this is illustrated inFigure 9.23. According to Avogadro’s law, equal volumes of gaseous N ,
2
H , and NH , at the same temperature and pressure, contain the same number of molecules. Because one
2 3
molecule of N reacts with three molecules of H to produce two molecules of NH , the volume of H required
2 2 3 2
is three times the volume of N , and the volume of NH produced is two times the volume of N .
2 3 2
FIGURE9.23 One volume of N combines with three volumes of H to form two volumes of NH .
2 2 3
PAGE: 460
446 9 • Gases
EXAMPLE 9.17
Reaction of Gases
Propane, C H (g), is used in gas grills to provide the heat for cooking. What volume of O (g) measured at 25 °C
3 8 2
and 760 torr is required to react with 2.7 L of propane measured under the same conditions of temperature
and pressure? Assume that the propane undergoes complete combustion.
Solution
The ratio of the volumes of C H and O will be equal to the ratio of their coefficients in the balanced equation
3 8 2
for the reaction:
From the equation, we see that one volume of C H will react with five volumes of O :
3 8 2
A volume of 13.5 L of O will be required to react with 2.7 L of C H .
2 3 8
Check Your Learning
An acetylene tank for an oxyacetylene welding torch provides 9340 L of acetylene gas, C H , at 0 °C and 1 atm.
2 2
How many tanks of oxygen, each providing 7.00 103L of O at 0 °C and 1 atm, will be required to burn the
2
acetylene?
Answer:
3.34 tanks (2.34 104L)
EXAMPLE 9.18
Volumes of Reacting Gases
Ammonia is an important fertilizer and industrial chemical. Suppose that a volume of 683 billion cubic feet of
gaseous ammonia, measured at 25 °C and 1 atm, was manufactured. What volume of H (g), measured under
2
the same conditions, was required to prepare this amount of ammonia by reaction with N ?
2
Solution
Because equal volumes of H and NH contain equal numbers of molecules and each three molecules of H
2 3 2
that react produce two molecules of NH , the ratio of the volumes of H and NH will be equal to 3:2. Two
3 2 3
volumes of NH , in this case in units of billion ft3, will be formed from three volumes of H :
3 2
The manufacture of 683 billion ft3of NH required 1020 billion ft3of H . (At 25 °C and 1 atm, this is the volume
3 2
of a cube with an edge length of approximately 1.9 miles.)
Check Your Learning
What volume of O (g) measured at 25 °C and 760 torr is required to react with 17.0 L of ethylene, C H (g),
2 2 4
measured under the same conditions of temperature and pressure? The products are CO and water vapor.
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 461
9.3 • Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions 447
Answer:
51.0 L
EXAMPLE 9.19
Volume of Gaseous Product
What volume of hydrogen at 27 °C and 723 torr may be prepared by the reaction of 8.88 g of gallium with an
excess of hydrochloric acid?
Solution
Convert the provided mass of the limiting reactant, Ga, to moles of hydrogen produced:
Convert the provided temperature and pressure values to appropriate units (K and atm, respectively), and then
use the molar amount of hydrogen gas and the ideal gas equation to calculate the volume of gas:
Check Your Learning
Sulfur dioxide is an intermediate in the preparation of sulfuric acid. What volume of SO at 343 °C and 1.21
2
atm is produced by burning l.00 kg of sulfur in excess oxygen?
Answer:
1.30 103L
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Greenhouse Gases and Climate Change
The thin skin of our atmosphere keeps the earth from being an ice planet and makes it habitable. In fact, this is
due to less than 0.5% of the air molecules. Of the energy from the sun that reaches the earth, almost is
reflected back into space, with the rest absorbed by the atmosphere and the surface of the earth. Some of the
energy that the earth absorbs is re-emitted as infrared (IR) radiation, a portion of which passes back out
through the atmosphere into space. Most if this IR radiation, however, is absorbed by certain atmospheric
gases, effectively trapping heat within the atmosphere in a phenomenon known as thegreenhouse effect. This
effect maintains global temperatures within the range needed to sustain life on earth. Without our
atmosphere, the earth's average temperature would be lower by more than 30 °C (nearly 60 °F). The major
greenhouse gases (GHGs) are water vapor, carbon dioxide, methane, and ozone. Since the Industrial
Revolution, human activity has been increasing the concentrations of GHGs, which have changed the energy
balance and are significantly altering the earth’s climate (Figure 9.24).
PAGE: 462
448 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.24 Greenhouse gases trap enough of the sun’s energy to make the planet habitable—this is known as
the greenhouse effect. Human activities are increasing greenhouse gas levels, warming the planet and causing more
extreme weather events.
There is strong evidence from multiple sources that higher atmospheric levels of CO are caused by human
2
activity, with fossil fuel burning accounting for about of the recent increase in CO . Reliable data from ice
2
cores reveals that CO concentration in the atmosphere is at the highest level in the past 800,000 years; other
2
evidence indicates that it may be at its highest level in 20 million years. In recent years, the CO concentration
2
has increased preindustrial levels of ~280 ppm to more than 400 ppm today (Figure 9.25).
FIGURE9.25 CO levels over the past 700,000 years were typically from 200–300 ppm, with a steep,
2
unprecedented increase over the past 50 years.
LINK TO LEARNING
Clickhere(http://openstax.org/l/16GlobalWarming)to see a 2-minute video explaining greenhouse gases and
global warming.
Portrait of a Chemist
Susan Solomon
Atmospheric and climate scientist SusanSolomon(Figure 9.26) is the author of one ofThe New York Times
books of the year (The Coldest March, 2001), one of Time magazine’s 100 most influential people in the
world (2008), and a working group leader of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which
was the recipient of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize. She helped determine and explain the cause of the
formation of the ozone hole over Antarctica, and has authored many important papers on climate change.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 463
9.4 • Effusion and Diffusion of Gases 449
She has been awarded the top scientific honors in the US and France (the National Medal of Science and
the Grande Medaille, respectively), and is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, the Royal Society,
the French Academy of Sciences, and the European Academy of Sciences. Formerly a professor at the
University of Colorado, she is now at MIT, and continues to work at NOAA.
For more information, watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16SusanSolomon)about Susan Solomon.
FIGURE9.26 Susan Solomon’s research focuses on climate change and has been instrumental in determining
the cause of the ozone hole over Antarctica. (credit: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration)
9.4 Effusion and Diffusion of Gases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and explain effusion and diffusion
• State Graham’s law and use it to compute relevant gas properties
If you have ever been in a room when a piping hot pizza was delivered, you have been made aware of the fact
that gaseous molecules can quickly spread throughout a room, as evidenced by the pleasant aroma that soon
reaches your nose. Although gaseous molecules travel at tremendous speeds (hundreds of meters per second),
they collide with other gaseous molecules and travel in many different directions before reaching the desired
target. At room temperature, a gaseous molecule will experience billions of collisions per second. Themean
free pathis the average distance a molecule travels between collisions. The mean free path increases with
decreasing pressure; in general, the mean free path for a gaseous molecule will be hundreds of times the
diameter of the molecule
In general, we know that when a sample of gas is introduced to one part of a closed container, its molecules
very quickly disperse throughout the container; this process by which molecules disperse in space in response
to differences in concentration is calleddiffusion(shown inFigure 9.27). The gaseous atoms or molecules are,
of course, unaware of any concentration gradient, they simply move randomly—regions of higher
concentration have more particles than regions of lower concentrations, and so a net movement of species
from high to low concentration areas takes place. In a closed environment, diffusion will ultimately result in
equal concentrations of gas throughout, as depicted inFigure 9.27. The gaseous atoms and molecules continue
to move, but since their concentrations are the same in both bulbs, the rates of transfer between the bulbs are
equal (nonettransfer of molecules occurs).
FIGURE9.27 (a) Two gases, H and O , are initially separated. (b) When the stopcock is opened, they mix together.
2 2
PAGE: 464
450 9 • Gases
The lighter gas, H , passes through the opening faster than O , so just after the stopcock is opened, more H
2 2 2
molecules move to the O side than O molecules move to the H side. (c) After a short time, both the slower-
2 2 2
moving O molecules and the faster-moving H molecules have distributed themselves evenly on both sides of the
2 2
vessel.
We are often interested in therate of diffusion, the amount of gas passing through some area per unit time:
The diffusion rate depends on several factors: the concentration gradient (the increase or decrease in
concentration from one point to another); the amount of surface area available for diffusion; and the distance
the gas particles must travel. Note also that the time required for diffusion to occur is inversely proportional to
the rate of diffusion, as shown in the rate of diffusion equation.
A process involving movement of gaseous species similar to diffusion iseffusion, the escape of gas molecules
through a tiny hole such as a pinhole in a balloon into a vacuum (Figure 9.28). Although diffusion and effusion
rates both depend on the molar mass of the gas involved, their rates are not equal; however, the ratios of their
rates are the same.
FIGURE9.28 Diffusion involves the unrestricted dispersal of molecules throughout space due to their random
motion. When this process is restricted to passage of molecules through very small openings in a physical barrier,
the process is called effusion.
If a mixture of gases is placed in a container with porous walls, the gases effuse through the small openings in
the walls. The lighter gases pass through the small openings more rapidly (at a higher rate) than the heavier
ones (Figure 9.29). In 1832, Thomas Graham studied the rates of effusion of different gases and formulated
Graham’s law of effusion:The rate of effusion of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of the mass
of its particles:
ℳ
This means that if two gases A and B are at the same temperature and pressure, the ratio of their effusion rates
is inversely proportional to the ratio of the square roots of the masses of their particles:
ℳ
ℳ
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 465
9.4 • Effusion and Diffusion of Gases 451
FIGURE9.29 The left photograph shows two balloons inflated with different gases, helium (orange) and argon
(blue).The right-side photograph shows the balloons approximately 12 hours after being filled, at which time the
helium balloon has become noticeably more deflated than the argon balloon, due to the greater effusion rate of the
lighter helium gas. (credit: modification of work by Paul Flowers)
EXAMPLE 9.20
Applying Graham’s Law to Rates of Effusion
Calculate the ratio of the rate of effusion of hydrogen to the rate of effusion of oxygen.
Solution
From Graham’s law, we have:
Hydrogen effuses four times as rapidly as oxygen.
Check Your Learning
At a particular pressure and temperature, nitrogen gas effuses at the rate of 79 mL/s. Under the same
conditions, at what rate will sulfur dioxide effuse?
Answer:
52 mL/s
EXAMPLE 9.21
Effusion Time Calculations
It takes 243 s for 4.46 10−5mol Xe to effuse through a tiny hole. Under the same conditions, how long will it
take 4.46 10−5mol Ne to effuse?
Solution
It is important to resist the temptation to use the times directly, and to remember how rate relates to time as
well as how it relates to mass. Recall the definition of rate of effusion:
and combine it with Graham’s law:
ℳ
ℳ
PAGE: 466
452 9 • Gases
To get:
ℳ
ℳ
Noting thatamount of A=amount of B, and solving fortime for Ne:
ℳ ℳ
ℳ ℳ
and substitute values:
Finally, solve for the desired quantity:
Note that this answer is reasonable: Since Ne is lighter than Xe, the effusion rate for Ne will be larger than that
for Xe, which means the time of effusion for Ne will be smaller than that for Xe.
Check Your Learning
A party balloon filled with helium deflates to of its original volume in 8.0 hours. How long will it take an
identical balloon filled with the same number of moles of air (ℳ = 28.2 g/mol) to deflate to of its original
volume?
Answer:
32 h
EXAMPLE 9.22
Determining Molar Mass Using Graham’s Law
An unknown gas effuses 1.66 times more rapidly than CO . What is the molar mass of the unknown gas? Can
2
you make a reasonable guess as to its identity?
Solution
From Graham’s law, we have:
ℳ
ℳ
Plug in known data:
ℳ
Solve:
ℳ
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 467
9.4 • Effusion and Diffusion of Gases 453
The gas could well be CH , the only gas with this molar mass.
4
Check Your Learning
Hydrogen gas effuses through a porous container 8.97-times faster than an unknown gas. Estimate the molar
mass of the unknown gas.
Answer:
163 g/mol
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Use of Diffusion for Nuclear Energy Applications: Uranium Enrichment
Gaseous diffusion has been used to produce enriched uranium for use in nuclear power plants and weapons.
Naturally occurring uranium contains only 0.72% of235U, the kind of uranium that is “fissile,” that is, capable
of sustaining a nuclear fission chain reaction. Nuclear reactors require fuel that is 2–5%235U, and nuclear
bombs need even higher concentrations. One way to enrich uranium to the desired levels is to take advantage
of Graham’s law. In a gaseous diffusion enrichment plant, uranium hexafluoride (UF , the only uranium
6
compound that is volatile enough to work) is slowly pumped through large cylindrical vessels called diffusers,
which contain porous barriers with microscopic openings. The process is one of diffusion because the other
side of the barrier is not evacuated. The235UF molecules have a higher average speed and diffuse through the
6
barrier a little faster than the heavier238UF molecules. The gas that has passed through the barrier is slightly
6
enriched in235UF and the residual gas is slightly depleted. The small difference in molecular weights between
6
235UF and238UF only about 0.4% enrichment, is achieved in one diffuser (Figure 9.30). But by connecting
6 6
many diffusers in a sequence of stages (called a cascade), the desired level of enrichment can be attained.
FIGURE9.30 In a diffuser, gaseous UF is pumped through a porous barrier, which partially separates235UF from
6 6
238UF The UF must pass through many large diffuser units to achieve sufficient enrichment in235U.
6 6
The large scale separation of gaseous235UF from238UF was first done during the World War II, at the atomic
6 6
energy installation in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, as part of the Manhattan Project (the development of the first
atomic bomb). Although the theory is simple, this required surmounting many daunting technical challenges
to make it work in practice. The barrier must have tiny, uniform holes (about 10–6cm in diameter) and be
porous enough to produce high flow rates. All materials (the barrier, tubing, surface coatings, lubricants, and
gaskets) need to be able to contain, but not react with, the highly reactive and corrosive UF .
6
Because gaseous diffusion plants require very large amounts of energy (to compress the gas to the high
PAGE: 468
454 9 • Gases
pressures required and drive it through the diffuser cascade, to remove the heat produced during
compression, and so on), it is now being replaced by gas centrifuge technology, which requires far less energy.
A current hot political issue is how to deny this technology to Iran, to prevent it from producing enough
enriched uranium for them to use to make nuclear weapons.
9.5 The Kinetic-Molecular Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• State the postulates of the kinetic-molecular theory
• Use this theory’s postulates to explain the gas laws
The gas laws that we have seen to this point, as well as the ideal gas equation, are empirical, that is, they have
been derived from experimental observations. The mathematical forms of these laws closely describe the
macroscopic behavior of most gases at pressures less than about 1 or 2 atm. Although the gas laws describe
relationships that have been verified by many experiments, they do not tell us why gases follow these
relationships.
Thekinetic molecular theory(KMT) is a simple microscopic model that effectively explains the gas laws
described in previous modules of this chapter. This theory is based on the following five postulates described
here. (Note: The term “molecule” will be used to refer to the individual chemical species that compose the gas,
although some gases are composed of atomic species, for example, the noble gases.)
1. Gases are composed of molecules that are in continuous motion, travelling in straight lines and changing
direction only when they collide with other molecules or with the walls of a container.
2. The molecules composing the gas are negligibly small compared to the distances between them.
3. The pressure exerted by a gas in a container results from collisions between the gas molecules and the
container walls.
4. Gas molecules exert no attractive or repulsive forces on each other or the container walls; therefore, their
collisions areelastic(do not involve a loss of energy).
5. The average kinetic energy of the gas molecules is proportional to the kelvin temperature of the gas.
The test of the KMT and its postulates is its ability to explain and describe the behavior of a gas. The various
gas laws can be derived from the assumptions of the KMT, which have led chemists to believe that the
assumptions of the theory accurately represent the properties of gas molecules. We will first look at the
individual gas laws (Boyle’s, Charles’s, Amontons’s, Avogadro’s, and Dalton’s laws) conceptually to see how the
KMT explains them. Then, we will more carefully consider the relationships between molecular masses,
speeds, and kinetic energies with temperature, and explain Graham’s law.
The Kinetic-Molecular Theory Explains the Behavior of Gases, Part I
Recalling that gas pressure is exerted by rapidly moving gas molecules and depends directly on the number of
molecules hitting a unit area of the wall per unit of time, we see that the KMT conceptually explains the
behavior of a gas as follows:
• Amontons’s law.If the temperature is increased, the average speed and kinetic energy of the gas
molecules increase. If the volume is held constant, the increased speed of the gas molecules results in
more frequent and more forceful collisions with the walls of the container, therefore increasing the
pressure (Figure 9.31).
• Charles’s law.If the temperature of a gas is increased, a constant pressure may be maintained only if the
volume occupied by the gas increases. This will result in greater average distances traveled by the
molecules to reach the container walls, as well as increased wall surface area. These conditions will
decrease the both the frequency of molecule-wall collisions and the number of collisions per unit area, the
combined effects of which balance the effect of increased collision forces due to the greater kinetic energy
at the higher temperature.
• Boyle’s law.If the gas volume volume of a given amount of gas at a given temperature is decreased (that is,
if the gas iscompressed), the molecules will be exposed to a decreased container wall area. Collisions with
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 469
9.5 • The Kinetic-Molecular Theory 455
the container wall will therefore occur more frequently and the pressure exerted by the gas will increase
(Figure 9.31).
• Avogadro’s law.At constant pressure and temperature, the frequency and force of molecule-wall collisions
are constant. Under such conditions, increasing the number of gaseous molecules will require a
proportional increase in the container volume in order to yield a decrease in the number of collisions per
unit area to compensate for the increased frequency of collisions (Figure 9.31).
• Dalton’s Law.Because of the large distances between them, the molecules of one gas in a mixture bombard
the container walls with the same frequency whether other gases are present or not, and the total pressure
of a gas mixture equals the sum of the (partial) pressures of the individual gases.
FIGURE9.31 (a) When gas temperature increases, gas pressure increases due to increased force and frequency of
molecular collisions. (b) When volume decreases, gas pressure increases due to increased frequency of molecular
collisions. (c) When the amount of gas increases at a constant pressure, volume increases to yield a constant
number of collisions per unit wall area per unit time.
molecular speeds and Kinetic Energy
The previous discussion showed that the KMT qualitatively explains the behaviors described by the various gas
laws. The postulates of this theory may be applied in a more quantitative fashion to derive these individual
laws. To do this, we must first look at speeds and kinetic energies of gas molecules, and the temperature of a
gas sample.
In a gas sample, individual molecules have widely varying speeds; however, because of thevastnumber of
molecules and collisions involved, the molecular speed distribution and average speed are constant. This
molecular speed distribution is known as a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, and it depicts the relative
numbers of molecules in a bulk sample of gas that possesses a given speed (Figure 9.32).
PAGE: 470
456 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.32 The molecular speed distribution for oxygen gas at 300 K is shown here. Very few molecules move at
either very low or very high speeds. The number of molecules with intermediate speeds increases rapidly up to a
maximum, which is the most probable speed, then drops off rapidly. Note that the most probable speed, ν , is a little
p
less than 400 m/s, while the root mean square speed,u , is closer to 500 m/s.
rms
The kinetic energy (KE) of a particle of mass (m) and speed (u) is given by:
Expressing mass in kilograms and speed in meters per second will yield energy values in units of joules (J = kg
m2s–2). To deal with a large number of gas molecules, we use averages for both speed and kinetic energy. In
the KMT, theroot mean square speedof a particle,u , is defined as the square root of the average of the
rms
squares of the speeds withn= the number of particles:
The average kinetic energy for a mole of particles, KE , is then equal to:
avg
whereMis the molar mass expressed in units of kg/mol. The KE of a mole of gas molecules is also directly
avg
proportional to the temperature of the gas and may be described by the equation:
whereRis the gas constant and T is the kelvin temperature. When used in this equation, the appropriate form
of the gas constant is 8.314 J/mol⋅K (8.314 kg m2s–2mol–1K–1). These two separate equations for KE may be
avg
combined and rearranged to yield a relation between molecular speed and temperature:
EXAMPLE 9.23
Calculation ofu
rms
Calculate the root-mean-square speed for a nitrogen molecule at 30 °C.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 471
9.5 • The Kinetic-Molecular Theory 457
Solution
Convert the temperature into Kelvin:
Determine the molar mass of nitrogen in kilograms:
Replace the variables and constants in the root-mean-square speed equation, replacing Joules with the
equivalent kg m2s–2:
Check Your Learning
Calculate the root-mean-square speed for a mole of oxygen molecules at –23 °C.
Answer:
441 m/s
If the temperature of a gas increases, its KE increases, more molecules have higher speeds and fewer
avg
molecules have lower speeds, and the distribution shifts toward higher speeds overall, that is, to the right. If
temperature decreases, KE decreases, more molecules have lower speeds and fewer molecules have higher
avg
speeds, and the distribution shifts toward lower speeds overall, that is, to the left. This behavior is illustrated
for nitrogen gas inFigure 9.33.
FIGURE9.33 The molecular speed distribution for nitrogen gas (N ) shifts to the right and flattens as the
2
temperature increases; it shifts to the left and heightens as the temperature decreases.
At a given temperature, all gases have the same KE for their molecules. Gases composed of lighter molecules
avg
have more high-speed particles and a higheru , with a speed distribution that peaks at relatively higher
rms
speeds. Gases consisting of heavier molecules have more low-speed particles, a loweru , and a speed
rms
distribution that peaks at relatively lower speeds. This trend is demonstrated by the data for a series of noble
gases shown inFigure 9.34.
PAGE: 472
458 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.34 molecular speed is directly related to molecular mass. At a given temperature, lighter molecules
move faster on average than heavier molecules.
LINK TO LEARNING
Thegas simulator(http://openstax.org/l/16MolecVelocity)may be used to examine the effect of temperature on
molecular speeds. Examine the simulator’s “energy histograms” (molecular speed distributions) and “species
information” (which gives average speed values) for molecules of different masses at various temperatures.
The Kinetic-Molecular Theory Explains the Behavior of Gases, Part II
According to Graham’s law, the molecules of a gas are in rapid motion and the molecules themselves are small.
The average distance between the molecules of a gas is large compared to the size of the molecules. As a
consequence, gas molecules can move past each other easily and diffuse at relatively fast rates.
The rate of effusion of a gas depends directly on the (average) speed of its molecules:
Using this relation, and the equation relating molecular speed to mass, Graham’s law may be easily derived as
shown here:
The ratio of the rates of effusion is thus derived to be inversely proportional to the ratio of the square roots of
their masses. This is the same relation observed experimentally and expressed as Graham’s law.
9.6 Non-Ideal Gas Behavior
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the physical factors that lead to deviations from ideal gas behavior
• Explain how these factors are represented in the van der Waals equation
• Define compressibility (Z) and describe how its variation with pressure reflects non-ideal behavior
• Quantify non-ideal behavior by comparing computations of gas properties using the ideal gas law and the van
der Waals equation
Thus far, the ideal gas law,PV = nRT, has been applied to a variety of different types of problems, ranging from
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 473
9.6 • Non-Ideal Gas Behavior 459
reaction stoichiometry and empirical and molecular formula problems to determining the density and molar
mass of a gas. As mentioned in the previous modules of this chapter, however, the behavior of a gas is often
non-ideal, meaning that the observed relationships between its pressure, volume, and temperature are not
accurately described by the gas laws. In this section, the reasons for these deviations from ideal gas behavior
are considered.
One way in which the accuracy ofPV = nRTcan be judged is by comparing the actual volume of 1 mole of gas
(its molar volume,V ) to the molar volume of an ideal gas at the same temperature and pressure. This ratio is
m
called thecompressibility factor (Z)with:
Ideal gas behavior is therefore indicated when this ratio is equal to 1, and any deviation from 1 is an indication
of non-ideal behavior.Figure 9.35shows plots of Z over a large pressure range for several common gases.
FIGURE9.35 A graph of the compressibility factor (Z) vs. pressure shows that gases can exhibit significant
deviations from the behavior predicted by the ideal gas law.
As is apparent fromFigure 9.35, the ideal gas law does not describe gas behavior well at relatively high
pressures. To determine why this is, consider the differences between real gas properties and what is expected
of a hypothetical ideal gas.
Particles of a hypothetical ideal gas have no significant volume and do not attract or repel each other. In
general, real gases approximate this behavior at relatively low pressures and high temperatures. However, at
high pressures, the molecules of a gas are crowded closer together, and the amount of empty space between
the molecules is reduced. At these higher pressures, the volume of the gas molecules themselves becomes
appreciable relative to the total volume occupied by the gas. The gas therefore becomes less compressible at
these high pressures, and although its volume continues to decrease with increasing pressure, this decrease is
notproportionalas predicted by Boyle’s law.
At relatively low pressures, gas molecules have practically no attraction for one another because they are (on
average) so far apart, and they behave almost like particles of an ideal gas. At higher pressures, however, the
force of attraction is also no longer insignificant. This force pulls the molecules a little closer together, slightly
decreasing the pressure (if the volume is constant) or decreasing the volume (at constant pressure) (Figure
9.36). This change is more pronounced at low temperatures because the molecules have lower KE relative to
the attractive forces, and so they are less effective in overcoming these attractions after colliding with one
another.
PAGE: 474
460 9 • Gases
FIGURE9.36 (a) Attractions between gas molecules serve to decrease the gas volume at constant pressure
compared to an ideal gas whose molecules experience no attractive forces. (b) These attractive forces will decrease
the force of collisions between the molecules and container walls, therefore reducing the pressure exerted at
constant volume compared to an ideal gas.
There are several different equations that better approximate gas behavior than does the ideal gas law. The
first, and simplest, of these was developed by the Dutch scientist Johannes van der Waals in 1879. Thevan der
Waals equationimproves upon the ideal gas law by adding two terms: one to account for the volume of the gas
molecules and another for the attractive forces between them.
The constantacorresponds to the strength of the attraction between molecules of a particular gas, and the
constantbcorresponds to the size of the molecules of a particular gas. The “correction” to the pressure term in
the ideal gas law is and the “correction” to the volume isnb. Note that whenVis relatively large andnis
relatively small, both of these correction terms become negligible, and the van der Waals equation reduces to
the ideal gas law,PV = nRT. Such a condition corresponds to a gas in which a relatively low number of
molecules is occupying a relatively large volume, that is, a gas at a relatively low pressure. Experimental values
for the van der Waals constants of some common gases are given inTable 9.3.
Values of van der Waals Constants for Some Common Gases
Gas a(L2atm/mol2) b(L/mol)
N 1.39 0.0391
2
O 1.36 0.0318
2
CO 3.59 0.0427
2
H O 5.46 0.0305
2
He 0.0342 0.0237
CCl 20.4 0.1383
4
TABLE9.3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 475
9.6 • Non-Ideal Gas Behavior 461
At low pressures, the correction for intermolecular attraction,a, is more important than the one for molecular
volume,b. At high pressures and small volumes, the correction for the volume of the molecules becomes
important because the molecules themselves are incompressible and constitute an appreciable fraction of the
total volume. At some intermediate pressure, the two corrections have opposing influences and the gas
appears to follow the relationship given byPV = nRTover a small range of pressures. This behavior is reflected
by the “dips” in several of the compressibility curves shown inFigure 9.35. The attractive force between
molecules initially makes the gas more compressible than an ideal gas, as pressure is raised (Z decreases with
increasingP). At very high pressures, the gas becomes less compressible (Z increases withP), as the gas
molecules begin to occupy an increasingly significant fraction of the total gas volume.
Strictly speaking, the ideal gas equation functions well when intermolecular attractions between gas
molecules are negligible and the gas molecules themselves do not occupy an appreciable part of the whole
volume. These criteria are satisfied under conditions oflow pressure and high temperature. Under such
conditions, the gas is said to behave ideally, and deviations from the gas laws are small enough that they may
be disregarded—this is, however, very often not the case.
EXAMPLE 9.24
Comparison of Ideal Gas Law and van der Waals Equation
A 4.25-L flask contains 3.46 mol CO at 229 °C. Calculate the pressure of this sample of CO :
2 2
(a) from the ideal gas law
(b) from the van der Waals equation
(c) Explain the reason(s) for the difference.
Solution
(a) From the ideal gas law:
(b) From the van der Waals equation:
This finally yieldsP= 32.4 atm.
(c) This is not very different from the value from the ideal gas law because the pressure is not very high and the
temperature is not very low. The value is somewhat different because CO molecules do have some volume and
2
attractions between molecules, and the ideal gas law assumes they do not have volume or attractions.
Check your Learning
A 560-mL flask contains 21.3 g N at 145 °C. Calculate the pressure of N :
2 2
(a) from the ideal gas law
(b) from the van der Waals equation
(c) Explain the reason(s) for the difference.
Answer:
(a) 46.562 atm; (b) 46.594 atm; (c) The van der Waals equation takes into account the volume of the gas
molecules themselves as well as intermolecular attractions.
PAGE: 476
462 9 • Key Terms
Key Terms
absolute zero temperature at which the volume of ideal gas constant (R) constant derived from the
a gas would be zero according to Charles’s law. ideal gas equationR= 0.08206 L atm mol–1K–1or
Amontons’s law (also, Gay-Lussac’s law) pressure 8.314 L kPa mol–1K–1
of a given number of moles of gas is directly ideal gas law relation between the pressure,
proportional to its kelvin temperature when the volume, amount, and temperature of a gas under
volume is held constant conditions derived by combination of the simple
atmosphere (atm) unit of pressure; 1 atm = gas laws
101,325 Pa kinetic molecular theory theory based on simple
Avogadro’s law volume of a gas at constant principles and assumptions that effectively
temperature and pressure is proportional to the explains ideal gas behavior
number of gas molecules manometer device used to measure the pressure
bar (bar or b) unit of pressure; 1 bar = 100,000 Pa of a gas trapped in a container
barometer device used to measure atmospheric mean free path average distance a molecule
pressure travels between collisions
Boyle’s law volume of a given number of moles of mole fraction (X) concentration unit defined as the
gas held at constant temperature is inversely ratio of the molar amount of a mixture
proportional to the pressure under which it is component to the total number of moles of all
measured mixture components
Charles’s law volume of a given number of moles partial pressure pressure exerted by an individual
of gas is directly proportional to its kelvin gas in a mixture
temperature when the pressure is held constant pascal (Pa) SI unit of pressure; 1 Pa = 1 N/m2
compressibility factor (Z) ratio of the pounds per square inch (psi) unit of pressure
experimentally measured molar volume for a gas common in the US
to its molar volume as computed from the ideal pressure force exerted per unit area
gas equation rate of diffusion amount of gas diffusing through a
Dalton’s law of partial pressures total pressure of given area over a given time
a mixture of ideal gases is equal to the sum of the root mean square speed (u ) measure of average
rms
partial pressures of the component gases speed for a group of particles calculated as the
diffusion movement of an atom or molecule from a square root of the average squared speed
region of relatively high concentration to one of standard conditions of temperature and pressure
relatively low concentration (discussed in this (STP) 273.15 K (0 °C) and 1 atm (101.325 kPa)
chapter with regard to gaseous species, but standard molar volume volume of 1 mole of gas at
applicable to species in any phase) STP, approximately 22.4 L for gases behaving
effusion transfer of gaseous atoms or molecules ideally
from a container to a vacuum through very small torr unit of pressure;
openings
van der Waals equation modified version of the
Graham’s law of effusion rates of diffusion and
ideal gas equation containing additional terms to
effusion of gases are inversely proportional to the
account for non-ideal gas behavior
square roots of their molecular masses
vapor pressure of water pressure exerted by
hydrostatic pressure pressure exerted by a fluid
water vapor in equilibrium with liquid water in a
due to gravity
closed container at a specific temperature
ideal gas hypothetical gas whose physical
properties are perfectly described by the gas laws
Key Equations
p=hρg
PV=nRT
P =P +P +P + … = ƩP
Total A B C i i
P =X P
A A Total
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 477
9 • Summary 463
ℳ
ℳ
Summary
9.1Gas Pressure quantities to properties of interest for gaseous
substances and mixtures. Appropriate
Gases exert pressure, which is force per unit area.
rearrangement of the ideal gas equation may be
The pressure of a gas may be expressed in the SI
made to permit the calculation of gas densities and
unit of pascal or kilopascal, as well as in many other
molar masses. Dalton’s law of partial pressures may
units including torr, atmosphere, and bar.
be used to relate measured gas pressures for
Atmospheric pressure is measured using a
gaseous mixtures to their compositions. Avogadro’s
barometer; other gas pressures can be measured
law may be used in stoichiometric computations for
using one of several types of manometers.
chemical reactions involving gaseous reactants or
9.2Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and products.
Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law
9.4Effusion and Diffusion of Gases
The behavior of gases can be described by several
Gaseous atoms and molecules move freely and
laws based on experimental observations of their
randomly through space. Diffusion is the process
properties. The pressure of a given amount of gas is
whereby gaseous atoms and molecules are
directly proportional to its absolute temperature,
transferred from regions of relatively high
provided that the volume does not change
concentration to regions of relatively low
(Amontons’s law). The volume of a given gas sample
concentration. Effusion is a similar process in which
is directly proportional to its absolute temperature
gaseous species pass from a container to a vacuum
at constant pressure (Charles’s law). The volume of a
through very small orifices. The rates of effusion of
given amount of gas is inversely proportional to its
gases are inversely proportional to the square roots
pressure when temperature is held constant (Boyle’s
of their densities or to the square roots of their
law). Under the same conditions of temperature and
atoms/molecules’ masses (Graham’s law).
pressure, equal volumes of all gases contain the
same number of molecules (Avogadro’s law). 9.5The Kinetic-Molecular Theory
The equations describing these laws are special The kinetic molecular theory is a simple but very
cases of the ideal gas law,PV=nRT, wherePis the effective model that effectively explains ideal gas
pressure of the gas,Vis its volume,nis the number behavior. The theory assumes that gases consist of
of moles of the gas,Tis its kelvin temperature, andR widely separated molecules of negligible volume
is the ideal (universal) gas constant. that are in constant motion, colliding elastically with
one another and the walls of their container with
9.3Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances,
average speeds determined by their absolute
Mixtures, and Reactions
temperatures. The individual molecules of a gas
The ideal gas law can be used to derive a number of exhibit a range of speeds, the distribution of these
convenient equations relating directly measured speeds being dependent on the temperature of the
PAGE: 478
464 9 • Exercises
gas and the mass of its molecules. description of gas behavior, and the gas is said to
exhibit ideal behavior. However, at lower
9.6Non-Ideal Gas Behavior
temperatures and higher pressures, corrections for
Gas molecules possess a finite volume and molecular volume and molecular attractions are
experience forces of attraction for one another. required to account for finite molecular size and
Consequently, gas behavior is not necessarily attractive forces. The van der Waals equation is a
described well by the ideal gas law. Under conditions modified version of the ideal gas law that can be
of low pressure and high temperature, these factors used to account for the non-ideal behavior of gases
are negligible, the ideal gas equation is an accurate under these conditions.
Exercises
9.1Gas Pressure
1. Why are sharp knives more effective than dull knives? (Hint: Think about the definition of pressure.)
2. Why do some small bridges have weight limits that depend on how many wheels or axles the crossing
vehicle has?
3. Why should you roll or belly-crawl rather than walk across a thinly-frozen pond?
4. A typical barometric pressure in Redding, California, is about 750 mm Hg. Calculate this pressure in atm
and kPa.
5. A typical barometric pressure in Denver, Colorado, is 615 mm Hg. What is this pressure in atmospheres
and kilopascals?
6. A typical barometric pressure in Kansas City is 740 torr. What is this pressure in atmospheres, in
millimeters of mercury, and in kilopascals?
7. Canadian tire pressure gauges are marked in units of kilopascals. What reading on such a gauge
corresponds to 32 psi?
8. During the Viking landings on Mars, the atmospheric pressure was determined to be on the average about
6.50 millibars (1 bar = 0.987 atm). What is that pressure in torr and kPa?
9. The pressure of the atmosphere on the surface of the planet Venus is about 88.8 atm. Compare that
pressure in psi to the normal pressure on earth at sea level in psi.
10. A medical laboratory catalog describes the pressure in a cylinder of a gas as 14.82 MPa. What is the
pressure of this gas in atmospheres and torr?
11. Consider this scenario and answer the following questions: On a mid-August day in the northeastern
United States, the following information appeared in the local newspaper: atmospheric pressure at sea
level 29.97 in. Hg, 1013.9 mbar.
(a) What was the pressure in kPa?
(b) The pressure near the seacoast in the northeastern United States is usually reported near 30.0 in. Hg.
During a hurricane, the pressure may fall to near 28.0 in. Hg. Calculate the drop in pressure in torr.
12. Why is it necessary to use a nonvolatile liquid in a barometer or manometer?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 479
9 • Exercises 465
13. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with a closed-end manometer. The liquid in the
manometer is mercury. Determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) torr
(b) Pa
(c) bar
14. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured with an open-end manometer, partially shown to the right.
The liquid in the manometer is mercury. Assuming atmospheric pressure is 29.92 in. Hg, determine the
pressure of the gas in:
(a) torr
(b) Pa
(c) bar
15. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end mercury manometer. Assuming
atmospheric pressure is 760.0 mm Hg, determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) mm Hg
(b) atm
(c) kPa
PAGE: 480
466 9 • Exercises
16. The pressure of a sample of gas is measured at sea level with an open-end mercury manometer. Assuming
atmospheric pressure is 760 mm Hg, determine the pressure of the gas in:
(a) mm Hg
(b) atm
(c) kPa
17. How would the use of a volatile liquid affect the measurement of a gas using open-ended manometers vs.
closed-end manometers?
9.2Relating Pressure, Volume, Amount, and Temperature: The Ideal Gas Law
18. Sometimes leaving a bicycle in the sun on a hot day will cause a blowout. Why?
19. Explain how the volume of the bubbles exhausted by a scuba diver (Figure 9.16) change as they rise to the
surface, assuming that they remain intact.
20. One way to state Boyle’s law is “All other things being equal, the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional
to its volume.” (a) What is the meaning of the term “inversely proportional?” (b) What are the “other
things” that must be equal?
21. An alternate way to state Avogadro’s law is “All other things being equal, the number of molecules in a gas
is directly proportional to the volume of the gas.” (a) What is the meaning of the term “directly
proportional?” (b) What are the “other things” that must be equal?
22. How would the graph inFigure 9.12change if the number of moles of gas in the sample used to determine
the curve were doubled?
23. How would the graph inFigure 9.13change if the number of moles of gas in the sample used to determine
the curve were doubled?
24. In addition to the data found inFigure 9.13, what other information do we need to find the mass of the
sample of air used to determine the graph?
25. Determine the volume of 1 mol of CH gas at 150 K and 1 atm, usingFigure 9.12.
4
26. Determine the pressure of the gas in the syringe shown inFigure 9.13when its volume is 12.5 mL, using:
(a) the appropriate graph
(b) Boyle’s law
27. A spray can is used until it is empty except for the propellant gas, which has a pressure of 1344 torr at 23
°C. If the can is thrown into a fire (T = 475 °C), what will be the pressure in the hot can?
28. What is the temperature of an 11.2-L sample of carbon monoxide, CO, at 744 torr if it occupies 13.3 L at 55
°C and 744 torr?
29. A 2.50-L volume of hydrogen measured at –196 °C is warmed to 100 °C. Calculate the volume of the gas at
the higher temperature, assuming no change in pressure.
30. A balloon inflated with three breaths of air has a volume of 1.7 L. At the same temperature and pressure,
what is the volume of the balloon if five more same-sized breaths are added to the balloon?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 481
9 • Exercises 467
31. A weather balloon contains 8.80 moles of helium at a pressure of 0.992 atm and a temperature of 25 °C at
ground level. What is the volume of the balloon under these conditions?
32. The volume of an automobile air bag was 66.8 L when inflated at 25 °C with 77.8 g of nitrogen gas. What
was the pressure in the bag in kPa?
33. How many moles of gaseous boron trifluoride, BF , are contained in a 4.3410-L bulb at 788.0 K if the
3
pressure is 1.220 atm? How many grams of BF ?
3
34. Iodine, I , is a solid at room temperature but sublimes (converts from a solid into a gas) when warmed.
2
What is the temperature in a 73.3-mL bulb that contains 0.292 g of I vapor at a pressure of 0.462 atm?
2
35. How many grams of gas are present in each of the following cases?
(a) 0.100 L of CO at 307 torr and 26 °C
2
(b) 8.75 L of C H , at 378.3 kPa and 483 K
2 4
(c) 221 mL of Ar at 0.23 torr and –54 °C
36. A high altitude balloon is filled with 1.41 104L of hydrogen at a temperature of 21 °C and a pressure of
745 torr. What is the volume of the balloon at a height of 20 km, where the temperature is –48 °C and the
pressure is 63.1 torr?
37. A cylinder of medical oxygen has a volume of 35.4 L, and contains O at a pressure of 151 atm and a
2
temperature of 25 °C. What volume of O does this correspond to at normal body conditions, that is, 1 atm
2
and 37 °C?
38. A large scuba tank (Figure 9.16) with a volume of 18 L is rated for a pressure of 220 bar. The tank is filled
at 20 °C and contains enough air to supply 1860 L of air to a diver at a pressure of 2.37 atm (a depth of 45
feet). Was the tank filled to capacity at 20 °C?
39. A 20.0-L cylinder containing 11.34 kg of butane, C H , was opened to the atmosphere. Calculate the mass
4 10
of the gas remaining in the cylinder if it were opened and the gas escaped until the pressure in the
cylinder was equal to the atmospheric pressure, 0.983 atm, and a temperature of 27 °C.
40. While resting, the average 70-kg human male consumes 14 L of pure O per hour at 25 °C and 100 kPa.
2
How many moles of O are consumed by a 70 kg man while resting for 1.0 h?
2
41. For a given amount of gas showing ideal behavior, draw labeled graphs of:
(a) the variation ofPwithV
(b) the variation ofVwithT
(c) the variation ofPwithT
(d) the variation of withV
42. A liter of methane gas, CH , at STP contains more atoms of hydrogen than does a liter of pure hydrogen
4
gas, H , at STP. Using Avogadro’s law as a starting point, explain why.
2
43. The effect of chlorofluorocarbons (such as CCl F ) on the depletion of the ozone layer is well known. The
2 2
use of substitutes, such as CH CH F(g), for the chlorofluorocarbons, has largely corrected the problem.
3 2
Calculate the volume occupied by 10.0 g of each of these compounds at STP:
(a) CCl F (g)
2 2
(b) CH CH F(g)
3 2
44. As 1 g of the radioactive element radium decays over 1 year, it produces 1.16 1018alpha particles
(helium nuclei). Each alpha particle becomes an atom of helium gas. What is the pressure in pascal of the
helium gas produced if it occupies a volume of 125 mL at a temperature of 25 °C?
45. A balloon with a volume of 100.21 L at 21 °C and 0.981 atm is released and just barely clears the top of
Mount Crumpit in British Columbia. If the final volume of the balloon is 144.53 L at a temperature of 5.24
°C, what is the pressure experienced by the balloon as it clears Mount Crumpet?
46. If the temperature of a fixed amount of a gas is doubled at constant volume, what happens to the pressure?
47. If the volume of a fixed amount of a gas is tripled at constant temperature, what happens to the pressure?
PAGE: 482
468 9 • Exercises
9.3Stoichiometry of Gaseous Substances, Mixtures, and Reactions
48. What is the density of laughing gas, dinitrogen monoxide, N O, at a temperature of 325 K and a pressure of
2
113.0 kPa?
49. Calculate the density of Freon 12, CF Cl , at 30.0 °C and 0.954 atm.
2 2
50. Which is denser at the same temperature and pressure, dry air or air saturated with water vapor? Explain.
51. A cylinder of O (g) used in breathing by patients with emphysema has a volume of 3.00 L at a pressure of
2
10.0 atm. If the temperature of the cylinder is 28.0 °C, what mass of oxygen is in the cylinder?
52. What is the molar mass of a gas if 0.0494 g of the gas occupies a volume of 0.100 L at a temperature 26 °C
and a pressure of 307 torr?
53. What is the molar mass of a gas if 0.281 g of the gas occupies a volume of 125 mL at a temperature 126 °C
and a pressure of 777 torr?
54. How could you show experimentally that the molecular formula of propene is C H , not CH ?
3 6 2
55. The density of a certain gaseous fluoride of phosphorus is 3.93 g/L at STP. Calculate the molar mass of this
fluoride and determine its molecular formula.
56. Consider this question: What is the molecular formula of a compound that contains 39% C, 45% N, and
16% H if 0.157 g of the compound occupies l25 mL with a pressure of 99.5 kPa at 22 °C?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
57. A 36.0–L cylinder of a gas used for calibration of blood gas analyzers in medical laboratories contains 350
g CO , 805 g O , and 4,880 g N . At 25 degrees C, what is the pressure in the cylinder in atmospheres?
2 2 2
58. A cylinder of a gas mixture used for calibration of blood gas analyzers in medical laboratories contains
5.0% CO , 12.0% O , and the remainder N at a total pressure of 146 atm. What is the partial pressure of
2 2 2
each component of this gas? (The percentages given indicate the percent of the total pressure that is due
to each component.)
59. A sample of gas isolated from unrefined petroleum contains 90.0% CH , 8.9% C H , and 1.1% C H at a
4 2 6 3 8
total pressure of 307.2 kPa. What is the partial pressure of each component of this gas? (The percentages
given indicate the percent of the total pressure that is due to each component.)
60. A mixture of 0.200 g of H , 1.00 g of N , and 0.820 g of Ar is stored in a closed container at STP. Find the
2 2
volume of the container, assuming that the gases exhibit ideal behavior.
61. Most mixtures of hydrogen gas with oxygen gas are explosive. However, a mixture that contains less than
3.0 % O is not. If enough O is added to a cylinder of H at 33.2 atm to bring the total pressure to 34.5 atm,
2 2 2
is the mixture explosive?
62. A commercial mercury vapor analyzer can detect, in air, concentrations of gaseous Hg atoms (which are
poisonous) as low as 2 10−6mg/L of air. At this concentration, what is the partial pressure of gaseous
mercury if the atmospheric pressure is 733 torr at 26 °C?
63. A sample of carbon monoxide was collected over water at a total pressure of 756 torr and a temperature of
18 °C. What is the pressure of the carbon monoxide? (SeeTable 9.2for the vapor pressure of water.)
64. In an experiment in a general chemistry laboratory, a student collected a sample of a gas over water. The
volume of the gas was 265 mL at a pressure of 753 torr and a temperature of 27 °C. The mass of the gas
was 0.472 g. What was the molar mass of the gas?
65. Joseph Priestley first prepared pure oxygen by heating mercuric oxide, HgO:
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of O at 23 °C and 0.975
2
atm is produced by the decomposition of 5.36 g of HgO?
(b) Answer the question.
66. Cavendish prepared hydrogen in 1766 by the novel method of passing steam through a red-hot gun
barrel:
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of H at a pressure of 745
2
torr and a temperature of 20 °C can be prepared from the reaction of 15.O g of H O?
2
(b) Answer the question.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 483
9 • Exercises 469
67. The chlorofluorocarbon CCl F can be recycled into a different compound by reaction with hydrogen to
2 2
produce CH F (g), a compound useful in chemical manufacturing:
2 2
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of hydrogen at 225 atm and
35.5 °C would be required to react with 1 ton (1.000 103kg) of CCl F ?
2 2
(b) Answer the question.
68. Automobile air bags are inflated with nitrogen gas, which is formed by the decomposition of solid sodium
azide (NaN ). The other product is sodium metal. Calculate the volume of nitrogen gas at 27 °C and 756
3
torr formed by the decomposition of 125 g of sodium azide.
69. Lime, CaO, is produced by heating calcium carbonate, CaCO ; carbon dioxide is the other product.
3
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of carbon dioxide at 875 K
and 0.966 atm is produced by the decomposition of 1 ton (1.000 103kg) of calcium carbonate?
(b) Answer the question.
70. Before small batteries were available, carbide lamps were used for bicycle lights. Acetylene gas, C H , and
2 2
solid calcium hydroxide were formed by the reaction of calcium carbide, CaC , with water. The ignition of
2
the acetylene gas provided the light. Currently, the same lamps are used by some cavers, and calcium
carbide is used to produce acetylene for carbide cannons.
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question: What volume of C H at 1.005 atm and
2 2
12.2 °C is formed by the reaction of 15.48 g of CaC with water?
2
(b) Answer the question.
71. Calculate the volume of oxygen required to burn 12.00 L of ethane gas, C H , to produce carbon dioxide
2 6
and water, if the volumes of C H and O are measured under the same conditions of temperature and
2 6 2
pressure.
72. What volume of O at STP is required to oxidize 8.0 L of NO at STP to NO ? What volume of NO is
2 2 2
produced at STP?
73. Consider the following questions:
(a) What is the total volume of the CO (g) and H O(g) at 600 °C and 0.888 atm produced by the combustion
2 2
of 1.00 L of C H (g) measured at STP?
2 6
(b) What is the partial pressure of H O in the product gases?
2
74. Methanol, CH OH, is produced industrially by the following reaction:
3
Assuming that the gases behave as ideal gases, find the ratio of the total volume of the reactants to the
final volume.
75. What volume of oxygen at 423.0 K and a pressure of 127.4 kPa is produced by the decomposition of 129.7
g of BaO to BaO and O ?
2 2
76. A 2.50-L sample of a colorless gas at STP decomposed to give 2.50 L of N and 1.25 L of O at STP. What is
2 2
the colorless gas?
77. Ethanol, C H OH, is produced industrially from ethylene, C H , by the following sequence of reactions:
2 5 2 4
What volume of ethylene at STP is required to produce 1.000 metric ton (1000 kg) of ethanol if the overall
yield of ethanol is 90.1%?
78. One molecule of hemoglobin will combine with four molecules of oxygen. If 1.0 g of hemoglobin combines
with 1.53 mL of oxygen at body temperature (37 °C) and a pressure of 743 torr, what is the molar mass of
hemoglobin?
79. A sample of a compound of xenon and fluorine was confined in a bulb with a pressure of 18 torr. Hydrogen
was added to the bulb until the pressure was 72 torr. Passage of an electric spark through the mixture
produced Xe and HF. After the HF was removed by reaction with solid KOH, the final pressure of xenon
and unreacted hydrogen in the bulb was 36 torr. What is the empirical formula of the xenon fluoride in the
original sample? (Note: Xenon fluorides contain only one xenon atom per molecule.)
PAGE: 484
470 9 • Exercises
80. One method of analyzing amino acids is the van Slyke method. The characteristic amino groups (−NH ) in
2
protein material are allowed to react with nitrous acid, HNO , to form N gas. From the volume of the gas,
2 2
the amount of amino acid can be determined. A 0.0604-g sample of a biological sample containing
glycine, CH (NH )COOH, was analyzed by the van Slyke method and yielded 3.70 mL of N collected over
2 2 2
water at a pressure of 735 torr and 29 °C. What was the percentage of glycine in the sample?
9.4Effusion and Diffusion of Gases
81. A balloon filled with helium gas takes 6 hours to deflate to 50% of its original volume. How long will it take
for an identical balloon filled with the same volume of hydrogen gas (instead of helium) to decrease its
volume by 50%?
82. Explain why the numbers of molecules are not identical in the left- and right-hand bulbs shown in the
center illustration ofFigure 9.27.
83. Starting with the definition of rate of effusion and Graham’s finding relating rate and molar mass, show
how to derive the Graham’s law equation, relating the relative rates of effusion for two gases to their
molecular masses.
84. Heavy water, D O (molar mass = 20.03 g mol–1), can be separated from ordinary water, H O (molar mass =
2 2
18.01), as a result of the difference in the relative rates of diffusion of the molecules in the gas phase.
Calculate the relative rates of diffusion of H O and D O.
2 2
85. Which of the following gases diffuse more slowly than oxygen? F , Ne, N O, C H , NO, Cl , H S
2 2 2 2 2 2
86. During the discussion of gaseous diffusion for enriching uranium, it was claimed that235UF diffuses
6
0.4% faster than238UF . Show the calculation that supports this value. The molar mass of235UF =
6 6
235.043930 + 6 18.998403 = 349.034348 g/mol, and the molar mass of238UF = 238.050788 + 6
6
18.998403 = 352.041206 g/mol.
87. Calculate the relative rate of diffusion of1H (molar mass 2.0 g/mol) compared with2H (molar mass 4.0
2 2
g/mol) and the relative rate of diffusion of O (molar mass 32 g/mol) compared with O (molar mass 48 g/
2 3
mol).
88. A gas of unknown identity diffuses at a rate of 83.3 mL/s in a diffusion apparatus in which carbon dioxide
diffuses at the rate of 102 mL/s. Calculate the molecular mass of the unknown gas.
89. When two cotton plugs, one moistened with ammonia and the other with hydrochloric acid, are
simultaneously inserted into opposite ends of a glass tube that is 87.0 cm long, a white ring of NH Cl
4
forms where gaseous NH and gaseous HCl first come into contact. At
3
approximately what distance from the ammonia moistened plug does this occur? (Hint: Calculate the rates
of diffusion for both NH and HCl, and find out how much faster NH diffuses than HCl.)
3 3
9.5The Kinetic-Molecular Theory
90. Using the postulates of the kinetic molecular theory, explain why a gas uniformly fills a container of any
shape.
91. Can the speed of a given molecule in a gas double at constant temperature? Explain your answer.
92. Describe what happens to the average kinetic energy of ideal gas molecules when the conditions are
changed as follows:
(a) The pressure of the gas is increased by reducing the volume at constant temperature.
(b) The pressure of the gas is increased by increasing the temperature at constant volume.
(c) The average speed of the molecules is increased by a factor of 2.
93. The distribution of molecular speeds in a sample of helium is shown inFigure 9.34. If the sample is
cooled, will the distribution of speeds look more like that of H or of H O? Explain your answer.
2 2
94. What is the ratio of the average kinetic energy of a SO molecule to that of an O molecule in a mixture of
2 2
two gases? What is the ratio of the root mean square speeds,u , of the two gases?
rms
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 485
9 • Exercises 471
95. A 1-L sample of CO initially at STP is heated to 546 K, and its volume is increased to 2 L.
(a) What effect do these changes have on the number of collisions of the molecules of the gas per unit area
of the container wall?
(b) What is the effect on the average kinetic energy of the molecules?
(c) What is the effect on the root mean square speed of the molecules?
96. The root mean square speed of H molecules at 25 °C is about 1.6 km/s. What is the root mean square
2
speed of a N molecule at 25 °C?
2
97. Answer the following questions:
(a) Is the pressure of the gas in the hot-air balloon shown at the opening of this chapter greater than, less
than, or equal to that of the atmosphere outside the balloon?
(b) Is the density of the gas in the hot-air balloon shown at the opening of this chapter greater than, less
than, or equal to that of the atmosphere outside the balloon?
(c) At a pressure of 1 atm and a temperature of 20 °C, dry air has a density of 1.2256 g/L. What is the
(average) molar mass of dry air?
(d) The average temperature of the gas in a hot-air balloon is 1.30 102°F. Calculate its density, assuming
the molar mass equals that of dry air.
(e) The lifting capacity of a hot-air balloon is equal to the difference in the mass of the cool air displaced by
the balloon and the mass of the gas in the balloon. What is the difference in the mass of 1.00 L of the cool
air in part (c) and the hot air in part (d)?
(f) An average balloon has a diameter of 60 feet and a volume of 1.1 105ft3. What is the lifting power of
such a balloon? If the weight of the balloon and its rigging is 500 pounds, what is its capacity for carrying
passengers and cargo?
(g) A balloon carries 40.0 gallons of liquid propane (density 0.5005 g/L). What volume of CO and H O gas
2 2
is produced by the combustion of this propane?
(h) A balloon flight can last about 90 minutes. If all of the fuel is burned during this time, what is the
approximate rate of heat loss (in kJ/min) from the hot air in the bag during the flight?
98. Show that the ratio of the rate of diffusion of Gas 1 to the rate of diffusion of Gas 2, is the same at 0 °C
and 100 °C.
PAGE: 486
472 9 • Exercises
9.6Non-Ideal Gas Behavior
99. Graphs showing the behavior of several different gases follow. Which of these gases exhibit behavior
significantly different from that expected for ideal gases?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 487
9 • Exercises 473
100. Explain why the plot ofPVfor CO differs from that of an ideal gas.
2
101. Under which of the following sets of conditions does a real gas behave most like an ideal gas, and for
which conditions is a real gas expected to deviate from ideal behavior? Explain.
(a) high pressure, small volume
(b) high temperature, low pressure
(c) low temperature, high pressure
102. Describe the factors responsible for the deviation of the behavior of real gases from that of an
ideal gas.
103. For which of the following gases should the correction for the molecular volume be largest:
CO, CO , H , He, NH , SF ?
2 2 3 6
104. A 0.245-L flask contains 0.467 mol CO at 159 °C. Calculate the pressure:
2
(a) using the ideal gas law
(b) using the van der Waals equation
(c) Explain the reason for the difference.
(d) Identify which correction (that for P or V) is dominant and why.
105. Answer the following questions:
(a) If XX behaved as an ideal gas, what would its graph of Z vs. P look like?
(b) For most of this chapter, we performed calculations treating gases as ideal. Was this justified?
(c) What is the effect of the volume of gas molecules on Z? Under what conditions is this effect small?
When is it large? Explain using an appropriate diagram.
(d) What is the effect of intermolecular attractions on the value of Z? Under what conditions is this effect
small? When is it large? Explain using an appropriate diagram.
(e) In general, under what temperature conditions would you expect Z to have the largest deviations from
the Z for an ideal gas?
PAGE: 488
474 9 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 489
CHAPTER 10
Liquids and Solids
Figure10.1 Solid carbon dioxide (“dry ice”, left) sublimes vigorously when placed in a liquid (right), cooling the
liquid and generating a dense mist of water above the cylinder. (credit: modification of work by Paul Flowers)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1Intermolecular Forces
10.2Properties of Liquids
10.3Phase Transitions
10.4Phase Diagrams
10.5The Solid State of Matter
10.6Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids
INTRODUCTION Leprosy has been a devastating disease throughout much of human history. Aside from the
symptoms and complications of the illness, its social stigma led sufferers to be cast out of communities and
isolated in colonies; in some regions this practice lasted well into the twentieth century. At that time, the best
potential treatment for leprosy was oil from the chaulmoogra tree, but the oil was extremely thick, causing
blisters and making usage painful and ineffective. Healthcare professionals seeking a better application
contacted Alice Ball, a young chemist at the University of Hawaii, who had focused her masters thesis on a
similar plant. Ball initiated a sequence of procedures (repeated acidification and purification to change the
characteristics of the oil and isolate the active substances (esters, discussed later in this text). The "Ball
Method" as it later came to be called, became the standard treatment for leprosy for decades. In the liquid and
solid states, atomic and molecular interactions are of considerable strength and play an important role in
determining a number of physical properties of the substance. For example, the thickness, or viscosity, of the
chaulmoogra oil was due to its intermolecular forces. In this chapter, the nature of these interactions and their
effects on various physical properties of liquid and solid phases will be examined.
PAGE: 490
476 10 • Liquids and Solids
10.1 Intermolecular Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the types of intermolecular forces possible between atoms or molecules in condensed phases
(dispersion forces, dipole-dipole attractions, and hydrogen bonding)
• Identify the types of intermolecular forces experienced by specific molecules based on their structures
• Explain the relation between the intermolecular forces present within a substance and the temperatures
associated with changes in its physical state
As was the case for gaseous substances, the kinetic molecular theory may be used to explain the behavior of
solids and liquids. In the following description, the termparticlewill be used to refer to an atom, molecule, or
ion. Note that we will use the popular phrase “intermolecular attraction” to refer to attractive forces between
the particles of a substance, regardless of whether these particles are molecules, atoms, or ions.
Consider these two aspects of the molecular-level environments in solid, liquid, and gaseous matter:
• Particles in a solid are tightly packed together and often arranged in a regular pattern; in a liquid, they are
close together with no regular arrangement; in a gas, they are far apart with no regular arrangement.
• Particles in a solid vibrate about fixed positions and do not generally move in relation to one another; in a
liquid, they move past each other but remain in essentially constant contact; in a gas, they move
independently of one another except when they collide.
The differences in the properties of a solid, liquid, or gas reflect the strengths of the attractive forces between
the atoms, molecules, or ions that make up each phase. The phase in which a substance exists depends on the
relative extents of itsintermolecular forces(IMFs) and the kinetic energies (KE) of its molecules. IMFs are the
various forces of attraction that may exist between the atoms and molecules of a substance due to electrostatic
phenomena, as will be detailed in this module. These forces serve to hold particles close together, whereas the
particles’ KE provides the energy required to overcome the attractive forces and thus increase the distance
between particles.Figure 10.2illustrates how changes in physical state may be induced by changing the
temperature, hence, the average KE, of a given substance.
FIGURE10.2 Transitions between solid, liquid, and gaseous states of a substance occur when conditions of
temperature or pressure favor the associated changes in intermolecular forces. (Note: The space between particles
in the gas phase is much greater than shown.)
As an example of the processes depicted in this figure, consider a sample of water. When gaseous water is
cooled sufficiently, the attractions between H O molecules will be capable of holding them together when they
2
come into contact with each other; the gas condenses, forming liquid H O. For example, liquid water forms on
2
the outside of a cold glass as the water vapor in the air is cooled by the cold glass, as seen inFigure 10.3.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 491
10.1 • Intermolecular Forces 477
FIGURE10.3 Condensation forms when water vapor in the air is cooled enough to form liquid water, such as (a) on
the outside of a cold beverage glass or (b) in the form of fog. (credit a: modification of work by Jenny Downing; credit
b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
We can also liquefy many gases by compressing them, if the temperature is not too high. The increased
pressure brings the molecules of a gas closer together, such that the attractions between the molecules become
strong relative to their KE. Consequently, they form liquids. Butane, C H , is the fuel used in disposable
4 10
lighters and is a gas at standard temperature and pressure. Inside the lighter’s fuel compartment, the butane is
compressed to a pressure that results in its condensation to the liquid state, as shown inFigure 10.4.
FIGURE10.4 Gaseous butane is compressed within the storage compartment of a disposable lighter, resulting in
its condensation to the liquid state. (credit: modification of work by “Sam-Cat”/Flickr)
Finally, if the temperature of a liquid becomes sufficiently low, or the pressure on the liquid becomes
sufficiently high, the molecules of the liquid no longer have enough KE to overcome the IMF between them,
and a solid forms. A more thorough discussion of these and other changes of state, or phase transitions, is
provided in a later module of this chapter.
LINK TO LEARNING
Access thisinteractive simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetvisual)on states of matter, phase transitions,
and intermolecular forces. This simulation is useful for visualizing concepts introduced throughout this
chapter.
PAGE: 492
478 10 • Liquids and Solids
Forces between Molecules
Under appropriate conditions, the attractions between all gas molecules will cause them to form liquids or
solids. This is due to intermolecular forces, notintramolecular forces.Intramolecular forces are thosewithin
the molecule that keep the molecule together, for example, the bonds between the atoms.Intermolecular
forces are the attractionsbetweenmolecules, which determine many of the physical properties of a substance.
Figure 10.5illustrates these different molecular forces. The strengths of these attractive forces vary widely,
though usually the IMFs between small molecules are weak compared to the intramolecular forces that bond
atoms together within a molecule. For example, to overcome the IMFs in one mole of liquid HCl and convert it
into gaseous HCl requires only about 17 kilojoules. However, to break the covalent bonds between the
hydrogen and chlorine atoms in one mole of HCl requires about 25 times more energy—430 kilojoules.
FIGURE10.5 Intramolecular forces keep a molecule intact.Intermolecular forces hold multiple molecules
together and determine many of a substance’s properties.
All of the attractive forces between neutral atoms and molecules are known asvan der Waals forces, although
they are usually referred to more informally as intermolecular attraction. We will consider the various types of
IMFs in the next three sections of this module.
Dispersion Forces
One of the three van der Waals forces is present in all condensed phases, regardless of the nature of the atoms
or molecules composing the substance. This attractive force is called theLondon dispersion forcein honor of
German-born American physicist FritzLondonwho, in 1928, first explained it. This force is often referred to as
simply thedispersion force. Because the electrons of an atom or molecule are in constant motion (or,
alternatively, the electron’s location is subject to quantum-mechanical variability), at any moment in time, an
atom or molecule can develop a temporary,instantaneous dipoleif its electrons are distributed
asymmetrically. The presence of this dipole can, in turn, distort the electrons of a neighboring atom or
molecule, producing aninduced dipole. These two rapidly fluctuating, temporary dipoles thus result in a
relatively weak electrostatic attraction between the species—a so-called dispersion force like that illustrated in
Figure 10.6.
FIGURE10.6 Dispersion forces result from the formation of temporary dipoles, as illustrated here for two nonpolar
diatomic molecules.
Dispersion forces that develop between atoms in different molecules can attract the two molecules to each
other. The forces are relatively weak, however, and become significant only when the molecules are very close.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 493
10.1 • Intermolecular Forces 479
Larger and heavier atoms and molecules exhibit stronger dispersion forces than do smaller and lighter atoms
and molecules. F and Cl are gases at room temperature (reflecting weaker attractive forces); Br is a liquid,
2 2 2
and I is a solid (reflecting stronger attractive forces). Trends in observed melting and boiling points for the
2
halogens clearly demonstrate this effect, as seen inTable 10.1.
Melting and Boiling Points of the Halogens
Halogen Molar Mass Atomic Radius Melting Point Boiling Point
fluorine, F 38 g/mol 72 pm 53 K 85 K
2
chlorine, Cl 71 g/mol 99 pm 172 K 238 K
2
bromine, Br 160 g/mol 114 pm 266 K 332 K
2
iodine, I 254 g/mol 133 pm 387 K 457 K
2
astatine, At 420 g/mol 150 pm 575 K 610 K
2
TABLE10.1
The increase in melting and boiling points with increasing atomic/molecular size may be rationalized by
considering how the strength of dispersion forces is affected by the electronic structure of the atoms or
molecules in the substance. In a larger atom, the valence electrons are, on average, farther from the nuclei
than in a smaller atom. Thus, they are less tightly held and can more easily form the temporary dipoles that
produce the attraction. The measure of how easy or difficult it is for another electrostatic charge (for example,
a nearby ion or polar molecule) to distort a molecule’s charge distribution (its electron cloud) is known as
polarizability. A molecule that has a charge cloud that is easily distorted is said to be very polarizable and will
have large dispersion forces; one with a charge cloud that is difficult to distort is not very polarizable and will
have small dispersion forces.
EXAMPLE 10.1
London Forces and Their Effects
Order the following compounds of a group 14 element and hydrogen from lowest to highest boiling point: CH ,
4
SiH , GeH , and SnH . Explain your reasoning.
4 4 4
Solution
Applying the skills acquired in the chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry, all of these
compounds are predicted to be nonpolar, so they may experience only dispersion forces: the smaller the
molecule, the less polarizable and the weaker the dispersion forces; the larger the molecule, the larger the
dispersion forces. The molar masses of CH , SiH , GeH , and SnH are approximately 16 g/mol, 32 g/mol, 77 g/
4 4 4 4
mol, and 123 g/mol, respectively. Therefore, CH is expected to have the lowest boiling point and SnH the
4 4
highest boiling point. The ordering from lowest to highest boiling point is expected to be CH < SiH < GeH <
4 4 4
SnH .
4
A graph of the actual boiling points of these compounds versus the period of the group 14 element shows this
prediction to be correct:
PAGE: 494
480 10 • Liquids and Solids
Check Your Learning
Order the following hydrocarbons from lowest to highest boiling point: C H , C H , and C H .
2 6 3 8 4 10
Answer:
C H < C H < C H . All of these compounds are nonpolar and only have London dispersion forces: the larger
2 6 3 8 4 10
the molecule, the larger the dispersion forces and the higher the boiling point. The ordering from lowest to
highest boiling point is therefore C H < C H < C H .
2 6 3 8 4 10
The shapes of molecules also affect the magnitudes of the dispersion forces between them. For example,
boiling points for the isomersn-pentane, isopentane, and neopentane (shown inFigure 10.7) are 36 °C, 27 °C,
and 9.5 °C, respectively. Even though these compounds are composed of molecules with the same chemical
formula, C H , the difference in boiling points suggests that dispersion forces in the liquid phase are
5 12
different, being greatest forn-pentane and least for neopentane. The elongated shape ofn-pentane provides a
greater surface area available for contact between molecules, resulting in correspondingly stronger dispersion
forces. The more compact shape of isopentane offers a smaller surface area available for intermolecular
contact and, therefore, weaker dispersion forces. Neopentane molecules are the most compact of the three,
offering the least available surface area for intermolecular contact and, hence, the weakest dispersion forces.
This behavior is analogous to the connections that may be formed between strips of VELCRO brand fasteners:
the greater the area of the strip’s contact, the stronger the connection.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 495
10.1 • Intermolecular Forces 481
FIGURE10.7 The strength of the dispersion forces increases with the contact area between molecules, as
demonstrated by the boiling points of these pentane isomers.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Geckos and Intermolecular Forces
Geckos have an amazing ability to adhere to most surfaces. They can quickly run up smooth walls and
across ceilings that have no toe-holds, and they do this without having suction cups or a sticky substance
on their toes. And while a gecko can lift its feet easily as it walks along a surface, if you attempt to pick it up,
it sticks to the surface. How are geckos (as well as spiders and some other insects) able to do this? Although
this phenomenon has been investigated for hundreds of years, scientists only recently uncovered the
details of the process that allows geckos’ feet to behave this way.
Geckos’ toes are covered with hundreds of thousands of tiny hairs known assetae, with each seta, in turn,
branching into hundreds of tiny, flat, triangular tips calledspatulae. The huge numbers of spatulae on its
setae provide a gecko, shown inFigure 10.8, with a large total surface area for sticking to a surface. In 2000,
KellarAutumn, who leads a multi-institutional gecko research team, found that geckos adhered equally
well to both polar silicon dioxide and nonpolar gallium arsenide. This proved that geckos stick to surfaces
because of dispersion forces—weak intermolecular attractions arising from temporary, synchronized
charge distributions between adjacent molecules. Although dispersion forces are very weak, the total
attraction over millions of spatulae is large enough to support many times the gecko’s weight.
In 2014, two scientists developed a model to explain how geckos can rapidly transition from “sticky” to
“non-sticky.” AlexGreaneyand CongcongHuat Oregon State University described how geckos can achieve
this by changing the angle between their spatulae and the surface. Geckos’ feet, which are normally
nonsticky, become sticky when a small shear force is applied. By curling and uncurling their toes, geckos
can alternate between sticking and unsticking from a surface, and thus easily move across it. Later
research led by Alyssa Stark at University of Akron showed that geckos can maintain their hold on
hydrophobic surfaces (similar to the leaves in their habitats) equally well whether the surfaces were wet or
dry. Stark's experiment used a ribbon to gently pull the geckos until they slipped, so that the researchers
could determine the geckos' ability to hold various surfaces under wet and dry conditions. Further
investigations may eventually lead to the development of better adhesives and other applications.
PAGE: 496
482 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.8 Geckos’ toes contain large numbers of tiny hairs (setae), which branch into many triangular tips
(spatulae). Geckos adhere to surfaces because of van der Waals attractions between the surface and a gecko’s
millions of spatulae. By changing how the spatulae contact the surface, geckos can turn their stickiness “on” and
“off.” (credit photo: modification of work by “JC*+A!”/Flickr)
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16kellaraut)to learn more about Kellar Autumn’s research that
determined that van der Waals forces are responsible for a gecko’s ability to cling and climb.
Dipole-Dipole Attractions
Recall from the chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry thatpolarmolecules have a partial
positive charge on one side and a partial negative charge on the other side of the molecule—a separation of
charge called adipole. Consider a polar molecule such as hydrogen chloride, HCl. In the HCl molecule, the
more electronegative Cl atom bears the partial negative charge, whereas the less electronegative H atom bears
the partial positive charge. An attractive force between HCl molecules results from the attraction between the
positive end of one HCl molecule and the negative end of another. This attractive force is called adipole-dipole
attraction—the electrostatic force between the partially positive end of one polar molecule and the partially
negative end of another, as illustrated inFigure 10.9.
FIGURE10.9 This image shows two arrangements of polar molecules, such as HCl, that allow an attraction
between the partial negative end of one molecule and the partial positive end of another.
The effect of a dipole-dipole attraction is apparent when we compare the properties of HCl molecules to
nonpolar F molecules. Both HCl and F consist of the same number of atoms and have approximately the
2 2
same molecular mass. At a temperature of 150 K, molecules of both substances would have the same average
KE. However, the dipole-dipole attractions between HCl molecules are sufficient to cause them to “stick
together” to form a liquid, whereas the relatively weaker dispersion forces between nonpolar F molecules are
2
not, and so this substance is gaseous at this temperature. The higher normal boiling point of HCl (188 K)
compared to F (85 K) is a reflection of the greater strength of dipole-dipole attractions between HCl
2
molecules, compared to the attractions between nonpolar F molecules. We will often use values such as
2
boiling or freezing points, or enthalpies of vaporization or fusion, as indicators of the relative strengths of IMFs
of attraction present within different substances.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 497
10.1 • Intermolecular Forces 483
EXAMPLE 10.2
Dipole-Dipole Forces and Their Effects
Predict which will have the higher boiling point: N or CO. Explain your reasoning.
2
Solution
CO and N are both diatomic molecules with masses of about 28 amu, so they experience similar London
2
dispersion forces. Because CO is a polar molecule, it experiences dipole-dipole attractions. Because N is
2
nonpolar, its molecules cannot exhibit dipole-dipole attractions. The dipole-dipole attractions between CO
molecules are comparably stronger than the dispersion forces between nonpolar N molecules, so CO is
2
expected to have the higher boiling point.
Check Your Learning
Predict which will have the higher boiling point: ICl or Br . Explain your reasoning.
2
Answer:
ICl. ICl and Br have similar masses (~160 amu) and therefore experience similar London dispersion forces. ICl
2
is polar and thus also exhibits dipole-dipole attractions; Br is nonpolar and does not. The relatively stronger
2
dipole-dipole attractions require more energy to overcome, so ICl will have the higher boiling point.
Hydrogen Bonding
Nitrosyl fluoride (ONF, molecular mass 49 amu) is a gas at room temperature. Water (H O, molecular mass 18
2
amu) is a liquid, even though it has a lower molecular mass. We clearly cannot attribute this difference
between the two compounds to dispersion forces. Both molecules have about the same shape and ONF is the
heavier and larger molecule. It is, therefore, expected to experience more significant dispersion forces.
Additionally, we cannot attribute this difference in boiling points to differences in the dipole moments of the
molecules. Both molecules are polar and exhibit comparable dipole moments. The large difference between
the boiling points is due to a particularly strong dipole-dipole attraction that may occur when a molecule
contains a hydrogen atom bonded to a fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen atom (the three most electronegative
elements). The very large difference in electronegativity between the H atom (2.1) and the atom to which it is
bonded (4.0 for an F atom, 3.5 for an O atom, or 3.0 for a N atom), combined with the very small size of a H
atom and the relatively small sizes of F, O, or N atoms, leads tohighly concentrated partial chargeswith these
atoms. Molecules with F-H, O-H, or N-H moieties are very strongly attracted to similar moieties in nearby
molecules, a particularly strong type of dipole-dipole attraction calledhydrogen bonding. Examples of
hydrogen bonds include HF⋯HF, H O⋯HOH, and H N⋯HNH , in which the hydrogen bonds are denoted by
2 3 2
dots.Figure 10.10illustrates hydrogen bonding between water molecules.
FIGURE10.10 Water molecules participate in multiple hydrogen-bonding interactions with nearby water
molecules.
PAGE: 498
484 10 • Liquids and Solids
Despite use of the word “bond,” keep in mind that hydrogen bonds areintermolecularattractive forces, not
intramolecularattractive forces (covalent bonds). Hydrogen bonds are much weaker than covalent bonds, only
about 5 to 10% as strong, but are generally much stronger than other dipole-dipole attractions and dispersion
forces.
Hydrogen bonds have a pronounced effect on the properties of condensed phases (liquids and solids). For
example, consider the trends in boiling points for the binary hydrides of group 15 (NH , PH , AsH , and SbH ),
3 3 3 3
group 16 hydrides (H O, H S, H Se, and H Te), and group 17 hydrides (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI). The boiling
2 2 2 2
points of the heaviest three hydrides for each group are plotted inFigure 10.11. As we progress down any of
these groups, the polarities of the molecules decrease slightly, whereas the sizes of the molecules increase
substantially. The effect of increasingly stronger dispersion forces dominates that of increasingly weaker
dipole-dipole attractions, and the boiling points are observed to increase steadily.
FIGURE10.11 For the group 15, 16, and 17 hydrides, the boiling points for each class of compounds increase with
increasing molecular mass for elements in periods 3, 4, and 5.
If we use this trend to predict the boiling points for the lightest hydride for each group, we would expect NH to
3
boil at about −120 °C, H O to boil at about −80 °C, and HF to boil at about −110 °C. However, when we measure
2
the boiling points for these compounds, we find that they are dramatically higher than the trends would
predict, as shown inFigure 10.12. The stark contrast between our naïve predictions and reality provides
compelling evidence for the strength of hydrogen bonding.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 499
10.1 • Intermolecular Forces 485
FIGURE10.12 In comparison to periods 3−5, the binary hydrides of period 2 elements in groups 17, 16 and 15 (F,
O and N, respectively) exhibit anomalously high boiling points due to hydrogen bonding.
EXAMPLE 10.3
Effect of Hydrogen Bonding on Boiling Points
Consider the compounds dimethylether (CH OCH ), ethanol (CH CH OH), and propane (CH CH CH ). Their
3 3 3 2 3 2 3
boiling points, not necessarily in order, are −42.1 °C, −24.8 °C, and 78.4 °C. Match each compound with its
boiling point. Explain your reasoning.
Solution
The VSEPR-predicted shapes of CH OCH , CH CH OH, and CH CH CH are similar, as are their molar masses
3 3 3 2 3 2 3
(46 g/mol, 46 g/mol, and 44 g/mol, respectively), so they will exhibit similar dispersion forces. Since
CH CH CH is nonpolar, it may exhibitonlydispersion forces. Because CH OCH is polar, it will also
3 2 3 3 3
experience dipole-dipole attractions. Finally, CH CH OH has an −OH group, and so it will experience the
3 2
uniquely strong dipole-dipole attraction known as hydrogen bonding. So the ordering in terms of strength of
IMFs, and thus boiling points, is CH CH CH < CH OCH < CH CH OH. The boiling point of propane is −42.1
3 2 3 3 3 3 2
°C, the boiling point of dimethylether is −24.8 °C, and the boiling point of ethanol is 78.5 °C.
Check Your Learning
Ethane (CH CH ) has a melting point of −183 °C and a boiling point of −89 °C. Predict the melting and boiling
3 3
points for methylamine (CH NH ). Explain your reasoning.
3 2
Answer:
The melting point and boiling point for methylamine are predicted to be significantly greater than those of
ethane. CH CH and CH NH are similar in size and mass, but methylamine possesses an −NH group and
3 3 3 2
therefore may exhibit hydrogen bonding. This greatly increases its IMFs, and therefore its melting and boiling
points. It is difficult to predict values, but the known values are a melting point of −93 °C and a boiling point of
−6 °C.
PAGE: 500
486 10 • Liquids and Solids
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Hydrogen Bonding and DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is found in every living organism and contains the genetic information that
determines the organism’s characteristics, provides the blueprint for making the proteins necessary for life,
and serves as a template to pass this information on to the organism’s offspring. A DNA molecule consists of
two (anti-)parallel chains of repeating nucleotides, which form its well-known double helical structure, as
shown inFigure 10.13.
FIGURE10.13 Two separate DNA molecules form a double-stranded helix in which the molecules are held
together via hydrogen bonding. (credit: modification of work by Jerome Walker, Dennis Myts)
Each nucleotide contains a (deoxyribose) sugar bound to a phosphate group on one side, and one of four
nitrogenous bases on the other. Two of the bases, cytosine (C) and thymine (T), are single-ringed structures
known as pyrimidines. The other two, adenine (A) and guanine (G), are double-ringed structures called
purines. These bases form complementary base pairs consisting of one purine and one pyrimidine, with
adenine pairing with thymine, and cytosine with guanine. Each base pair is held together by hydrogen
bonding. A and T share two hydrogen bonds, C and G share three, and both pairings have a similar shape and
structureFigure 10.14.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 501
10.2 • Properties of Liquids 487
FIGURE10.14 The geometries of the base molecules result in maximum hydrogen bonding between adenine and
thymine (AT) and between guanine and cytosine (GC), so-called “complementary base pairs.”
The cumulative effect of millions of hydrogen bonds effectively holds the two strands of DNA together.
Importantly, the two strands of DNA can relatively easily “unzip” down the middle since hydrogen bonds are
relatively weak compared to the covalent bonds that hold the atoms of the individual DNA molecules together.
This allows both strands to function as a template for replication.
10.2 Properties of Liquids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between adhesive and cohesive forces
• Define viscosity, surface tension, and capillary rise
• Describe the roles of intermolecular attractive forces in each of these properties/phenomena
When you pour a glass of water, or fill a car with gasoline, you observe that water and gasoline flow freely. But
when you pour syrup on pancakes or add oil to a car engine, you note that syrup and motor oil do not flow as
readily. Theviscosityof a liquid is a measure of its resistance to flow. Water, gasoline, and other liquids that
flow freely have a low viscosity. Honey, syrup, motor oil, and other liquids that do not flow freely, like those
shown inFigure 10.15, have higher viscosities. We can measure viscosity by measuring the rate at which a
metal ball falls through a liquid (the ball falls more slowly through a more viscous liquid) or by measuring the
rate at which a liquid flows through a narrow tube (more viscous liquids flow more slowly).
PAGE: 502
488 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.15 (a) Honey and (b) motor oil are examples of liquids with high viscosities; they flow slowly. (credit a:
modification of work by Scott Bauer; credit b: modification of work by David Nagy)
The IMFs between the molecules of a liquid, the size and shape of the molecules, and the temperature
determine how easily a liquid flows. AsTable 10.2shows, the more structurally complex are the molecules in a
liquid and the stronger the IMFs between them, the more difficult it is for them to move past each other and the
greater is the viscosity of the liquid. As the temperature increases, the molecules move more rapidly and their
kinetic energies are better able to overcome the forces that hold them together; thus, the viscosity of the liquid
decreases.
Viscosities of Common Substances at 25 °C
Substance Formula Viscosity (mPa·s)
water H O 0.890
2
mercury Hg 1.526
ethanol C H OH 1.074
2 5
octane C H 0.508
8 18
ethylene glycol CH (OH)CH (OH) 16.1
2 2
honey variable ~2,000–10,000
motor oil variable ~50–500
TABLE10.2
The various IMFs between identical molecules of a substance are examples ofcohesive forces. The molecules
within a liquid are surrounded by other molecules and are attracted equally in all directions by the cohesive
forces within the liquid. However, the molecules on the surface of a liquid are attracted only by about one-half
as many molecules. Because of the unbalanced molecular attractions on the surface molecules, liquids
contract to form a shape that minimizes the number of molecules on the surface—that is, the shape with the
minimum surface area. A small drop of liquid tends to assume a spherical shape, as shown inFigure 10.16,
because in a sphere, the ratio of surface area to volume is at a minimum. Larger drops are more greatly
affected by gravity, air resistance, surface interactions, and so on, and as a result, are less spherical.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 503
10.2 • Properties of Liquids 489
FIGURE10.16 Attractive forces result in a spherical water drop that minimizes surface area; cohesive forces hold
the sphere together; adhesive forces keep the drop attached to the web. (credit photo: modification of work by
“OliBac”/Flickr)
Surface tensionis defined as the energy required to increase the surface area of a liquid, or the force required
to increase the length of a liquid surface by a given amount. This property results from the cohesive forces
between molecules at the surface of a liquid, and it causes the surface of a liquid to behave like a stretched
rubber membrane. Surface tensions of several liquids are presented inTable 10.3. Among common liquids,
water exhibits a distinctly high surface tension due to strong hydrogen bonding between its molecules. As a
result of this high surface tension, the surface of water represents a relatively “tough skin” that can withstand
considerable force without breaking. A steel needle carefully placed on water will float. Some insects, like the
one shown inFigure 10.17, even though they are denser than water, move on its surface because they are
supported by the surface tension.
Surface Tensions of Common Substances at 25 °C
Substance Formula Surface Tension (mN/m)
water H O 71.99
2
mercury Hg 458.48
ethanol C H OH 21.97
2 5
octane C H 21.14
8 18
ethylene glycol CH (OH)CH (OH) 47.99
2 2
TABLE10.3
FIGURE10.17 Surface tension (right) prevents this insect, a “water strider,” from sinking into the water.
Surface tension is affected by a variety of variables, including the introduction of additional substances on the
surface. In the late 1800s, Agnes Pockels, who was initially blocked from pursuing a scientific career but
PAGE: 504
490 10 • Liquids and Solids
studied on her own, began investigating the impact and characteristics of soapy and greasy films in water.
Using homemade materials, she developed an instrument known as a trough for measuring surface
contaminants and their effects. With the support of renowned scientist Lord Rayleigh, her 1891 paper showed
that surface contamination significantly reduces surface tension, and also that changing the characteristics of
the surface (compressing or expanding it) also affects surface tension. Decades later, Irving Langmuir and
Katharine Blodgett built on Pockels' work in their own trough and important advances in surface chemistry.
Langmuir pioneered methods for producing single-molecule layers of film; Blodgett applied these to the
development of non-reflective glass (critical for film-making and other applications), and also studied methods
related to cleaning surfaces, which are important in semiconductor fabrication.
The IMFs of attraction between twodifferentmolecules are calledadhesive forces. Consider what happens
when water comes into contact with some surface. If the adhesive forces between water molecules and the
molecules of the surface are weak compared to the cohesive forces between the water molecules, the water
does not “wet” the surface. For example, water does not wet waxed surfaces or many plastics such as
polyethylene. Water forms drops on these surfaces because the cohesive forces within the drops are greater
than the adhesive forces between the water and the plastic. Water spreads out on glass because the adhesive
force between water and glass is greater than the cohesive forces within the water. When water is confined in a
glass tube, its meniscus (surface) has a concave shape because the water wets the glass and creeps up the side
of the tube. On the other hand, the cohesive forces between mercury atoms are much greater than the adhesive
forces between mercury and glass. Mercury therefore does not wet glass, and it forms a convex meniscus when
confined in a tube because the cohesive forces within the mercury tend to draw it into a drop (Figure 10.18).
FIGURE10.18 Differences in the relative strengths of cohesive and adhesive forces result in different meniscus
shapes for mercury (left) and water (right) in glass tubes. (credit: Mark Ott)
If you place one end of a paper towel in spilled wine, as shown inFigure 10.19, the liquid wicks up the paper
towel. A similar process occurs in a cloth towel when you use it to dry off after a shower. These are examples of
capillary action—when a liquid flows within a porous material due to the attraction of the liquid molecules to
the surface of the material and to other liquid molecules. The adhesive forces between the liquid and the
porous material, combined with the cohesive forces within the liquid, may be strong enough to move the liquid
upward against gravity.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 505
10.2 • Properties of Liquids 491
FIGURE10.19 Wine wicks up a paper towel (left) because of the strong attractions of water (and ethanol)
molecules to the −OH groups on the towel’s cellulose fibers and the strong attractions of water molecules to other
water (and ethanol) molecules (right). (credit photo: modification of work by Mark Blaser)
Towels soak up liquids like water because the fibers of a towel are made of molecules that are attracted to
water molecules. Most cloth towels are made of cotton, and paper towels are generally made from paper pulp.
Both consist of long molecules of cellulose that contain many −OH groups. Water molecules are attracted to
these −OH groups and form hydrogen bonds with them, which draws the H O molecules up the cellulose
2
molecules. The water molecules are also attracted to each other, so large amounts of water are drawn up the
cellulose fibers.
Capillary action can also occur when one end of a small diameter tube is immersed in a liquid, as illustrated in
Figure 10.20. If the liquid molecules are strongly attracted to the tube molecules, the liquid creeps up the
inside of the tube until the weight of the liquid and the adhesive forces are in balance. The smaller the
diameter of the tube is, the higher the liquid climbs. It is partly by capillary action occurring in plant cells
called xylem that water and dissolved nutrients are brought from the soil up through the roots and into a plant.
Capillary action is the basis for thin layer chromatography, a laboratory technique commonly used to separate
small quantities of mixtures. You depend on a constant supply of tears to keep your eyes lubricated and on
capillary action to pump tear fluid away.
FIGURE10.20 Depending upon the relative strengths of adhesive and cohesive forces, a liquid may rise (such as
water) or fall (such as mercury) in a glass capillary tube. The extent of the rise (or fall) is directly proportional to the
surface tension of the liquid and inversely proportional to the density of the liquid and the radius of the tube.
The height to which a liquid will rise in a capillary tube is determined by several factors as shown in the
PAGE: 506
492 10 • Liquids and Solids
following equation:
In this equation,his the height of the liquid inside the capillary tube relative to the surface of the liquid outside
the tube,Tis the surface tension of the liquid,θis the contact angle between the liquid and the tube,ris the
radius of the tube,ρis the density of the liquid, andgis the acceleration due to gravity, 9.8 m/s2. When the tube
is made of a material to which the liquid molecules are strongly attracted, they will spread out completely on
the surface, which corresponds to a contact angle of 0°. This is the situation for water rising in a glass tube.
EXAMPLE 10.4
Capillary Rise
At 25 °C, how high will water rise in a glass capillary tube with an inner diameter of 0.25 mm?
For water,T= 71.99 mN/m andρ= 1.0 g/cm3.
Solution
The liquid will rise to a heighthgiven by:
The Newton is defined as a kg m/s2, and so the provided surface tension is equivalent to 0.07199 kg/s2. The
provided density must be converted into units that will cancel appropriately:ρ= 1000 kg/m3. The diameter of
the tube in meters is 0.00025 m, so the radius is 0.000125 m. For a glass tube immersed in water, the contact
angle isθ= 0°, so cosθ= 1. Finally, acceleration due to gravity on the earth isg= 9.8 m/s2. Substituting these
values into the equation, and cancelling units, we have:
Check Your Learning
Water rises in a glass capillary tube to a height of 8.4 cm. What is the diameter of the capillary tube?
Answer:
diameter = 0.36 mm
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Biomedical Applications of Capillary Action
Many medical tests require drawing a small amount of blood, for example to determine the amount of
glucose in someone with diabetes or the hematocrit level in an athlete. This procedure can be easily done
because of capillary action, the ability of a liquid to flow up a small tube against gravity, as shown inFigure
10.21. When your finger is pricked, a drop of blood forms and holds together due to surface tension—the
unbalanced intermolecular attractions at the surface of the drop. Then, when the open end of a narrow-
diameter glass tube touches the drop of blood, the adhesive forces between the molecules in the blood and
those at the glass surface draw the blood up the tube. How far the blood goes up the tube depends on the
diameter of the tube (and the type of fluid). A small tube has a relatively large surface area for a given
volume of blood, which results in larger (relative) attractive forces, allowing the blood to be drawn farther
up the tube. The liquid itself is held together by its own cohesive forces. When the weight of the liquid in the
tube generates a downward force equal to the upward force associated with capillary action, the liquid
stops rising.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 507
10.3 • Phase Transitions 493
FIGURE10.21 Blood is collected for medical analysis by capillary action, which draws blood into a small
diameter glass tube. (credit: modification of work by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
10.3 Phase Transitions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define phase transitions and phase transition temperatures
• Explain the relation between phase transition temperatures and intermolecular attractive forces
• Describe the processes represented by typical heating and cooling curves, and compute heat flows and
enthalpy changes accompanying these processes
We witness and utilize changes of physical state, or phase transitions, in a great number of ways. As one
example of global significance, consider the evaporation, condensation, freezing, and melting of water. These
changes of state are essential aspects of our earth’s water cycle as well as many other natural phenomena and
technological processes of central importance to our lives. In this module, the essential aspects of phase
transitions are explored.
Vaporization and Condensation
When a liquid vaporizes in a closed container, gas molecules cannot escape. As these gas phase molecules
move randomly about, they will occasionally collide with the surface of the condensed phase, and in some
cases, these collisions will result in the molecules re-entering the condensed phase. The change from the gas
phase to the liquid is calledcondensation. When the rate of condensation becomes equal to the rate of
vaporization, neither the amount of the liquid nor the amount of the vapor in the container changes. The
vapor in the container is then said to bein equilibriumwith the liquid. Keep in mind that this is not a static
situation, as molecules are continually exchanged between the condensed and gaseous phases. Such is an
example of adynamic equilibrium, the status of a system in which reciprocal processes (for example,
vaporization and condensation) occur at equal rates. The pressure exerted by the vapor in equilibrium with a
liquid in a closed container at a given temperature is called the liquid’svapor pressure(or equilibrium vapor
pressure). The area of the surface of the liquid in contact with a vapor and the size of the vessel have no effect
on the vapor pressure, although they do affect the time required for the equilibrium to be reached. We can
measure the vapor pressure of a liquid by placing a sample in a closed container, like that illustrated inFigure
10.22, and using a manometer to measure the increase in pressure that is due to the vapor in equilibrium with
the condensed phase.
FIGURE10.22 In a closed container, dynamic equilibrium is reached when (a) the rate of molecules escaping from
PAGE: 508
494 10 • Liquids and Solids
the liquid to become the gas (b) increases and eventually (c) equals the rate of gas molecules entering the liquid.
When this equilibrium is reached, the vapor pressure of the gas is constant, although the vaporization and
condensation processes continue.
The chemical identities of the molecules in a liquid determine the types (and strengths) of intermolecular
attractions possible; consequently, different substances will exhibit different equilibrium vapor pressures.
Relatively strong intermolecular attractive forces will serve to impede vaporization as well as favoring
“recapture” of gas-phase molecules when they collide with the liquid surface, resulting in a relatively low vapor
pressure. Weak intermolecular attractions present less of a barrier to vaporization, and a reduced likelihood of
gas recapture, yielding relatively high vapor pressures. The following example illustrates this dependence of
vapor pressure on intermolecular attractive forces.
EXAMPLE 10.5
Explaining Vapor Pressure in Terms of IMFs
Given the shown structural formulas for these four compounds, explain their relative vapor pressures in terms
of types and extents of IMFs:
Solution
Diethyl ether has a very small dipole and most of its intermolecular attractions are London forces. Although
this molecule is the largest of the four under consideration, its IMFs are the weakest and, as a result, its
molecules most readily escape from the liquid. It also has the highest vapor pressure. Due to its smaller size,
ethanol exhibits weaker dispersion forces than diethyl ether. However, ethanol is capable of hydrogen bonding
and, therefore, exhibits stronger overall IMFs, which means that fewer molecules escape from the liquid at any
given temperature, and so ethanol has a lower vapor pressure than diethyl ether. Water is much smaller than
either of the previous substances and exhibits weaker dispersion forces, but its extensive hydrogen bonding
provides stronger intermolecular attractions, fewer molecules escaping the liquid, and a lower vapor pressure
than for either diethyl ether or ethanol. Ethylene glycol has two −OH groups, so, like water, it exhibits extensive
hydrogen bonding. It is much larger than water and thus experiences larger London forces. Its overall IMFs are
the largest of these four substances, which means its vaporization rate will be the slowest and, consequently,
its vapor pressure the lowest.
Check Your Learning
At 20 °C, the vapor pressures of several alcohols are given in this table. Explain these vapor pressures in terms
of types and extents of IMFs for these alcohols:
Compound methanol CH OH ethanol C H OH propanol C H OH butanol C H OH
3 2 5 3 7 4 9
Vapor Pressure at 20 °C 11.9 kPa 5.95 kPa 2.67 kPa 0.56 kPa
Answer:
All these compounds exhibit hydrogen bonding; these strong IMFs are difficult for the molecules to overcome,
so the vapor pressures are relatively low. As the size of molecule increases from methanol to butanol,
dispersion forces increase, which means that the vapor pressures decrease as observed:
P > P > P > P .
methanol ethanol propanol butanol
As temperature increases, the vapor pressure of a liquid also increases due to the increased average KE of its
molecules. Recall that at any given temperature, the molecules of a substance experience a range of kinetic
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 509
10.3 • Phase Transitions 495
energies, with a certain fraction of molecules having a sufficient energy to overcome IMF and escape the liquid
(vaporize). At a higher temperature, a greater fraction of molecules have enough energy to escape from the
liquid, as shown inFigure 10.23. The escape of more molecules per unit of time and the greater average speed
of the molecules that escape both contribute to the higher vapor pressure.
FIGURE10.23 Temperature affects the distribution of kinetic energies for the molecules in a liquid. At the higher
temperature, more molecules have the necessary kinetic energy, KE, to escape from the liquid into the gas phase.
Boiling Points
When the vapor pressure increases enough to equal the external atmospheric pressure, the liquid reaches its
boiling point. Theboiling pointof a liquid is the temperature at which its equilibrium vapor pressure is equal
to the pressure exerted on the liquid by its gaseous surroundings. For liquids in open containers, this pressure
is that due to the earth’s atmosphere. Thenormal boiling pointof a liquid is defined as its boiling point when
surrounding pressure is equal to 1 atm (101.3 kPa).Figure 10.24shows the variation in vapor pressure with
temperature for several different substances. Considering the definition of boiling point, these curves may be
seen as depicting the dependence of a liquid’s boiling point on surrounding pressure.
FIGURE10.24 The boiling points of liquids are the temperatures at which their equilibrium vapor pressures equal
the pressure of the surrounding atmosphere. Normal boiling points are those corresponding to a pressure of 1 atm
(101.3 kPa.)
PAGE: 510
496 10 • Liquids and Solids
EXAMPLE 10.6
A Boiling Point at Reduced Pressure
A typical atmospheric pressure in Leadville, Colorado (elevation 10,200 feet) is 68 kPa. Use the graph inFigure
10.24to determine the boiling point of water at this elevation.
Solution
The graph of the vapor pressure of water versus temperature inFigure 10.24indicates that the vapor pressure
of water is 68 kPa at about 90 °C. Thus, at about 90 °C, the vapor pressure of water will equal the atmospheric
pressure in Leadville, and water will boil.
Check Your Learning
The boiling point of ethyl ether was measured to be 10 °C at a base camp on the slopes of Mount Everest. Use
Figure 10.24to determine the approximate atmospheric pressure at the camp.
Answer:
Approximately 40 kPa (0.4 atm)
The quantitative relation between a substance’s vapor pressure and its temperature is described by the
Clausius-Clapeyron equation:
where ΔH is the enthalpy of vaporization for the liquid,Ris the gas constant, andAis a constant whose
vap
value depends on the chemical identity of the substance. Temperature T must be in Kelvin in this equation.
This equation is often rearranged into logarithmic form to yield the linear equation:
This linear equation may be expressed in a two-point format that is convenient for use in various
computations, as demonstrated in the example exercises that follow. If at temperature T , the vapor pressure is
1
P , and at temperature T , the vapor pressure is P , the corresponding linear equations are:
1 2 2
Since the constant,A, is the same, these two equations may be rearranged to isolate lnAand then set them
equal to one another:
which can be combined into:
EXAMPLE 10.7
Estimating Enthalpy of Vaporization
Isooctane (2,2,4-trimethylpentane) has an octane rating of 100. It is used as one of the standards for the
octane-rating system for gasoline. At 34.0 °C, the vapor pressure of isooctane is 10.0 kPa, and at 98.8 °C, its
vapor pressure is 100.0 kPa. Use this information to estimate the enthalpy of vaporization for isooctane.
Solution
The enthalpy of vaporization, ΔH , can be determined by using the Clausius-Clapeyron equation:
vap
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 511
10.3 • Phase Transitions 497
Since we have two vapor pressure-temperature values (T = 34.0 °C = 307.2 K,P = 10.0 kPa andT = 98.8 °C =
1 1 2
372.0 K,P = 100 kPa), we can substitute them into this equation and solve for ΔH . Rearranging the
2 vap
Clausius-Clapeyron equation and solving for ΔH yields:
vap
Note that the pressure can be in any units, so long as they agree for bothPvalues, but the temperature must be
in kelvin for the Clausius-Clapeyron equation to be valid.
Check Your Learning
At 20.0 °C, the vapor pressure of ethanol is 5.95 kPa, and at 63.5 °C, its vapor pressure is 53.3 kPa. Use this
information to estimate the enthalpy of vaporization for ethanol.
Answer:
41,360 J/mol or 41.4 kJ/mol
EXAMPLE 10.8
Estimating Temperature (or Vapor Pressure)
For benzene (C H ), the normal boiling point is 80.1 °C and the enthalpy of vaporization is 30.8 kJ/mol. What is
6 6
the boiling point of benzene in Denver, where atmospheric pressure = 83.4 kPa?
Solution
If the temperature and vapor pressure are known at one point, along with the enthalpy of vaporization, ΔH
vap,
then the temperature that corresponds to a different vapor pressure (or the vapor pressure that corresponds to
a different temperature) can be determined by using the Clausius-Clapeyron equation:
Since the normal boiling point is the temperature at which the vapor pressure equals atmospheric pressure at
sea level, we know one vapor pressure-temperature value (T = 80.1 °C = 353.3 K,P = 101.3 kPa, ΔH = 30.8
1 1 vap
kJ/mol) and want to find the temperature (T) that corresponds to vapor pressureP = 83.4 kPa. We can
2 2
substitute these values into the Clausius-Clapeyron equation and then solve forT. Rearranging the Clausius-
2
Clapeyron equation and solving forT yields:
2
Check Your Learning
For acetone (CH ) CO, the normal boiling point is 56.5 °C and the enthalpy of vaporization is 31.3 kJ/mol. What
32
is the vapor pressure of acetone at 25.0 °C?
Answer:
30.1 kPa
Enthalpy of Vaporization
Vaporization is an endothermic process. The cooling effect can be evident when you leave a swimming pool or
PAGE: 512
498 10 • Liquids and Solids
a shower. When the water on your skin evaporates, it removes heat from your skin and causes you to feel cold.
The energy change associated with the vaporization process is the enthalpy of vaporization, ΔH . For
vap
example, the vaporization of water at standard temperature is represented by:
As described in the chapter on thermochemistry, the reverse of an endothermic process is exothermic. And so,
the condensation of a gas releases heat:
EXAMPLE 10.9
Using Enthalpy of Vaporization
One way our body is cooled is by evaporation of the water in sweat (Figure 10.25). In very hot climates, we can
lose as much as 1.5 L of sweat per day. Although sweat is not pure water, we can get an approximate value of
the amount of heat removed by evaporation by assuming that it is. How much heat is required to evaporate 1.5
L of water (1.5 kg) atT= 37 °C (normal body temperature); ΔH = 43.46 kJ/mol at 37 °C.
vap
FIGURE10.25 Evaporation of sweat helps cool the body. (credit: “Kullez”/Flickr)
Solution
We start with the known volume of sweat (approximated as just water) and use the given information to
convert to the amount of heat needed:
Thus, 3600 kJ of heat are removed by the evaporation of 1.5 L of water.
Check Your Learning
How much heat is required to evaporate 100.0 g of liquid ammonia, NH , at its boiling point if its enthalpy of
3
vaporization is 4.8 kJ/mol?
Answer:
28 kJ
Melting and Freezing
When we heat a crystalline solid, we increase the average energy of its atoms, molecules, or ions and the solid
gets hotter. At some point, the added energy becomes large enough to partially overcome the forces holding the
molecules or ions of the solid in their fixed positions, and the solid begins the process of transitioning to the
liquid state, ormelting. At this point, the temperature of the solid stops rising, despite the continual input of
heat, and it remains constant until all of the solid is melted. Only after all of the solid has melted will continued
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 513
10.3 • Phase Transitions 499
heating increase the temperature of the liquid (Figure 10.26).
FIGURE10.26 (a) This beaker of ice has a temperature of −12.0 °C. (b) After 10 minutes the ice has absorbed
enough heat from the air to warm to 0 °C. A small amount has melted. (c) Thirty minutes later, the ice has absorbed
more heat, but its temperature is still 0 °C. The ice melts without changing its temperature. (d) Only after all the ice
has melted does the heat absorbed cause the temperature to increase to 22.2 °C. (credit: modification of work by
Mark Ott)
If we stop heating during melting and place the mixture of solid and liquid in a perfectly insulated container so
no heat can enter or escape, the solid and liquid phases remain in equilibrium. This is almost the situation
with a mixture of ice and water in a very good thermos bottle; almost no heat gets in or out, and the mixture of
solid ice and liquid water remains for hours. In a mixture of solid and liquid at equilibrium, the reciprocal
processes of melting andfreezingoccur at equal rates, and the quantities of solid and liquid therefore remain
constant. The temperature at which the solid and liquid phases of a given substance are in equilibrium is
called themelting pointof the solid or thefreezing pointof the liquid. Use of one term or the other is normally
dictated by the direction of the phase transition being considered, for example, solid to liquid (melting) or
liquid to solid (freezing).
The enthalpy of fusion and the melting point of a crystalline solid depend on the strength of the attractive
forces between the units present in the crystal. Molecules with weak attractive forces form crystals with low
melting points. Crystals consisting of particles with stronger attractive forces melt at higher temperatures.
The amount of heat required to change one mole of a substance from the solid state to the liquid state is the
enthalpy of fusion, ΔH of the substance. The enthalpy of fusion of ice is 6.0 kJ/mol at 0 °C. Fusion (melting) is
fus
an endothermic process:
The reciprocal process, freezing, is an exothermic process whose enthalpy change is −6.0 kJ/mol at 0 °C:
Sublimation and Deposition
Some solids can transition directly into the gaseous state, bypassing the liquid state, via a process known as
sublimation. At room temperature and standard pressure, a piece of dry ice (solid CO ) sublimes, appearing to
2
gradually disappear without ever forming any liquid. Snow and ice sublime at temperatures below the melting
point of water, a slow process that may be accelerated by winds and the reduced atmospheric pressures at high
altitudes. When solid iodine is warmed, the solid sublimes and a vivid purple vapor forms (Figure 10.27). The
reverse of sublimation is calleddeposition, a process in which gaseous substances condense directly into the
solid state, bypassing the liquid state. The formation of frost is an example of deposition.
PAGE: 514
500 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.27 Sublimation of solid iodine in the bottom of the tube produces a purple gas that subsequently
deposits as solid iodine on the colder part of the tube above. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
Like vaporization, the process of sublimation requires an input of energy to overcome intermolecular
attractions. The enthalpy of sublimation, ΔH , is the energy required to convert one mole of a substance from
sub
the solid to the gaseous state. For example, the sublimation of carbon dioxide is represented by:
Likewise, the enthalpy change for the reverse process of deposition is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign
to that for sublimation:
Consider the extent to which intermolecular attractions must be overcome to achieve a given phase transition.
Converting a solid into a liquid requires that these attractions be only partially overcome; transition to the
gaseous state requires that they be completely overcome. As a result, the enthalpy of fusion for a substance is
less than its enthalpy of vaporization. This same logic can be used to derive an approximate relation between
the enthalpies of all phase changes for a given substance. Though not an entirely accurate description,
sublimation may be conveniently modeled as a sequential two-step process of melting followed by
vaporization in order to apply Hess’s Law. Viewed in this manner, the enthalpy of sublimation for a substance
may be estimated as the sum of its enthalpies of fusion and vaporization, as illustrated inFigure 10.28. For
example:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 515
10.3 • Phase Transitions 501
FIGURE10.28 For a given substance, the sum of its enthalpy of fusion and enthalpy of vaporization is
approximately equal to its enthalpy of sublimation.
Heating and Cooling Curves
In the chapter on thermochemistry, the relation between the amount of heat absorbed or released by a
substance,q, and its accompanying temperature change, ΔT, was introduced:
wheremis the mass of the substance andcis its specific heat. The relation applies to matter being heated or
cooled, but not undergoing a change in state. When a substance being heated or cooled reaches a temperature
corresponding to one of its phase transitions, further gain or loss of heat is a result of diminishing or
enhancing intermolecular attractions, instead of increasing or decreasing molecular kinetic energies. While a
substance is undergoing a change in state, its temperature remains constant.Figure 10.29shows a typical
heating curve.
Consider the example of heating a pot of water to boiling. A stove burner will supply heat at a roughly constant
rate; initially, this heat serves to increase the water’s temperature. When the water reaches its boiling point,
the temperature remains constant despite the continued input of heat from the stove burner. This same
temperature is maintained by the water as long as it is boiling. If the burner setting is increased to provide heat
at a greater rate, the water temperature does not rise, but instead the boiling becomes more vigorous (rapid).
This behavior is observed for other phase transitions as well: For example, temperature remains constant
while the change of state is in progress.
PAGE: 516
502 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.29 A typical heating curve for a substance depicts changes in temperature that result as the substance
absorbs increasing amounts of heat. Plateaus in the curve (regions of constant temperature) are exhibited when the
substance undergoes phase transitions.
EXAMPLE 10.10
Total Heat Needed to Change Temperature and Phase for a Substance
How much heat is required to convert 135 g of ice at −15 °C into water vapor at 120 °C?
Solution
The transition described involves the following steps:
1. Heat ice from −15 °C to 0 °C
2. Melt ice
3. Heat water from 0 °C to 100 °C
4. Boil water
5. Heat steam from 100 °C to 120 °C
The heat needed to change the temperature of a given substance (with no change in phase) is:q=m c ΔT
(see previous chapter on thermochemistry). The heat needed to induce a given change in phase is given byq=
n ΔH.
Using these equations with the appropriate values for specific heat of ice, water, and steam, and enthalpies of
fusion and vaporization, we have:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 517
10.4 • Phase Diagrams 503
Converting the quantities in J to kJ permits them to be summed, yielding the total heat required:
Check Your Learning
What is the total amount of heat released when 94.0 g water at 80.0 °C cools to form ice at −30.0 °C?
Answer:
68.7 kJ
10.4 Phase Diagrams
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the construction and use of a typical phase diagram
• Use phase diagrams to identify stable phases at given temperatures and pressures, and to describe phase
transitions resulting from changes in these properties
• Describe the supercritical fluid phase of matter
In the previous module, the variation of a liquid’s equilibrium vapor pressure with temperature was described.
Considering the definition of boiling point, plots of vapor pressure versus temperature represent how the
boiling point of the liquid varies with pressure. Also described was the use of heating and cooling curves to
determine a substance’s melting (or freezing) point. Making such measurements over a wide range of
pressures yields data that may be presented graphically as a phase diagram. Aphase diagramcombines plots
of pressure versus temperature for the liquid-gas, solid-liquid, and solid-gas phase-transition equilibria of a
substance. These diagrams indicate the physical states that exist under specific conditions of pressure and
temperature, and also provide the pressure dependence of the phase-transition temperatures (melting points,
sublimation points, boiling points). A typical phase diagram for a pure substance is shown inFigure 10.30.
PAGE: 518
504 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.30 The physical state of a substance and its phase-transition temperatures are represented
graphically in a phase diagram.
To illustrate the utility of these plots, consider the phase diagram for water shown inFigure 10.31.
FIGURE10.31 The pressure and temperature axes on this phase diagram of water are not drawn to constant scale
in order to illustrate several important properties.
We can use the phase diagram to identify the physical state of a sample of water under specified conditions of
pressure and temperature. For example, a pressure of 50 kPa and a temperature of −10 °C correspond to the
region of the diagram labeled “ice.” Under these conditions, water exists only as a solid (ice). A pressure of 50
kPa and a temperature of 50 °C correspond to the “water” region—here, water exists only as a liquid. At 25 kPa
and 200 °C, water exists only in the gaseous state. Note that on the H O phase diagram, the pressure and
2
temperature axes are not drawn to a constant scale in order to permit the illustration of several important
features as described here.
The curve BC inFigure 10.31is the plot of vapor pressure versus temperature as described in the previous
module of this chapter. This “liquid-vapor” curve separates the liquid and gaseous regions of the phase
diagram and provides the boiling point for water at any pressure. For example, at 1 atm, the boiling point is
100 °C. Notice that the liquid-vapor curve terminates at a temperature of 374 °C and a pressure of 218 atm,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 519
10.4 • Phase Diagrams 505
indicating that water cannot exist as a liquid above this temperature, regardless of the pressure. The physical
properties of water under these conditions are intermediate between those of its liquid and gaseous phases.
This unique state of matter is called a supercritical fluid, a topic that will be described in the next section of
this module.
The solid-vapor curve, labeled AB inFigure 10.31, indicates the temperatures and pressures at which ice and
water vapor are in equilibrium. These temperature-pressure data pairs correspond to the sublimation, or
deposition, points for water. If we could zoom in on the solid-gas line inFigure 10.31, we would see that ice has
a vapor pressure of about 0.20 kPa at −10 °C. Thus, if we place a frozen sample in a vacuum with a pressure
less than 0.20 kPa, ice will sublime. This is the basis for the “freeze-drying” process often used to preserve
foods, such as the ice cream shown inFigure 10.32.
FIGURE10.32 Freeze-dried foods, like this ice cream, are dehydrated by sublimation at pressures below the triple
point for water. (credit: ʺlwaoʺ/Flickr)
The solid-liquid curve labeled BD shows the temperatures and pressures at which ice and liquid water are in
equilibrium, representing the melting/freezing points for water. Note that this curve exhibits a slight negative
slope (greatly exaggerated for clarity), indicating that the melting point for water decreases slightly as pressure
increases. Water is an unusual substance in this regard, as most substances exhibit an increase in melting
point with increasing pressure. This behavior is partly responsible for the movement of glaciers, like the one
shown inFigure 10.33. The bottom of a glacier experiences an immense pressure due to its weight that can
melt some of the ice, forming a layer of liquid water on which the glacier may more easily slide.
FIGURE10.33 The immense pressures beneath glaciers result in partial melting to produce a layer of water that
provides lubrication to assist glacial movement. This satellite photograph shows the advancing edge of the Perito
Moreno glacier in Argentina. (credit: NASA)
The point of intersection of all three curves is labeled B inFigure 10.31. At the pressure and temperature
represented by this point, all three phases of water coexist in equilibrium. This temperature-pressure data
PAGE: 520
506 10 • Liquids and Solids
pair is called thetriple point. At pressures lower than the triple point, water cannot exist as a liquid, regardless
of the temperature.
EXAMPLE 10.11
Determining the State of Water
Using the phase diagram for water given inFigure 10.31, determine the state of water at the following
temperatures and pressures:
(a) −10 °C and 50 kPa
(b) 25 °C and 90 kPa
(c) 50 °C and 40 kPa
(d) 80 °C and 5 kPa
(e) −10 °C and 0.3 kPa
(f) 50 °C and 0.3 kPa
Solution
Using the phase diagram for water, we can determine that the state of water at each temperature and pressure
given are as follows: (a) solid; (b) liquid; (c) liquid; (d) gas; (e) solid; (f) gas.
Check Your Learning
What phase changes can water undergo as the temperature changes if the pressure is held at 0.3 kPa? If the
pressure is held at 50 kPa?
Answer:
At 0.3 kPa: at −58 °C. At 50 kPa: at 0 °C, l ⟶ g at 78 °C
Consider the phase diagram for carbon dioxide shown inFigure 10.34as another example. The solid-liquid
curve exhibits a positive slope, indicating that the melting point for CO increases with pressure as it does for
2
most substances (water being a notable exception as described previously). Notice that the triple point is well
above 1 atm, indicating that carbon dioxide cannot exist as a liquid under ambient pressure conditions.
Instead, cooling gaseous carbon dioxide at 1 atm results in its deposition into the solid state. Likewise, solid
carbon dioxide does not melt at 1 atm pressure but instead sublimes to yield gaseous CO . Finally, notice that
2
the critical point for carbon dioxide is observed at a relatively modest temperature and pressure in
comparison to water.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 521
10.4 • Phase Diagrams 507
FIGURE10.34 A phase diagram for carbon dioxide is shown. The pressure axis is plotted on a logarithmic scale to
accommodate the large range of values.
EXAMPLE 10.12
Determining the State of Carbon Dioxide
Using the phase diagram for carbon dioxide shown inFigure 10.34, determine the state of CO at the following
2
temperatures and pressures:
(a) −30 °C and 2000 kPa
(b) −90 °C and 1000 kPa
(c) −60 °C and 100 kPa
(d) −40 °C and 1500 kPa
(e) 0 °C and 100 kPa
(f) 20 °C and 100 kPa
Solution
Using the phase diagram for carbon dioxide provided, we can determine that the state of CO at each
2
temperature and pressure given are as follows: (a) liquid; (b) solid; (c) gas; (d) liquid; (e) gas; (f) gas.
Check Your Learning
Identify the phase changes that carbon dioxide will undergo as its temperature is increased from −100 °C
while holding its pressure constant at 1500 kPa. At 50 kPa. At what approximate temperatures do these phase
changes occur?
Answer:
at 1500 kPa: at −55 °C, at −10 °C;
at 50 kPa: at −60 °C
Supercritical Fluids
If we place a sample of water in a sealed container at 25 °C, remove the air, and let the vaporization-
condensation equilibrium establish itself, we are left with a mixture of liquid water and water vapor at a
pressure of 0.03 atm. A distinct boundary between the more dense liquid and the less dense gas is clearly
PAGE: 522
508 10 • Liquids and Solids
observed. As we increase the temperature, the pressure of the water vapor increases, as described by the
liquid-gas curve in the phase diagram for water (Figure 10.31), and a two-phase equilibrium of liquid and
gaseous phases remains. At a temperature of 374 °C, the vapor pressure has risen to 218 atm, and any further
increase in temperature results in the disappearance of the boundary between liquid and vapor phases. All of
the water in the container is now present in a single phase whose physical properties are intermediate
between those of the gaseous and liquid states. This phase of matter is called asupercritical fluid, and the
temperature and pressure above which this phase exists is thecritical point(Figure 10.35). Above its critical
temperature, a gas cannot be liquefied no matter how much pressure is applied. The pressure required to
liquefy a gas at its critical temperature is called the critical pressure. The critical temperatures and critical
pressures of some common substances are given in the following table.
Substance Critical Temperature (°C) Critical Pressure (kPa)
hydrogen −240.0 1300
nitrogen −147.2 3400
oxygen −118.9 5000
carbon dioxide 31.1 7400
ammonia 132.4 11,300
sulfur dioxide 157.2 7800
water 374.0 22,000
FIGURE10.35 (a) A sealed container of liquid carbon dioxide slightly below its critical point is heated, resulting in
(b) the formation of the supercritical fluid phase. Cooling the supercritical fluid lowers its temperature and pressure
below the critical point, resulting in the reestablishment of separate liquid and gaseous phases (c and d). Colored
floats illustrate differences in density between the liquid, gaseous, and supercritical fluid states. (credit:
modification of work by “mrmrobin”/YouTube)
LINK TO LEARNING
Observe theliquid-to-supercritical fluid transition(http://openstax.org/l/16supercrit)for carbon dioxide.
Like a gas, a supercritical fluid will expand and fill a container, but its density is much greater than typical gas
densities, typically being close to those for liquids. Similar to liquids, these fluids are capable of dissolving
nonvolatile solutes. They exhibit essentially no surface tension and very low viscosities, however, so they can
more effectively penetrate very small openings in a solid mixture and remove soluble components. These
properties make supercritical fluids extremely useful solvents for a wide range of applications. For example,
supercritical carbon dioxide has become a very popular solvent in the food industry, being used to
decaffeinate coffee, remove fats from potato chips, and extract flavor and fragrance compounds from citrus
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 523
10.4 • Phase Diagrams 509
oils. It is nontoxic, relatively inexpensive, and not considered to be a pollutant. After use, the CO can be easily
2
recovered by reducing the pressure and collecting the resulting gas.
EXAMPLE 10.13
The Critical Temperature of Carbon Dioxide
If we shake a carbon dioxide fire extinguisher on a cool day (18 °C), we can hear liquid CO sloshing around
2
inside the cylinder. However, the same cylinder appears to contain no liquid on a hot summer day (35 °C).
Explain these observations.
Solution
On the cool day, the temperature of the CO is below the critical temperature of CO , 304 K or 31 °C, so liquid
2 2
CO is present in the cylinder. On the hot day, the temperature of the CO is greater than its critical
2 2
temperature of 31 °C. Above this temperature no amount of pressure can liquefy CO so no liquid CO exists in
2 2
the fire extinguisher.
Check Your Learning
Ammonia can be liquefied by compression at room temperature; oxygen cannot be liquefied under these
conditions. Why do the two gases exhibit different behavior?
Answer:
The critical temperature of ammonia is 405.5 K, which is higher than room temperature. The critical
temperature of oxygen is below room temperature; thus oxygen cannot be liquefied at room temperature.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Decaffeinating Coffee Using Supercritical CO
2
Coffee is the world’s second most widely traded commodity, following only petroleum. Across the globe,
people love coffee’s aroma and taste. Many of us also depend on one component of coffee—caffeine—to help
us get going in the morning or stay alert in the afternoon. But late in the day, coffee’s stimulant effect can
keep you from sleeping, so you may choose to drink decaffeinated coffee in the evening.
Since the early 1900s, many methods have been used to decaffeinate coffee. All have advantages and
disadvantages, and all depend on the physical and chemical properties of caffeine. Because caffeine is a
somewhat polar molecule, it dissolves well in water, a polar liquid. However, since many of the other
400-plus compounds that contribute to coffee’s taste and aroma also dissolve in H O, hot water
2
decaffeination processes can also remove some of these compounds, adversely affecting the smell and
taste of the decaffeinated coffee. Dichloromethane (CH Cl ) and ethyl acetate (CH CO C H ) have similar
2 2 3 2 2 5
polarity to caffeine, and are therefore very effective solvents for caffeine extraction, but both also remove
some flavor and aroma components, and their use requires long extraction and cleanup times. Because
both of these solvents are toxic, health concerns have been raised regarding the effect of residual solvent
remaining in the decaffeinated coffee.
Supercritical fluid extraction using carbon dioxide is now being widely used as a more effective and
environmentally friendly decaffeination method (Figure 10.36). At temperatures above 304.2 K and
pressures above 7376 kPa, CO is a supercritical fluid, with properties of both gas and liquid. Like a gas, it
2
penetrates deep into the coffee beans; like a liquid, it effectively dissolves certain substances. Supercritical
carbon dioxide extraction of steamed coffee beans removes 97−99% of the caffeine, leaving coffee’s flavor
and aroma compounds intact. Because CO is a gas under standard conditions, its removal from the
2
extracted coffee beans is easily accomplished, as is the recovery of the caffeine from the extract. The
caffeine recovered from coffee beans via this process is a valuable product that can be used subsequently
as an additive to other foods or drugs.
PAGE: 524
510 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.36 (a) Caffeine molecules have both polar and nonpolar regions, making it soluble in solvents of
varying polarities. (b) The schematic shows a typical decaffeination process involving supercritical carbon
dioxide.
10.5 The Solid State of Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and describe the bonding and properties of ionic, molecular, metallic, and covalent network crystalline
solids
• Describe the main types of crystalline solids: ionic solids, metallic solids, covalent network solids, and
molecular solids
• Explain the ways in which crystal defects can occur in a solid
When most liquids are cooled, they eventually freeze and formcrystalline solids, solids in which the atoms,
ions, or molecules are arranged in a definite repeating pattern. It is also possible for a liquid to freeze before its
molecules become arranged in an orderly pattern. The resulting materials are calledamorphous solidsor
noncrystalline solids (or, sometimes, glasses). The particles of such solids lack an ordered internal structure
and are randomly arranged (Figure 10.37).
FIGURE10.37 The entities of a solid phase may be arranged in a regular, repeating pattern (crystalline solids) or
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 525
10.5 • The Solid State of Matter 511
randomly (amorphous).
Metals and ionic compounds typically form ordered, crystalline solids. Substances that consist of large
molecules, or a mixture of molecules whose movements are more restricted, often form amorphous solids. For
examples, candle waxes are amorphous solids composed of large hydrocarbon molecules. Some substances,
such as silicon dioxide (shown inFigure 10.38), can form either crystalline or amorphous solids, depending on
the conditions under which it is produced. Also, amorphous solids may undergo a transition to the crystalline
state under appropriate conditions.
FIGURE10.38 (a) Silicon dioxide, SiO , is abundant in nature as one of several crystalline forms of the mineral
2
quartz. (b) Rapid cooling of molten SiO yields an amorphous solid known as “fused silica”.
2
Crystalline solids are generally classified according to the nature of the forces that hold its particles together.
These forces are primarily responsible for the physical properties exhibited by the bulk solids. The following
sections provide descriptions of the major types of crystalline solids: ionic, metallic, covalent network, and
molecular.
Ionic Solids
Ionic solids, such as sodium chloride and nickel oxide, are composed of positive and negative ions that are
held together by electrostatic attractions, which can be quite strong (Figure 10.39). Many ionic crystals also
have high melting points. This is due to the very strong attractions between the ions—in ionic compounds, the
attractions between full charges are (much) larger than those between the partial charges in polar molecular
compounds. This will be looked at in more detail in a later discussion of lattice energies. Although they are
hard, they also tend to be brittle, and they shatter rather than bend. Ionic solids do not conduct electricity;
however, they do conduct when molten or dissolved because their ions are free to move. Many simple
compounds formed by the reaction of a metallic element with a nonmetallic element are ionic.
FIGURE10.39 Sodium chloride is an ionic solid.
Metallic Solids
Metallic solidssuch as crystals of copper, aluminum, and iron are formed by metal atomsFigure 10.40. The
structure of metallic crystals is often described as a uniform distribution of atomic nuclei within a “sea” of
delocalized electrons. The atoms within such a metallic solid are held together by a unique force known as
metallic bondingthat gives rise to many useful and varied bulk properties. All exhibit high thermal and
electrical conductivity, metallic luster, and malleability. Many are very hard and quite strong. Because of their
PAGE: 526
512 10 • Liquids and Solids
malleability (the ability to deform under pressure or hammering), they do not shatter and, therefore, make
useful construction materials. The melting points of the metals vary widely. Mercury is a liquid at room
temperature, and the alkali metals melt below 200 °C. Several post-transition metals also have low melting
points, whereas the transition metals melt at temperatures above 1000 °C. These differences reflect
differences in strengths of metallic bonding among the metals.
FIGURE10.40 Copper is a metallic solid.
Covalent Network Solid
Covalent network solidsinclude crystals of diamond, silicon, some other nonmetals, and some covalent
compounds such as silicon dioxide (sand) and silicon carbide (carborundum, the abrasive on sandpaper).
Many minerals have networks of covalent bonds. The atoms in these solids are held together by a network of
covalent bonds, as shown inFigure 10.41. To break or to melt a covalent network solid, covalent bonds must be
broken. Because covalent bonds are relatively strong, covalent network solids are typically characterized by
hardness, strength, and high melting points. For example, diamond is one of the hardest substances known
and melts above 3500 °C.
FIGURE10.41 A covalent crystal contains a three-dimensional network of covalent bonds, as illustrated by the
structures of diamond, silicon dioxide, silicon carbide, and graphite. Graphite is an exceptional example, composed
of planar sheets of covalent crystals that are held together in layers by noncovalent forces. Unlike typical covalent
solids, graphite is very soft and electrically conductive.
Molecular Solid
Molecular solids, such as ice, sucrose (table sugar), and iodine, as shown inFigure 10.42, are composed of
neutral molecules. The strengths of the attractive forces between the units present in different crystals vary
widely, as indicated by the melting points of the crystals. Small symmetrical molecules (nonpolar molecules),
such as H , N , O , and F , have weak attractive forces and form molecular solids with very low melting points
2 2 2 2
(below −200 °C). Substances consisting of larger, nonpolar molecules have larger attractive forces and melt at
higher temperatures. Molecular solids composed of molecules with permanent dipole moments (polar
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 527
10.5 • The Solid State of Matter 513
molecules) melt at still higher temperatures. Examples include ice (melting point, 0 °C) and table sugar
(melting point, 185 °C).
FIGURE10.42 Carbon dioxide (CO ) consists of small, nonpolar molecules and forms a molecular solid with a
2
melting point of −78 °C. Iodine (I ) consists of larger, nonpolar molecules and forms a molecular solid that melts at
2
114 °C.
Properties of Solids
A crystalline solid, like those listed inTable 10.4, has a precise melting temperature because each atom or
molecule of the same type is held in place with the same forces or energy. Thus, the attractions between the
units that make up the crystal all have the same strength and all require the same amount of energy to be
broken. The gradual softening of an amorphous material differs dramatically from the distinct melting of a
crystalline solid. This results from the structural nonequivalence of the molecules in the amorphous solid.
Some forces are weaker than others, and when an amorphous material is heated, the weakest intermolecular
attractions break first. As the temperature is increased further, the stronger attractions are broken. Thus
amorphous materials soften over a range of temperatures.
Types of Crystalline Solids and Their Properties
Type of Type of Type of
Properties Examples
Solid Particles Attractions
ionic hard, brittle, conducts electricity as a liquid but NaCl,
ionic ions
bonds not as a solid, high to very high melting points Al O
2 3
atoms of shiny, malleable, ductile, conducts heat and
metallic Cu, Fe, Ti,
metallic electropositive electricity well, variable hardness and melting
bonds Pb, U
elements temperature
atoms of C
covalent covalent very hard, not conductive, very high melting
electronegative (diamond),
network bonds points
elements SiO , SiC
2
H O, CO ,
molecules (or variable hardness, variable brittleness, not 2 2
molecular IMFs I ,
atoms) conductive, low melting points 2
C H O
12 22 11
TABLE10.4
PAGE: 528
514 10 • Liquids and Solids
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Graphene: Material of the Future
Carbon is an essential element in our world. The unique properties of carbon atoms allow the existence of
carbon-based life forms such as ourselves. Carbon forms a huge variety of substances that we use on a daily
basis, including those shown inFigure 10.43. You may be familiar with diamond and graphite, the two most
commonallotropesof carbon. (Allotropes are different structural forms of the same element.) Diamond is one
of the hardest-known substances, whereas graphite is soft enough to be used as pencil lead. These very
different properties stem from the different arrangements of the carbon atoms in the different allotropes.
FIGURE10.43 Diamond is extremely hard because of the strong bonding between carbon atoms in all directions.
Graphite (in pencil lead) rubs off onto paper due to the weak attractions between the carbon layers. An image of a
graphite surface shows the distance between the centers of adjacent carbon atoms. (credit left photo: modification
of work by Steve Jurvetson; credit middle photo: modification of work by United States Geological Survey)
You may be less familiar with a recently discovered form of carbon: graphene. Graphene was first isolated in
2004 by using tape to peel off thinner and thinner layers from graphite. It is essentially a single sheet (one
atom thick) of graphite. Graphene, illustrated inFigure 10.44, is not only strong and lightweight, but it is also
an excellent conductor of electricity and heat. These properties may prove very useful in a wide range of
applications, such as vastly improved computer chips and circuits, better batteries and solar cells, and
stronger and lighter structural materials. The 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded to AndreGeimand
KonstantinNovoselovfor their pioneering work with graphene.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 529
10.5 • The Solid State of Matter 515
FIGURE10.44 Graphene sheets can be formed into buckyballs, nanotubes, and stacked layers.
Crystal Defects
In a crystalline solid, the atoms, ions, or molecules are arranged in a definite repeating pattern, but occasional
defects may occur in the pattern. Several types of defects are known, as illustrated inFigure 10.45.Vacancies
are defects that occur when positions that should contain atoms or ions are vacant. Less commonly, some
atoms or ions in a crystal may occupy positions, calledinterstitial sites, located between the regular positions
for atoms. Other distortions are found in impure crystals, as, for example, when the cations, anions, or
molecules of the impurity are too large to fit into the regular positions without distorting the structure. Trace
amounts of impurities are sometimes added to a crystal (a process known asdoping)in order to create defects
in the structure that yield desirable changes in its properties. For example, silicon crystals are doped with
varying amounts of different elements to yield suitable electrical properties for their use in the manufacture of
semiconductors and computer chips.
PAGE: 530
516 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.45 Types of crystal defects include vacancies, interstitial atoms, and substitutions impurities.
10.6 Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the arrangement of atoms and ions in crystalline structures
• Compute ionic radii using unit cell dimensions
• Explain the use of X-ray diffraction measurements in determining crystalline structures
Over 90% of naturally occurring and man-made solids are crystalline. Most solids form with a regular
arrangement of their particles because the overall attractive interactions between particles are maximized,
and the total intermolecular energy is minimized, when the particles pack in the most efficient manner. The
regular arrangement at an atomic level is often reflected at a macroscopic level. In this module, we will explore
some of the details about the structures of metallic and ionic crystalline solids, and learn how these structures
are determined experimentally.
The Structures of Metals
We will begin our discussion of crystalline solids by considering elemental metals, which are relatively simple
because each contains only one type of atom. A pure metal is a crystalline solid with metal atoms packed
closely together in a repeating pattern. Some of the properties of metals in general, such as their malleability
and ductility, are largely due to having identical atoms arranged in a regular pattern. The different properties
of one metal compared to another partially depend on the sizes of their atoms and the specifics of their spatial
arrangements. We will explore the similarities and differences of four of the most common metal crystal
geometries in the sections that follow.
Unit Cells of Metals
The structure of a crystalline solid, whether a metal or not, is best described by considering its simplest
repeating unit, which is referred to as itsunit cell. The unit cell consists of lattice points that represent the
locations of atoms or ions. The entire structure then consists of this unit cell repeating in three dimensions, as
illustrated inFigure 10.46.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 531
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 517
FIGURE10.46 A unit cell shows the locations of lattice points repeating in all directions.
Let us begin our investigation of crystal lattice structure and unit cells with the most straightforward structure
and the most basic unit cell. To visualize this, imagine taking a large number of identical spheres, such as
tennis balls, and arranging them uniformly in a container. The simplest way to do this would be to make layers
in which the spheres in one layer are directly above those in the layer below, as illustrated inFigure 10.47. This
arrangement is calledsimple cubic structure, and the unit cell is called thesimple cubic unit cellor
primitive cubic unit cell.
FIGURE10.47 When metal atoms are arranged with spheres in one layer directly above or below spheres in
another layer, the lattice structure is called simple cubic. Note that the spheres are in contact.
In a simple cubic structure, the spheres are not packed as closely as they could be, and they only “fill” about
52% of the volume of the container. This is a relatively inefficient arrangement, and only one metal (polonium,
Po) crystallizes in a simple cubic structure. As shown inFigure 10.48, a solid with this type of arrangement
consists of planes (or layers) in which each atom contacts only the four nearest neighbors in its layer; one atom
directly above it in the layer above; and one atom directly below it in the layer below. The number of other
particles that each particle in a crystalline solid contacts is known as itscoordination number. For a
polonium atom in a simple cubic array, the coordination number is, therefore, six.
FIGURE10.48 An atom in a simple cubic lattice structure contacts six other atoms, so it has a coordination
number of six.
In a simple cubic lattice, the unit cell that repeats in all directions is a cube defined by the centers of eight
atoms, as shown inFigure 10.49. Atoms at adjacent corners of this unit cell contact each other, so the edge
length of this cell is equal to two atomic radii, or one atomic diameter. A cubic unit cell contains only the parts
of these atoms that are within it. Since an atom at a corner of a simple cubic unit cell is contained by a total of
eight unit cells, only one-eighth of that atom is within a specific unit cell. And since each simple cubic unit cell
has one atom at each of its eight “corners,” there is atom within one simple cubic unit cell.
PAGE: 532
518 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.49 A simple cubic lattice unit cell contains one-eighth of an atom at each of its eight corners, so it
contains one atom total.
EXAMPLE 10.14
Calculation of Atomic Radius and Density for Metals, Part 1
The edge length of the unit cell of alpha polonium is 336 pm.
(a) Determine the radius of a polonium atom.
(b) Determine the density of alpha polonium.
Solution
Alpha polonium crystallizes in a simple cubic unit cell:
(a) Two adjacent Po atoms contact each other, so the edge length of this cell is equal to two Po atomic radii: l =
2r. Therefore, the radius of Po is
(b) Density is given by The density of polonium can be found by determining the density of
its unit cell (the mass contained within a unit cell divided by the volume of the unit cell). Since a Po unit cell
contains one-eighth of a Po atom at each of its eight corners, a unit cell contains one Po atom.
The mass of a Po unit cell can be found by:
The volume of a Po unit cell can be found by:
(Note that the edge length was converted from pm to cm to get the usual volume units for density.)
Therefore, the density of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 533
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 519
Check Your Learning
The edge length of the unit cell for nickel is 0.3524 nm. The density of Ni is 8.90 g/cm3. Does nickel crystallize
in a simple cubic structure? Explain.
Answer:
No. If Ni was simple cubic, its density would be given by:
Then the density of Ni would be
Since the actual density of Ni is not close to this, Ni does not form a simple cubic structure.
Most metal crystals are one of the four major types of unit cells. For now, we will focus on the three cubic unit
cells: simple cubic (which we have already seen),body-centered cubic unit cell, andface-centered cubic unit
cell—all of which are illustrated inFigure 10.50. (Note that there are actually seven different lattice systems,
some of which have more than one type of lattice, for a total of 14 different types of unit cells. We leave the
more complicated geometries for later in this module.)
FIGURE10.50 Cubic unit cells of metals show (in the upper figures) the locations of lattice points and (in the lower
figures) metal atoms located in the unit cell.
Some metals crystallize in an arrangement that has a cubic unit cell with atoms at all of the corners and an
atom in the center, as shown inFigure 10.51. This is called abody-centered cubic (BCC) solid. Atoms in the
corners of a BCC unit cell do not contact each other but contact the atom in the center. A BCC unit cell contains
two atoms: one-eighth of an atom at each of the eight corners atom from the corners) plus one
atom from the center. Any atom in this structure touches four atoms in the layer above it and four atoms in the
layer below it. Thus, an atom in a BCC structure has a coordination number of eight.
PAGE: 534
520 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.51 In a body-centered cubic structure, atoms in a specific layer do not touch each other. Each atom
touches four atoms in the layer above it and four atoms in the layer below it.
Atoms in BCC arrangements are much more efficiently packed than in a simple cubic structure, occupying
about 68% of the total volume. Isomorphous metals with a BCC structure include K, Ba, Cr, Mo, W, and Fe at
room temperature. (Elements or compounds that crystallize with the same structure are said to be
isomorphous.)
Many other metals, such as aluminum, copper, and lead, crystallize in an arrangement that has a cubic unit
cell with atoms at all of the corners and at the centers of each face, as illustrated inFigure 10.52. This
arrangement is called aface-centered cubic (FCC) solid. A FCC unit cell contains four atoms: one-eighth of an
atom at each of the eight corners atom from the corners) and one-half of an atom on each of the
six faces atoms from the faces). The atoms at the corners touch the atoms in the centers of the
adjacent faces along the face diagonals of the cube. Because the atoms are on identical lattice points, they have
identical environments.
FIGURE10.52 A face-centered cubic solid has atoms at the corners and, as the name implies, at the centers of the
faces of its unit cells.
Atoms in an FCC arrangement are packed as closely together as possible, with atoms occupying 74% of the
volume. This structure is also calledcubic closest packing (CCP). In CCP, there are three repeating layers of
hexagonally arranged atoms. Each atom contacts six atoms in its own layer, three in the layer above, and three
in the layer below. In this arrangement, each atom touches 12 near neighbors, and therefore has a
coordination number of 12. The fact that FCC and CCP arrangements are equivalent may not be immediately
obvious, but why they are actually the same structure is illustrated inFigure 10.53.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 535
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 521
FIGURE10.53 A CCP arrangement consists of three repeating layers (ABCABC…) of hexagonally arranged atoms.
Atoms in a CCP structure have a coordination number of 12 because they contact six atoms in their layer, plus three
atoms in the layer above and three atoms in the layer below. By rotating our perspective, we can see that a CCP
structure has a unit cell with a face containing an atom from layer A at one corner, atoms from layer B across a
diagonal (at two corners and in the middle of the face), and an atom from layer C at the remaining corner. This is the
same as a face-centered cubic arrangement.
Because closer packing maximizes the overall attractions between atoms and minimizes the total
intermolecular energy, the atoms in most metals pack in this manner. We find two types of closest packing in
simple metallic crystalline structures: CCP, which we have already encountered, andhexagonal closest
packing (HCP)shown inFigure 10.54. Both consist of repeating layers of hexagonally arranged atoms. In both
types, a second layer (B) is placed on the first layer (A) so that each atom in the second layer is in contact with
three atoms in the first layer. The third layer is positioned in one of two ways. In HCP, atoms in the third layer
are directly above atoms in the first layer (i.e., the third layer is also type A), and the stacking consists of
alternating type A and type B close-packed layers (i.e., ABABAB⋯). In CCP, atoms in the third layer are not
above atoms in either of the first two layers (i.e., the third layer is type C), and the stacking consists of
alternating type A, type B, and type C close-packed layers (i.e., ABCABCABC⋯). About two–thirds of all metals
crystallize in closest-packed arrays with coordination numbers of 12. Metals that crystallize in an HCP
structure include Cd, Co, Li, Mg, Na, and Zn, and metals that crystallize in a CCP structure include Ag, Al, Ca,
Cu, Ni, Pb, and Pt.
FIGURE10.54 In both types of closest packing, atoms are packed as compactly as possible. Hexagonal closest
packing consists of two alternating layers (ABABAB…). Cubic closest packing consists of three alternating layers
(ABCABCABC…).
PAGE: 536
522 10 • Liquids and Solids
EXAMPLE 10.15
Calculation of Atomic Radius and Density for Metals, Part 2
Calcium crystallizes in a face-centered cubic structure. The edge length of its unit cell is 558.8 pm.
(a) What is the atomic radius of Ca in this structure?
(b) Calculate the density of Ca.
Solution
(a) In an FCC structure, Ca atoms contact each other across the diagonal of the face, so the length of the
diagonal is equal to four Ca atomic radii (d = 4r). Two adjacent edges and the diagonal of the face form a right
triangle, with the length of each side equal to 558.8 pm and the length of the hypotenuse equal to four Ca
atomic radii:
Solving this gives
(b) Density is given by The density of calcium can be found by determining the density of its
unit cell: for example, the mass contained within a unit cell divided by the volume of the unit cell. A face-
centered Ca unit cell has one-eighth of an atom at each of the eight corners atom) and one-half of
an atom on each of the six faces atoms), for a total of four atoms in the unit cell.
The mass of the unit cell can be found by:
The volume of a Ca unit cell can be found by:
(Note that the edge length was converted from pm to cm to get the usual volume units for density.)
Then, the density of
Check Your Learning
Silver crystallizes in an FCC structure. The edge length of its unit cell is 409 pm.
(a) What is the atomic radius of Ag in this structure?
(b) Calculate the density of Ag.
Answer:
(a) 144 pm; (b) 10.5 g/cm3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 537
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 523
In general, a unit cell is defined by the lengths of three axes (a,b, andc) and the angles (α,β, andγ) between
them, as illustrated inFigure 10.55. The axes are defined as being the lengths between points in the space
lattice. Consequently, unit cell axes join points with identical environments.
FIGURE10.55 A unit cell is defined by the lengths of its three axes (a,b, andc) and the angles (α,β, andγ)
between the axes.
There are seven different lattice systems, some of which have more than one type of lattice, for a total of
fourteen different unit cells, which have the shapes shown inFigure 10.56.
PAGE: 538
524 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.56 There are seven different lattice systems and 14 different unit cells.
The Structures of Ionic Crystals
Ionic crystals consist of two or more different kinds of ions that usually have different sizes. The packing of
these ions into a crystal structure is more complex than the packing of metal atoms that are the same size.
Most monatomic ions behave as charged spheres, and their attraction for ions of opposite charge is the same
in every direction. Consequently, stable structures for ionic compounds result (1) when ions of one charge are
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 539
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 525
surrounded by as many ions as possible of the opposite charge and (2) when the cations and anions are in
contact with each other. Structures are determined by two principal factors: the relative sizes of the ions and
the ratio of the numbers of positive and negative ions in the compound.
In simple ionic structures, we usually find the anions, which are normally larger than the cations, arranged in a
closest-packed array. (As seen previously, additional electrons attracted to the same nucleus make anions
larger and fewer electrons attracted to the same nucleus make cations smaller when compared to the atoms
from which they are formed.) The smaller cations commonly occupy one of two types ofholes(or interstices)
remaining between the anions. The smaller of the holes is found between three anions in one plane and one
anion in an adjacent plane. The four anions surrounding this hole are arranged at the corners of a tetrahedron,
so the hole is called atetrahedral hole. The larger type of hole is found at the center of six anions (three in one
layer and three in an adjacent layer) located at the corners of an octahedron; this is called anoctahedral hole.
Figure 10.57illustrates both of these types of holes.
FIGURE10.57 Cations may occupy two types of holes between anions: octahedral holes or tetrahedral holes.
Depending on the relative sizes of the cations and anions, the cations of an ionic compound may occupy
tetrahedral or octahedral holes, as illustrated inFigure 10.58. Relatively small cations occupy tetrahedral
holes, and larger cations occupy octahedral holes. If the cations are too large to fit into the octahedral holes, the
anions may adopt a more open structure, such as a simple cubic array. The larger cations can then occupy the
larger cubic holes made possible by the more open spacing.
FIGURE10.58 A cation’s size and the shape of the hole occupied by the compound are directly related.
There are two tetrahedral holes for each anion in either an HCP or CCP array of anions. A compound that
crystallizes in a closest-packed array of anions with cations in the tetrahedral holes can have a maximum
cation:anion ratio of 2:1; all of the tetrahedral holes are filled at this ratio. Examples include Li O, Na O, Li S,
2 2 2
PAGE: 540
526 10 • Liquids and Solids
and Na S. Compounds with a ratio of less than 2:1 may also crystallize in a closest-packed array of anions with
2
cations in the tetrahedral holes, if the ionic sizes fit. In these compounds, however, some of the tetrahedral
holes remain vacant.
EXAMPLE 10.16
Occupancy of Tetrahedral Holes
Zinc sulfide is an important industrial source of zinc and is also used as a white pigment in paint. Zinc sulfide
crystallizes with zinc ions occupying one-half of the tetrahedral holes in a closest-packed array of sulfide ions.
What is the formula of zinc sulfide?
Solution
Because there are two tetrahedral holes per anion (sulfide ion) and one-half of these holes are occupied by zinc
ions, there must be or 1, zinc ion per sulfide ion. Thus, the formula is ZnS.
Check Your Learning
Lithium selenide can be described as a closest-packed array of selenide ions with lithium ions in all of the
tetrahedral holes. What it the formula of lithium selenide?
Answer:
Li Se
2
The ratio of octahedral holes to anions in either an HCP or CCP structure is 1:1. Thus, compounds with cations
in octahedral holes in a closest-packed array of anions can have a maximum cation:anion ratio of 1:1. In NiO,
MnS, NaCl, and KH, for example, all of the octahedral holes are filled. Ratios of less than 1:1 are observed when
some of the octahedral holes remain empty.
EXAMPLE 10.17
Stoichiometry of Ionic Compounds
Sapphire is aluminum oxide. Aluminum oxide crystallizes with aluminum ions in two-thirds of the octahedral
holes in a closest-packed array of oxide ions. What is the formula of aluminum oxide?
Solution
Because there is one octahedral hole per anion (oxide ion) and only two-thirds of these holes are occupied, the
ratio of aluminum to oxygen must be :1, which would give The simplest whole number ratio is 2:3, so
the formula is Al O .
2 3
Check Your Learning
The white pigment titanium oxide crystallizes with titanium ions in one-half of the octahedral holes in a
closest-packed array of oxide ions. What is the formula of titanium oxide?
Answer:
TiO
2
In a simple cubic array of anions, there is one cubic hole that can be occupied by a cation for each anion in the
array. In CsCl, and in other compounds with the same structure, all of the cubic holes are occupied. Half of the
cubic holes are occupied in SrH , UO , SrCl , and CaF .
2 2 2 2
Different types of ionic compounds often crystallize in the same structure when the relative sizes of their ions
and their stoichiometries (the two principal features that determine structure) are similar.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 541
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 527
Unit Cells of Ionic Compounds
Many ionic compounds crystallize with cubic unit cells, and we will use these compounds to describe the
general features of ionic structures.
When an ionic compound is composed of cations and anions of similar size in a 1:1 ratio, it typically forms a
simple cubic structure. Cesium chloride, CsCl, (illustrated inFigure 10.59) is an example of this, with Cs+and
Cl−having radii of 174 pm and 181 pm, respectively. We can think of this as chloride ions forming a simple
cubic unit cell, with a cesium ion in the center; or as cesium ions forming a unit cell with a chloride ion in the
center; or as simple cubic unit cells formed by Cs+ions overlapping unit cells formed by Cl−ions. Cesium ions
and chloride ions touch along the body diagonals of the unit cells. One cesium ion and one chloride ion are
present per unit cell, giving the l:l stoichiometry required by the formula for cesium chloride. Note that there is
no lattice point in the center of the cell, and CsCl is not a BCC structure because a cesium ion is not identical to
a chloride ion.
FIGURE10.59 Ionic compounds with similar-sized cations and anions, such as CsCl, usually form a simple cubic
structure. They can be described by unit cells with either cations at the corners or anions at the corners.
We have said that the location of lattice points is arbitrary. This is illustrated by an alternate description of the
CsCl structure in which the lattice points are located in the centers of the cesium ions. In this description, the
cesium ions are located on the lattice points at the corners of the cell, and the chloride ion is located at the
center of the cell. The two unit cells are different, but they describe identical structures.
When an ionic compound is composed of a 1:1 ratio of cations and anions that differ significantly in size, it
typically crystallizes with an FCC unit cell, like that shown inFigure 10.60. Sodium chloride, NaCl, is an
example of this, with Na+and Cl−having radii of 102 pm and 181 pm, respectively. We can think of this as
chloride ions forming an FCC cell, with sodium ions located in the octahedral holes in the middle of the cell
edges and in the center of the cell. The sodium and chloride ions touch each other along the cell edges. The
unit cell contains four sodium ions and four chloride ions, giving the 1:1 stoichiometry required by the
formula, NaCl.
PAGE: 542
528 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.60 Ionic compounds with anions that are much larger than cations, such as NaCl, usually form an FCC
structure. They can be described by FCC unit cells with cations in the octahedral holes.
The cubic form of zinc sulfide, zinc blende, also crystallizes in an FCC unit cell, as illustrated inFigure 10.61.
This structure contains sulfide ions on the lattice points of an FCC lattice. (The arrangement of sulfide ions is
identical to the arrangement of chloride ions in sodium chloride.) The radius of a zinc ion is only about 40% of
the radius of a sulfide ion, so these small Zn2+ions are located in alternating tetrahedral holes, that is, in one
half of the tetrahedral holes. There are four zinc ions and four sulfide ions in the unit cell, giving the empirical
formula ZnS.
FIGURE10.61 ZnS, zinc sulfide (or zinc blende) forms an FCC unit cell with sulfide ions at the lattice points and
much smaller zinc ions occupying half of the tetrahedral holes in the structure.
A calcium fluoride unit cell, like that shown inFigure 10.62, is also an FCC unit cell, but in this case, the cations
are located on the lattice points; equivalent calcium ions are located on the lattice points of an FCC lattice. All
of the tetrahedral sites in the FCC array of calcium ions are occupied by fluoride ions. There are four calcium
ions and eight fluoride ions in a unit cell, giving a calcium:fluorine ratio of 1:2, as required by the chemical
formula, CaF . Close examination ofFigure 10.62will reveal a simple cubic array of fluoride ions with calcium
2
ions in one half of the cubic holes. The structure cannot be described in terms of aspace latticeof points on
the fluoride ions because the fluoride ions do not all have identical environments. The orientation of the four
calcium ions about the fluoride ions differs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 543
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 529
FIGURE10.62 Calcium fluoride, CaF , forms an FCC unit cell with calcium ions (green) at the lattice points and
2
fluoride ions (red) occupying all of the tetrahedral sites between them.
Calculation of Ionic Radii
If we know the edge length of a unit cell of an ionic compound and the position of the ions in the cell, we can
calculate ionic radii for the ions in the compound if we make assumptions about individual ionic shapes and
contacts.
EXAMPLE 10.18
Calculation of Ionic Radii
The edge length of the unit cell of LiCl (NaCl-like structure, FCC) is 0.514 nm or 5.14 Å. Assuming that the
lithium ion is small enough so that the chloride ions are in contact, as inFigure 10.60, calculate the ionic
radius for the chloride ion.
Note: The length unit angstrom, Å, is often used to represent atomic-scale dimensions and is equivalent to
10−10m.
Solution
On the face of a LiCl unit cell, chloride ions contact each other across the diagonal of the face:
Drawing a right triangle on the face of the unit cell, we see that the length of the diagonal is equal to four
chloride radii (one radius from each corner chloride and one diameter—which equals two radii—from the
chloride ion in the center of the face), sod= 4r. From the Pythagorean theorem, we have:
which yields:
Solving this gives:
PAGE: 544
530 10 • Liquids and Solids
Check Your Learning
The edge length of the unit cell of KCl (NaCl-like structure, FCC) is 6.28 Å. Assuming anion-cation contact along
the cell edge, calculate the radius of the potassium ion. The radius of the chloride ion is 1.82 Å.
Answer:
The radius of the potassium ion is 1.33 Å.
It is important to realize that values for ionic radii calculated from the edge lengths of unit cells depend on
numerous assumptions, such as a perfect spherical shape for ions, which are approximations at best. Hence,
such calculated values are themselves approximate and comparisons cannot be pushed too far. Nevertheless,
this method has proved useful for calculating ionic radii from experimental measurements such as X-ray
crystallographic determinations.
X-Ray Crystallography
The size of the unit cell and the arrangement of atoms in a crystal may be determined from measurements of
thediffractionof X-rays by the crystal, termedX-ray crystallography.Diffractionis the change in the
direction of travel experienced by an electromagnetic wave when it encounters a physical barrier whose
dimensions are comparable to those of the wavelength of the light. X-rays are electromagnetic radiation with
wavelengths about as long as the distance between neighboring atoms in crystals (on the order of a few Å).
When a beam of monochromatic X-rays strikes a crystal, its rays are scattered in all directions by the atoms
within the crystal. When scattered waves traveling in the same direction encounter one another, they undergo
interference, a process by which the waves combine to yield either an increase or a decrease in amplitude
(intensity) depending upon the extent to which the combining waves’ maxima are separated (seeFigure
10.63).
FIGURE10.63 Light waves occupying the same space experience interference, combining to yield waves of greater
(a) or lesser (b) intensity, depending upon the separation of their maxima and minima.
When X-rays of a certain wavelength,λ, are scattered by atoms in adjacent crystal planes separated by a
distance,d, they may undergo constructive interference when the difference between the distances traveled by
the two waves prior to their combination is an integer factor,n, of the wavelength. This condition is satisfied
when the angle of the diffracted beam,θ, is related to the wavelength and interatomic distance by the equation:
This relation is known as theBragg equationin honor of W. H.Bragg, the English physicist who first explained
this phenomenon.Figure 10.64illustrates two examples of diffracted waves from the same two crystal planes.
The figure on the left depicts waves diffracted at the Bragg angle, resulting in constructive interference, while
that on the right shows diffraction and a different angle that does not satisfy the Bragg condition, resulting in
destructive interference.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 545
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 531
FIGURE10.64 The diffraction of X-rays scattered by the atoms within a crystal permits the determination of the
distance between the atoms. The top image depicts constructive interference between two scattered waves and a
resultant diffracted wave of high intensity. The bottom image depicts destructive interference and a low intensity
diffracted wave.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16bragg)for more details on the Bragg equation and a simulator that allows
you to explore the effect of each variable on the intensity of the diffracted wave.
An X-ray diffractometer, such as the one illustrated inFigure 10.65, may be used to measure the angles at
which X-rays are diffracted when interacting with a crystal as described earlier. From such measurements, the
Bragg equation may be used to compute distances between atoms as demonstrated in the following example
exercise.
PAGE: 546
532 10 • Liquids and Solids
FIGURE10.65 (a) In a diffractometer, a beam of X-rays strikes a crystalline material, producing (b) an X-ray
diffraction pattern that can be analyzed to determine the crystal structure.
EXAMPLE 10.19
Using the Bragg Equation
In a diffractometer, X-rays with a wavelength of 0.1315 nm were used to produce a diffraction pattern for
copper. The first order diffraction (n= 1) occurred at an angleθ= 25.25°. Determine the spacing between the
diffracting planes in copper.
Solution
The distance between the planes is found by solving the Bragg equation,nλ= 2dsinθ, ford.
This gives:
Check Your Learning
A crystal with spacing between planes equal to 0.394 nm diffracts X-rays with a wavelength of 0.147 nm. What
is the angle for the first order diffraction?
Answer:
10.8°
Portrait of a Chemist
X-ray Crystallographer Rosalind Franklin
The discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953 by FrancisCrickand JamesWatsonis one of the great
achievements in the history of science. They were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine,
along with MauriceWilkins, who provided experimental proof of DNA’s structure. British chemist Rosalind
Franklinmade invaluable contributions to this monumental achievement through her work in measuring
X-ray diffraction images of DNA. Early in her career, Franklin’s research on the structure of coals proved
helpful to the British war effort. After shifting her focus to biological systems in the early 1950s, Franklin
and doctoral student Raymond Gosling discovered that DNA consists of two forms: a long, thin fiber formed
when wet (type “B”) and a short, wide fiber formed when dried (type “A”). Her X-ray diffraction images of
DNA (Figure 10.66) provided the crucial information that allowed Watson and Crick to confirm that DNA
forms a double helix, and to determine details of its size and structure. Franklin also conducted pioneering
research on viruses and the RNA that contains their genetic information, uncovering new information that
radically changed the body of knowledge in the field. After developing ovarian cancer, Franklin continued
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 547
10.6 • Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids 533
to work until her death in 1958 at age 37. Among many posthumous recognitions of her work, the Chicago
Medical School of Finch University of Health Sciences changed its name to the Rosalind Franklin
University of Medicine and Science in 2004, and adopted an image of her famous X-ray diffraction image of
DNA as its official university logo.
FIGURE10.66 This illustration shows an X-ray diffraction image similar to the one Franklin found in her
research. (credit: National Institutes of Health)
PAGE: 548
534 10 • Key Terms
Key Terms
adhesive force force of attraction between temporary dipoles; significant only when
molecules of different chemical identities particles are very close together
amorphous solid (also, noncrystalline solid) solid dynamic equilibrium state of a system in which
in which the particles lack an ordered internal reciprocal processes are occurring at equal rates
structure face-centered cubic (FCC) solid crystalline
body-centered cubic (BCC) solid crystalline structure consisting of a cubic unit cell with
structure that has a cubic unit cell with lattice lattice points on the corners and in the center of
points at the corners and in the center of the cell each face
body-centered cubic unit cell simplest repeating face-centered cubic unit cell simplest repeating
unit of a body-centered cubic crystal; it is a cube unit of a face-centered cubic crystal; it is a cube
containing lattice points at each corner and in the containing lattice points at each corner and in the
center of the cube center of each face
boiling point temperature at which the vapor freezing change from a liquid state to a solid state
pressure of a liquid equals the pressure of the gas freezing point temperature at which the solid and
above it liquid phases of a substance are in equilibrium;
Bragg equation equation that relates the angles at see alsomelting point
which X-rays are diffracted by the atoms within a hexagonal closest packing (HCP) crystalline
crystal structure in which close packed layers of atoms
capillary action flow of liquid within a porous or ions are stacked as a series of two alternating
material due to the attraction of the liquid layers of different relative orientations (AB)
molecules to the surface of the material and to hole (also, interstice) space between atoms within
other liquid molecules a crystal
Clausius-Clapeyron equation mathematical hydrogen bonding occurs when exceptionally
relationship between the temperature, vapor strong dipoles attract; bonding that exists when
pressure, and enthalpy of vaporization for a hydrogen is bonded to one of the three most
substance electronegative elements: F, O, or N
cohesive force force of attraction between induced dipole temporary dipole formed when the
identical molecules electrons of an atom or molecule are distorted by
condensation change from a gaseous to a liquid the instantaneous dipole of a neighboring atom or
state molecule
coordination number number of atoms closest to instantaneous dipole temporary dipole that
any given atom in a crystal or to the central metal occurs for a brief moment in time when the
atom in a complex electrons of an atom or molecule are distributed
covalent network solid solid whose particles are asymmetrically
held together by covalent bonds intermolecular force noncovalent attractive force
critical point temperature and pressure above between atoms, molecules, and/or ions
which a gas cannot be condensed into a liquid interstitial sites spaces between the regular
crystalline solid solid in which the particles are particle positions in any array of atoms or ions
arranged in a definite repeating pattern ionic solid solid composed of positive and negative
cubic closest packing (CCP) crystalline structure ions held together by strong electrostatic
in which planes of closely packed atoms or ions attractions
are stacked as a series of three alternating layers isomorphous possessing the same crystalline
of different relative orientations (ABC) structure
deposition change from a gaseous state directly to melting change from a solid state to a liquid state
a solid state melting point temperature at which the solid and
diffraction redirection of electromagnetic liquid phases of a substance are in equilibrium;
radiation that occurs when it encounters a see alsofreezing point
physical barrier of appropriate dimensions metallic solid solid composed of metal atoms
dipole-dipole attraction intermolecular attraction molecular solid solid composed of neutral
between two permanent dipoles molecules held together by intermolecular forces
dispersion force (also, London dispersion force) of attraction
attraction between two rapidly fluctuating, normal boiling point temperature at which a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 549
10 • Key Equations 535
liquid’s vapor pressure equals 1 atm (760 torr) tetrahedral hole tetrahedral space formed by four
octahedral hole open space in a crystal at the atoms or ions in a crystal
center of six particles located at the corners of an triple point temperature and pressure at which the
octahedron vapor, liquid, and solid phases of a substance are
phase diagram pressure-temperature graph in equilibrium
summarizing conditions under which the phases unit cell smallest portion of a space lattice that is
of a substance can exist repeated in three dimensions to form the entire
polarizability measure of the ability of a charge to lattice
distort a molecule’s charge distribution (electron vacancy defect that occurs when a position that
cloud) should contain an atom or ion is vacant
simple cubic structure crystalline structure with a van der Waals force attractive or repulsive force
cubic unit cell with lattice points only at the between molecules, including dipole-dipole,
corners dipole-induced dipole, and London dispersion
simple cubic unit cell (also, primitive cubic unit forces; does not include forces due to covalent or
cell) unit cell in the simple cubic structure ionic bonding, or the attraction between ions and
space lattice all points within a crystal that have molecules
identical environments vapor pressure (also, equilibrium vapor pressure)
sublimation change from solid state directly to pressure exerted by a vapor in equilibrium with a
gaseous state solid or a liquid at a given temperature
supercritical fluid substance at a temperature and vaporization change from liquid state to gaseous
pressure higher than its critical point; exhibits state
properties intermediate between those of gaseous viscosity measure of a liquid’s resistance to flow
and liquid states X-ray crystallography experimental technique for
surface tension energy required to increase the determining distances between atoms in a crystal
area, or length, of a liquid surface by a given by measuring the angles at which X-rays are
amount diffracted when passing through the crystal
Key Equations
Summary
10.1Intermolecular Forces motion of the electrons in an atom can induce a
dipole in an adjacent atom and give rise to the
The physical properties of condensed matter
London dispersion force. London forces increase
(liquids and solids) can be explained in terms of the
with increasing molecular size. Hydrogen bonds are
kinetic molecular theory. In a liquid, intermolecular
a special type of dipole-dipole attraction that results
attractive forces hold the molecules in contact,
when hydrogen is bonded to one of the three most
although they still have sufficient KE to move past
electronegative elements: F, O, or N.
each other.
10.2Properties of Liquids
Intermolecular attractive forces, collectively referred
to as van der Waals forces, are responsible for the The intermolecular forces between molecules in the
behavior of liquids and solids and are electrostatic in liquid state vary depending upon their chemical
nature. Dipole-dipole attractions result from the identities and result in corresponding variations in
electrostatic attraction of the partial negative end of various physical properties. Cohesive forces
one polar molecule for the partial positive end of between like molecules are responsible for a liquid’s
another. The temporary dipole that results from the viscosity (resistance to flow) and surface tension
PAGE: 550
536 10 • Exercises
(elasticity of a liquid surface). Adhesive forces of particles in a very organized structure; others
between the molecules of a liquid and different form amorphous (noncrystalline) solids with an
molecules composing a surface in contact with the internal structure that is not ordered. The main
liquid are responsible for phenomena such as types of crystalline solids are ionic solids, metallic
surface wetting and capillary rise. solids, covalent network solids, and molecular
solids. The properties of the different kinds of
10.3Phase Transitions
crystalline solids are due to the types of particles of
Phase transitions are processes that convert matter which they consist, the arrangements of the
from one physical state into another. There are six particles, and the strengths of the attractions
phase transitions between the three phases of between them. Because their particles experience
matter. Melting, vaporization, and sublimation are identical attractions, crystalline solids have distinct
all endothermic processes, requiring an input of melting temperatures; the particles in amorphous
heat to overcome intermolecular attractions. The solids experience a range of interactions, so they
reciprocal transitions of freezing, condensation, and soften gradually and melt over a range of
deposition are all exothermic processes, involving temperatures. Some crystalline solids have defects
heat as intermolecular attractive forces are in the definite repeating pattern of their particles.
established or strengthened. The temperatures at These defects (which include vacancies, atoms or
which phase transitions occur are determined by the ions not in the regular positions, and impurities)
relative strengths of intermolecular attractions and change physical properties such as electrical
are, therefore, dependent on the chemical identity of conductivity, which is exploited in the silicon
the substance. crystals used to manufacture computer chips.
10.4Phase Diagrams 10.6Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids
The temperature and pressure conditions at which a The structures of crystalline metals and simple ionic
substance exists in solid, liquid, and gaseous states compounds can be described in terms of packing of
are summarized in a phase diagram for that spheres. Metal atoms can pack in hexagonal closest-
substance. Phase diagrams are combined plots of packed structures, cubic closest-packed structures,
three pressure-temperature equilibrium curves: body-centered structures, and simple cubic
solid-liquid, liquid-gas, and solid-gas. These curves structures. The anions in simple ionic structures
represent the relationships between phase- commonly adopt one of these structures, and the
transition temperatures and pressures. The point of cations occupy the spaces remaining between the
intersection of all three curves represents the anions. Small cations usually occupy tetrahedral
substance’s triple point—the temperature and holes in a closest-packed array of anions. Larger
pressure at which all three phases are in cations usually occupy octahedral holes. Still larger
equilibrium. At pressures below the triple point, a cations can occupy cubic holes in a simple cubic
substance cannot exist in the liquid state, regardless array of anions. The structure of a solid can be
of its temperature. The terminus of the liquid-gas described by indicating the size and shape of a unit
curve represents the substance’s critical point, the cell and the contents of the cell. The type of
pressure and temperature above which a liquid structure and dimensions of the unit cell can be
phase cannot exist. determined by X-ray diffraction measurements.
10.5The Solid State of Matter
Some substances form crystalline solids consisting
Exercises
10.1Intermolecular Forces
1. In terms of their bulk properties, how do liquids and solids differ? How are they similar?
2. In terms of the kinetic molecular theory, in what ways are liquids similar to solids? In what ways are
liquids different from solids?
3. In terms of the kinetic molecular theory, in what ways are liquids similar to gases? In what ways are liquids
different from gases?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 551
10 • Exercises 537
4. Explain why liquids assume the shape of any container into which they are poured, whereas solids are
rigid and retain their shape.
5. What is the evidence that all neutral atoms and molecules exert attractive forces on each other?
6. Open thePhET States of Matter Simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16phetvisual)to answer the following
questions:
(a) Select the Solid, Liquid, Gas tab. Explore by selecting different substances, heating and cooling the
systems, and changing the state. What similarities do you notice between the four substances for each
phase (solid, liquid, gas)? What differences do you notice?
(b) For each substance, select each of the states and record the given temperatures. How do the given
temperatures for each state correlate with the strengths of their intermolecular attractions? Explain.
(c) Select the Interaction Potential tab, and use the default neon atoms. Move the Ne atom on the right and
observe how the potential energy changes. Select the Total Force button, and move the Ne atom as before.
When is the total force on each atom attractive and large enough to matter? Then select the Component
Forces button, and move the Ne atom. When do the attractive (van der Waals) and repulsive (electron
overlap) forces balance? How does this relate to the potential energy versus the distance between atoms
graph? Explain.
7. Define the following and give an example of each:
(a) dispersion force
(b) dipole-dipole attraction
(c) hydrogen bond
8. The types of intermolecular forces in a substance are identical whether it is a solid, a liquid, or a gas. Why
then does a substance change phase from a gas to a liquid or to a solid?
9. Why do the boiling points of the noble gases increase in the order He < Ne < Ar < Kr < Xe?
10. Neon and HF have approximately the same molecular masses.
(a) Explain why the boiling points of Neon and HF differ.
(b) Compare the change in the boiling points of Ne, Ar, Kr, and Xe with the change of the boiling points of
HF, HCl, HBr, and HI, and explain the difference between the changes with increasing atomic or molecular
mass.
11. Arrange each of the following sets of compounds in order of increasing boiling point temperature:
(a) HCl, H O, SiH
2 4
(b) F , Cl , Br
2 2 2
(c) CH , C H , C H
4 2 6 3 8
(d) O , NO, N
2 2
12. The molecular mass of butanol, C H OH, is 74.14; that of ethylene glycol, CH (OH)CH OH, is 62.08, yet
4 9 2 2
their boiling points are 117.2 °C and 174 °C, respectively. Explain the reason for the difference.
13. On the basis of intermolecular attractions, explain the differences in the boiling points ofn–butane (−1 °C)
and chloroethane (12 °C), which have similar molar masses.
14. On the basis of dipole moments and/or hydrogen bonding, explain in a qualitative way the differences in
the boiling points of acetone (56.2 °C) and 1-propanol (97.4 °C), which have similar molar masses.
15. The melting point of H O(s) is 0 °C. Would you expect the melting point of H S(s) to be −85 °C, 0 °C, or 185
2 2
°C? Explain your answer.
16. Silane (SiH ), phosphine (PH ), and hydrogen sulfide (H S) melt at −185 °C, −133 °C, and −85 °C,
4 3 2
respectively. What does this suggest about the polar character and intermolecular attractions of the three
compounds?
17. Explain why a hydrogen bond between two water molecules is weaker than a hydrogen bond between two
hydrogen fluoride molecules.
PAGE: 552
538 10 • Exercises
18. Under certain conditions, molecules of acetic acid, CH COOH, form “dimers,” pairs of acetic acid
3
molecules held together by strong intermolecular attractions:
Draw a dimer of acetic acid, showing how two CH COOH molecules are held together, and stating the type
3
of IMF that is responsible.
19. Proteins are chains of amino acids that can form in a variety of arrangements, one of which is a helix.
What kind of IMF is responsible for holding the protein strand in this shape? On the protein image, show
the locations of the IMFs that hold the protein together:
20. The density of liquid NH is 0.64 g/mL; the density of gaseous NH at STP is 0.0007 g/mL. Explain the
3 3
difference between the densities of these two phases.
21. Identify the intermolecular forces present in the following solids:
(a) CH CH OH
3 2
(b) CH CH CH
3 2 3
(c) CH CH Cl
3 2
10.2Properties of Liquids
22. The test tubes shown here contain equal amounts of the specified motor oils. Identical metal spheres were
dropped at the same time into each of the tubes, and a brief moment later, the spheres had fallen to the
heights indicated in the illustration.
Rank the motor oils in order of increasing viscosity, and explain your reasoning:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 553
10 • Exercises 539
23. Although steel is denser than water, a steel needle or paper clip placed carefully lengthwise on the surface
of still water can be made to float. Explain at a molecular level how this is possible.
FIGURE10.67 (credit: Cory Zanker)
24. The surface tension and viscosity values for diethyl ether, acetone, ethanol, and ethylene glycol are shown
here.
(a) Explain their differences in viscosity in terms of the size and shape of their molecules and their IMFs.
(b) Explain their differences in surface tension in terms of the size and shape of their molecules and their
IMFs:
25. You may have heard someone use the figure of speech “slower than molasses in winter” to describe a
process that occurs slowly. Explain why this is an apt idiom, using concepts of molecular size and shape,
molecular interactions, and the effect of changing temperature.
26. It is often recommended that you let your car engine run idle to warm up before driving, especially on cold
winter days. While the benefit of prolonged idling is dubious, it is certainly true that a warm engine is
more fuel efficient than a cold one. Explain the reason for this.
PAGE: 554
540 10 • Exercises
27. The surface tension and viscosity of water at several different temperatures are given in this table.
Water Surface Tension (mN/m) Viscosity (mPa s)
0 °C 75.6 1.79
20 °C 72.8 1.00
60 °C 66.2 0.47
100 °C 58.9 0.28
(a) As temperature increases, what happens to the surface tension of water? Explain why this occurs, in terms
of molecular interactions and the effect of changing temperature.
(b) As temperature increases, what happens to the viscosity of water? Explain why this occurs, in terms of
molecular interactions and the effect of changing temperature.
28. At 25 °C, how high will water rise in a glass capillary tube with an inner diameter of 0.63 mm? Refer to
Example 10.4for the required information.
29. Water rises in a glass capillary tube to a height of 17 cm. What is the diameter of the capillary tube?
10.3Phase Transitions
30. Heat is added to boiling water. Explain why the temperature of the boiling water does not change. What
does change?
31. Heat is added to ice at 0 °C. Explain why the temperature of the ice does not change. What does change?
32. What feature characterizes the dynamic equilibrium between a liquid and its vapor in a closed container?
33. Identify two common observations indicating some liquids have sufficient vapor pressures to noticeably
evaporate?
34. Identify two common observations indicating some solids, such as dry ice and mothballs, have vapor
pressures sufficient to sublime?
35. What is the relationship between the intermolecular forces in a liquid and its vapor pressure?
36. What is the relationship between the intermolecular forces in a solid and its melting temperature?
37. Why does spilled gasoline evaporate more rapidly on a hot day than on a cold day?
38. Carbon tetrachloride, CCl , was once used as a dry cleaning solvent, but is no longer used because it is
4
carcinogenic. At 57.8 °C, the vapor pressure of CCl is 54.0 kPa, and its enthalpy of vaporization is 33.05
4
kJ/mol. Use this information to estimate the normal boiling point for CCl .
4
39. When is the boiling point of a liquid equal to its normal boiling point?
40. How does the boiling of a liquid differ from its evaporation?
41. Use the information inFigure 10.24to estimate the boiling point of water in Denver when the atmospheric
pressure is 83.3 kPa.
42. A syringe at a temperature of 20 °C is filled with liquid ether in such a way that there is no space for any
vapor. If the temperature is kept constant and the plunger is withdrawn to create a volume that can be
occupied by vapor, what would be the approximate pressure of the vapor produced?
43. Explain the following observations:
(a) It takes longer to cook an egg in Ft. Davis, Texas (altitude, 5000 feet above sea level) than it does in
Boston (at sea level).
(b) Perspiring is a mechanism for cooling the body.
44. The enthalpy of vaporization of water is larger than its enthalpy of fusion. Explain why.
45. Explain why the molar enthalpies of vaporization of the following substances increase in the order CH <
4
C H < C H , even though the type of IMF (dispersion) is the same.
2 6 3 8
46. Explain why the enthalpies of vaporization of the following substances increase in the order CH < NH <
4 3
H O, even though all three substances have approximately the same molar mass.
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 555
10 • Exercises 541
47. The enthalpy of vaporization of CO (l) is 9.8 kJ/mol. Would you expect the enthalpy of vaporization of
2
CS (l) to be 28 kJ/mol, 9.8 kJ/mol, or −8.4 kJ/mol? Discuss the plausibility of each of these answers.
2
48. The hydrogen fluoride molecule, HF, is more polar than a water molecule, H O (for example, has a greater
2
dipole moment), yet the molar enthalpy of vaporization for liquid hydrogen fluoride is lesser than that for
water. Explain.
49. Ethyl chloride (boiling point, 13 °C) is used as a local anesthetic. When the liquid is sprayed on the skin, it
cools the skin enough to freeze and numb it. Explain the cooling effect of liquid ethyl chloride.
50. Which contains the compounds listed correctly in order of increasing boiling points?
(a) N < CS < H O < KCl
2 2 2
(b) H O < N < CS < KCl
2 2 2
(c) N < KCl < CS < H O
2 2 2
(d) CS < N < KCl < H O
2 2 2
(e) KCl < H O < CS < N
2 2 2
51. How much heat is required to convert 422 g of liquid H O at 23.5 °C into steam at 150 °C?
2
52. Evaporation of sweat requires energy and thus take excess heat away from the body. Some of the water
that you drink may eventually be converted into sweat and evaporate. If you drink a 20-ounce bottle of
water that had been in the refrigerator at 3.8 °C, how much heat is needed to convert all of that water into
sweat and then to vapor? (Note: Your body temperature is 36.6 °C. For the purpose of solving this problem,
assume that the thermal properties of sweat are the same as for water.)
53. Titanium tetrachloride, TiCl , has a melting point of −23.2 °C and has a ΔH = 9.37 kJ/mol.
4 fusion
(a) How much energy is required to melt 263.1 g TiCl ?
4
(b) For TiCl , which will likely have the larger magnitude: ΔH or ΔH ? Explain your
4 fusion vaporization
reasoning.
10.4Phase Diagrams
54. From the phase diagram for water (Figure 10.31), determine the state of water at:
(a) 35 °C and 85 kPa
(b) −15 °C and 40 kPa
(c) −15 °C and 0.1 kPa
(d) 75 °C and 3 kPa
(e) 40 °C and 0.1 kPa
(f) 60 °C and 50 kPa
55. What phase changes will take place when water is subjected to varying pressure at a constant temperature
of 0.005 °C? At 40 °C? At −40 °C?
56. Pressure cookers allow food to cook faster because the higher pressure inside the pressure cooker
increases the boiling temperature of water. A particular pressure cooker has a safety valve that is set to
vent steam if the pressure exceeds 3.4 atm. What is the approximate maximum temperature that can be
reached inside this pressure cooker? Explain your reasoning.
57. From the phase diagram for carbon dioxide inFigure 10.34, determine the state of CO at:
2
(a) 20 °C and 1000 kPa
(b) 10 °C and 2000 kPa
(c) 10 °C and 100 kPa
(d) −40 °C and 500 kPa
(e) −80 °C and 1500 kPa
(f) −80 °C and 10 kPa
58. Determine the phase changes that carbon dioxide undergoes as pressure is increased at a constant
temperature of (a) −50 °C and (b) 50 °C. If the temperature is held at −40 °C? At 20 °C? (See the phase
diagram inFigure 10.34.)
59. Consider a cylinder containing a mixture of liquid carbon dioxide in equilibrium with gaseous carbon
dioxide at an initial pressure of 65 atm and a temperature of 20 °C. Sketch a plot depicting the change in
the cylinder pressure with time as gaseous carbon dioxide is released at constant temperature.
PAGE: 556
542 10 • Exercises
60. Dry ice, CO (s), does not melt at atmospheric pressure. It sublimes at a temperature of −78 °C. What is the
2
lowest pressure at which CO (s) will melt to give CO (l)? At approximately what temperature will this
2 2
occur? (SeeFigure 10.34for the phase diagram.)
61. If a severe storm results in the loss of electricity, it may be necessary to use a clothesline to dry laundry. In
many parts of the country in the dead of winter, the clothes will quickly freeze when they are hung on the
line. If it does not snow, will they dry anyway? Explain your answer.
62. Is it possible to liquefy nitrogen at room temperature (about 25 °C)? Is it possible to liquefy sulfur dioxide
at room temperature? Explain your answers.
63. Elemental carbon has one gas phase, one liquid phase, and two different solid phases, as shown in the
phase diagram:
(a) On the phase diagram, label the gas and liquid regions.
(b) Graphite is the most stable phase of carbon at normal conditions. On the phase diagram, label the
graphite phase.
(c) If graphite at normal conditions is heated to 2500 K while the pressure is increased to 1010Pa, it is
converted into diamond. Label the diamond phase.
(d) Circle each triple point on the phase diagram.
(e) In what phase does carbon exist at 5000 K and 108Pa?
(f) If the temperature of a sample of carbon increases from 3000 K to 5000 K at a constant pressure of 106
Pa, which phase transition occurs, if any?
10.5The Solid State of Matter
64. What types of liquids typically form amorphous solids?
65. At very low temperatures oxygen, O , freezes and forms a crystalline solid. Which best describes these
2
crystals?
(a) ionic
(b) covalent network
(c) metallic
(d) amorphous
(e) molecular crystals
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 557
10 • Exercises 543
66. As it cools, olive oil slowly solidifies and forms a solid over a range of temperatures. Which best describes
the solid?
(a) ionic
(b) covalent network
(c) metallic
(d) amorphous
(e) molecular crystals
67. Explain why ice, which is a crystalline solid, has a melting temperature of 0 °C, whereas butter, which is an
amorphous solid, softens over a range of temperatures.
68. Identify the type of crystalline solid (metallic, network covalent, ionic, or molecular) formed by each of the
following substances:
(a) SiO
2
(b) KCl
(c) Cu
(d) CO
2
(e) C (diamond)
(f) BaSO
4
(g) NH
3
(h) NH F
4
(i) C H OH
2 5
69. Identify the type of crystalline solid (metallic, network covalent, ionic, or molecular) formed by each of the
following substances:
(a) CaCl
2
(b) SiC
(c) N
2
(d) Fe
(e) C (graphite)
(f) CH CH CH CH
3 2 2 3
(g) HCl
(h) NH NO
4 3
(i) K PO
3 4
70. Classify each substance in the table as either a metallic, ionic, molecular, or covalent network solid:
Electrical
Substance Appearance Melting Point Solubility in Water
Conductivity
X lustrous, malleable 1500 °C high insoluble
Y soft, yellow 113 °C none insoluble
only if melted/
Z hard, white 800 °C soluble
dissolved
PAGE: 558
544 10 • Exercises
71. Classify each substance in the table as either a metallic, ionic, molecular, or covalent network solid:
Electrical
Substance Appearance Melting Point Solubility in Water
Conductivity
only if melted/
X brittle, white 800 °C soluble
dissolved
Y shiny, malleable 1100 °C high insoluble
Z hard, colorless 3550 °C none insoluble
72. Identify the following substances as ionic, metallic, covalent network, or molecular solids:
Substance A is malleable, ductile, conducts electricity well, and has a melting point of 1135 °C. Substance
B is brittle, does not conduct electricity as a solid but does when molten, and has a melting point of 2072
°C. Substance C is very hard, does not conduct electricity, and has a melting point of 3440 °C. Substance D
is soft, does not conduct electricity, and has a melting point of 185 °C.
73. Substance A is shiny, conducts electricity well, and melts at 975 °C. Substance A is likely a(n):
(a) ionic solid
(b) metallic solid
(c) molecular solid
(d) covalent network solid
74. Substance B is hard, does not conduct electricity, and melts at 1200 °C. Substance B is likely a(n):
(a) ionic solid
(b) metallic solid
(c) molecular solid
(d) covalent network solid
10.6Lattice Structures in Crystalline Solids
75. Describe the crystal structure of iron, which crystallizes with two equivalent metal atoms in a cubic unit
cell.
76. Describe the crystal structure of Pt, which crystallizes with four equivalent metal atoms in a cubic unit
cell.
77. What is the coordination number of a chromium atom in the body-centered cubic structure of chromium?
78. What is the coordination number of an aluminum atom in the face-centered cubic structure of aluminum?
79. Cobalt metal crystallizes in a hexagonal closest packed structure. What is the coordination number of a
cobalt atom?
80. Nickel metal crystallizes in a cubic closest packed structure. What is the coordination number of a nickel
atom?
81. Tungsten crystallizes in a body-centered cubic unit cell with an edge length of 3.165 Å.
(a) What is the atomic radius of tungsten in this structure?
(b) Calculate the density of tungsten.
82. Platinum (atomic radius = 1.38 Å) crystallizes in a cubic closely packed structure. Calculate the edge
length of the face-centered cubic unit cell and the density of platinum.
83. Barium crystallizes in a body-centered cubic unit cell with an edge length of 5.025 Å
(a) What is the atomic radius of barium in this structure?
(b) Calculate the density of barium.
84. Aluminum (atomic radius = 1.43 Å) crystallizes in a cubic closely packed structure. Calculate the edge
length of the face-centered cubic unit cell and the density of aluminum.
85. The density of aluminum is 2.7 g/cm3; that of silicon is 2.3 g/cm3. Explain why Si has the lower density
even though it has heavier atoms.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 559
10 • Exercises 545
86. The free space in a metal may be found by subtracting the volume of the atoms in a unit cell from the
volume of the cell. Calculate the percentage of free space in each of the three cubic lattices if all atoms in
each are of equal size and touch their nearest neighbors. Which of these structures represents the most
efficient packing? That is, which packs with the least amount of unused space?
87. Cadmium sulfide, sometimes used as a yellow pigment by artists, crystallizes with cadmium, occupying
one-half of the tetrahedral holes in a closest packed array of sulfide ions. What is the formula of cadmium
sulfide? Explain your answer.
88. A compound of cadmium, tin, and phosphorus is used in the fabrication of some semiconductors. It
crystallizes with cadmium occupying one-fourth of the tetrahedral holes and tin occupying one-fourth of
the tetrahedral holes in a closest packed array of phosphide ions. What is the formula of the compound?
Explain your answer.
89. What is the formula of the magnetic oxide of cobalt, used in recording tapes, that crystallizes with cobalt
atoms occupying one-eighth of the tetrahedral holes and one-half of the octahedral holes in a closely
packed array of oxide ions?
90. A compound containing zinc, aluminum, and sulfur crystallizes with a closest-packed array of sulfide
ions. Zinc ions are found in one-eighth of the tetrahedral holes and aluminum ions in one-half of the
octahedral holes. What is the empirical formula of the compound?
91. A compound of thallium and iodine crystallizes in a simple cubic array of iodide ions with thallium ions in
all of the cubic holes. What is the formula of this iodide? Explain your answer.
92. Which of the following elements reacts with sulfur to form a solid in which the sulfur atoms form a closest-
packed array with all of the octahedral holes occupied: Li, Na, Be, Ca, or Al?
93. What is the percent by mass of titanium in rutile, a mineral that contains titanium and oxygen, if structure
can be described as a closest packed array of oxide ions with titanium ions in one-half of the octahedral
holes? What is the oxidation number of titanium?
94. Explain why the chemically similar alkali metal chlorides NaCl and CsCl have different structures,
whereas the chemically different NaCl and MnS have the same structure.
95. As minerals were formed from the molten magma, different ions occupied the same cites in the crystals.
Lithium often occurs along with magnesium in minerals despite the difference in the charge on their ions.
Suggest an explanation.
96. Rubidium iodide crystallizes with a cubic unit cell that contains iodide ions at the corners and a rubidium
ion in the center. What is the formula of the compound?
97. One of the various manganese oxides crystallizes with a cubic unit cell that contains manganese ions at
the corners and in the center. Oxide ions are located at the center of each edge of the unit cell. What is the
formula of the compound?
98. NaH crystallizes with the same crystal structure as NaCl. The edge length of the cubic unit cell of NaH is
4.880 Å.
(a) Calculate the ionic radius of H−. (The ionic radius of Li+is 0.0.95 Å.)
(b) Calculate the density of NaH.
99. Thallium(I) iodide crystallizes with the same structure as CsCl. The edge length of the unit cell of TlI is
4.20 Å. Calculate the ionic radius of TI+. (The ionic radius of I−is 2.16 Å.)
100. A cubic unit cell contains manganese ions at the corners and fluoride ions at the center of each edge.
(a) What is the empirical formula of this compound? Explain your answer.
(b) What is the coordination number of the Mn3+ion?
(c) Calculate the edge length of the unit cell if the radius of a Mn3+ion is 0.65 A.
(d) Calculate the density of the compound.
101. What is the spacing between crystal planes that diffract X-rays with a wavelength of 1.541 nm at an angle
θof 15.55° (first order reflection)?
102. A diffractometer using X-rays with a wavelength of 0.2287 nm produced first order diffraction peak for a
crystal angleθ= 16.21°. Determine the spacing between the diffracting planes in this crystal.
103. A metal with spacing between planes equal to 0.4164 nm diffracts X-rays with a wavelength of 0.2879
nm. What is the diffraction angle for the first order diffraction peak?
PAGE: 560
546 10 • Exercises
104. Gold crystallizes in a face-centered cubic unit cell. The second-order reflection (n = 2) of X-rays for the
planes that make up the tops and bottoms of the unit cells is atθ= 22.20°. The wavelength of the X-rays
is 1.54 Å. What is the density of metallic gold?
105. When an electron in an excited molybdenum atom falls from the L to the K shell, an X-ray is emitted.
These X-rays are diffracted at an angle of 7.75° by planes with a separation of 2.64 Å. What is the
difference in energy between the K shell and the L shell in molybdenum assuming a first order
diffraction?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 561
CHAPTER 11
Solutions and Colloids
Figure11.1 Coral reefs, such as this one at the Palmyra Atoll National Wildlife Refuge, are vital to the ecosystem of
earth’s oceans. The health of coral reefs and all marine life depends on the specific chemical composition of the
complex mixture known as seawater. (credit: modification of work by “USFWS – Pacific Region”/Wikimedia
Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1The Dissolution Process
11.2Electrolytes
11.3Solubility
11.4Colligative Properties
11.5Colloids
INTRODUCTION Coral reefs are home to about 25% of all marine species. They are being threatened by
climate change, oceanic acidification, and water pollution, all of which change the composition of the solution
known as seawater. Dissolved oxygen in seawater is critical for sea creatures, but as the oceans warm, oxygen
becomes less soluble. As the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases, the concentration of
carbon dioxide in the oceans increases, contributing to oceanic acidification. Coral reefs are particularly
sensitive to the acidification of the ocean, since the exoskeletons of the coral polyps are soluble in acidic
solutions. Humans contribute to the changing of seawater composition by allowing agricultural runoff and
other forms of pollution to affect our oceans.
Solutions are crucial to the processes that sustain life and to many other processes involving chemical
reactions. This chapter considers the nature of solutions and examines factors that determine whether a
solution will form and what properties it may have. The properties of colloids—mixtures containing dispersed
particles larger than the molecules and ions of typical solutions—are also discussed.
PAGE: 562
548 11 • Solutions and Colloids
11.1 The Dissolution Process
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic properties of solutions and how they form
• Predict whether a given mixture will yield a solution based on molecular properties of its components
• Explain why some solutions either produce or absorb heat when they form
An earlier chapter of this text introducedsolutions, defined as homogeneous mixtures of two or more
substances. Often, one component of a solution is present at a significantly greater concentration, in which
case it is called thesolvent. The other components of the solution present in relatively lesser concentrations
are calledsolutes. Sugar is a covalent solid composed of sucrose molecules, C H O . When this compound
12 22 11
dissolves in water, its molecules become uniformly distributed among the molecules of water:
The subscript “aq” in the equation signifies that the sucrose molecules are solutes and are therefore
individually dispersedthroughout theaqueous solution(water is the solvent). Although sucrose molecules are
heavier than water molecules, they remain dispersed throughout the solution; gravity does not cause them to
“settle out” over time.
Potassium dichromate, K Cr O , is an ionic compound composed of colorless potassium ions, K+, and orange
2 2 7
dichromate ions, When a small amount of solid potassium dichromate is added to water, the
compound dissolves and dissociates to yield potassium ions and dichromate ions uniformly distributed
throughout the mixture (Figure 11.2), as indicated in this equation:
As with the mixture of sugar and water, this mixture is also an aqueous solution. Its solutes, potassium and
dichromate ions, remain individually dispersed among the solvent (water) molecules.
FIGURE11.2 When potassium dichromate (K Cr O ) is mixed with water, it forms a homogeneous orange solution.
2 2 7
(credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thisvirtual lab(http://openstax.org/l/16Phetsugar)to view simulations of the dissolution of common
covalent and ionic substances (sugar and salt) in water.
Water is used so often as a solvent that the word solution has come to imply an aqueous solution to many
people. However, almost any gas, liquid, or solid can act as a solvent. Manyalloysare solid solutions of one
metal dissolved in another; for example, US five-cent coins contain nickel dissolved in copper. Air is a gaseous
solution, a homogeneous mixture of nitrogen, oxygen, and several other gases. Oxygen (a gas), alcohol (a
liquid), and sugar (a solid) all dissolve in water (a liquid) to form liquid solutions.Table 11.1gives examples of
several different solutions and the phases of the solutes and solvents.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 563
11.1 • The Dissolution Process 549
Different Types of Solutions
Solution Solute Solvent
air O (g) N (g)
2 2
1
soft drinks CO (g) H O(l)
2 2
hydrogen in palladium H (g) Pd(s)
2
rubbing alcohol H O(l) C H O(l) (2-propanol)
2 3 8
saltwater NaCl(s) H O(l)
2
brass Zn(s) Cu(s)
TABLE11.1
Solutions exhibit these defining traits:
• They are homogeneous; after a solution is mixed, it has the same composition at all points throughout (its
composition is uniform).
• The physical state of a solution—solid, liquid, or gas—is typically the same as that of the solvent, as
demonstrated by the examples inTable 11.1.
• The components of a solution are dispersed on a molecular scale; they consist of a mixture of separated
solute particles (molecules, atoms, and/or ions) each closely surrounded by solvent species.
• The dissolved solute in a solution will not settle out or separate from the solvent.
• The composition of a solution, or the concentrations of its components, can be varied continuously (within
limits determined by thesolubilityof the components, discussed in detail later in this chapter).
The Formation of Solutions
The formation of a solution is an example of aspontaneous process, a process that occurs under specified
conditions without the requirement of energy from some external source. Sometimes a mixture is stirred to
speed up the dissolution process, but this is not necessary; a homogeneous solution will form eventually. The
topic of spontaneity is critically important to the study of chemical thermodynamics and is treated more
thoroughly in a later chapter of this text. For purposes of this chapter’s discussion, it will suffice to consider
two criteria thatfavor, but do not guarantee, the spontaneous formation of a solution:
1. a decrease in the internal energy of the system (an exothermic change, as discussed in the previous
chapter on thermochemistry)
2. an increased dispersal of matter in the system (which indicates an increase in theentropyof the system,
as you will learn about in the later chapter on thermodynamics)
In the process of dissolution, an internal energy change often, but not always, occurs as heat is absorbed or
evolved. An increase in matter dispersal always results when a solution forms from the uniform distribution of
solute molecules throughout a solvent.
When the strengths of the intermolecular forces of attraction between solute and solvent species in a solution
are no different than those present in the separated components, the solution is formed with no accompanying
energy change. Such a solution is called anideal solution. A mixture of ideal gases (or gases such as helium
and argon, which closely approach ideal behavior) is an example of an ideal solution, since the entities
comprising these gases experience no significant intermolecular attractions.
1 If bubbles of gas are observed within the liquid, the mixture is not homogeneous and, thus, not a solution.
PAGE: 564
550 11 • Solutions and Colloids
When containers of helium and argon are connected, the gases spontaneously mix due to diffusion and form a
solution (Figure 11.3). The formation of this solution clearly involves an increase in matter dispersal, since the
helium and argon atoms occupy a volume twice as large as that which each occupied before mixing.
FIGURE11.3 Samples of helium and argon spontaneously mix to give a solution.
Ideal solutions may also form when structurally similar liquids are mixed. For example, mixtures of the
alcohols methanol (CH OH) and ethanol (C H OH) form ideal solutions, as do mixtures of the hydrocarbons
3 2 5
pentane, C H , and hexane, C H . Placing methanol and ethanol, or pentane and hexane, in the bulbs shown
5 12 6 14
inFigure 11.3will result in the same diffusion and subsequent mixing of these liquids as is observed for the
He and Ar gases (although at a much slower rate), yielding solutions with no significant change in energy.
Unlike a mixture of gases, however, the components of these liquid-liquid solutions do, indeed, experience
intermolecular attractive forces. But since the molecules of the two substances being mixed are structurally
very similar, the intermolecular attractive forces between like and unlike molecules are essentially the same,
and the dissolution process, therefore, does not entail any appreciable increase or decrease in energy. These
examples illustrate how increased matter dispersal alone can provide the driving force required to cause the
spontaneous formation of a solution. In some cases, however, the relative magnitudes of intermolecular forces
of attraction between solute and solvent species may prevent dissolution.
Three types of intermolecular attractive forces are relevant to the dissolution process: solute-solute, solvent-
solvent, and solute-solvent. As illustrated inFigure 11.4, the formation of a solution may be viewed as a
stepwise process in which energy is consumed to overcome solute-solute and solvent-solvent attractions
(endothermic processes) and released when solute-solvent attractions are established (an exothermic process
referred to assolvation). The relative magnitudes of the energy changes associated with these stepwise
processes determine whether the dissolution process overall will release or absorb energy. In some cases,
solutions do not form because the energy required to separate solute and solvent species is so much greater
than the energy released by solvation.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 565
11.1 • The Dissolution Process 551
FIGURE11.4 This schematic representation of dissolution shows a stepwise process involving the endothermic
separation of solute and solvent species (Steps 1 and 2) and exothermic solvation (Step 3).
Consider the example of an ionic compound dissolving in water. Formation of the solution requires the
electrostatic forces between the cations and anions of the compound (solute–solute) be overcome completely
as attractive forces are established between these ions and water molecules (solute–solvent). Hydrogen
bonding between a relatively small fraction of the water molecules must also be overcome to accommodate
any dissolved solute. If the solute’s electrostatic forces are significantly greater than the solvation forces, the
dissolution process is significantly endothermic and the compound may not dissolve to an appreciable extent.
Calcium carbonate, the major component of coral reefs, is one example of such an “insoluble” ionic compound
(seeFigure 11.1). On the other hand, if the solvation forces are much stronger than the compound’s
electrostatic forces, the dissolution is significantly exothermic and the compound may be highly soluble. A
common example of this type of ionic compound is sodium chloride, commonly known as table salt.
As noted at the beginning of this module, spontaneous solution formation is favored, but not guaranteed, by
exothermic dissolution processes. While many soluble compounds do, indeed, dissolve with the release of
heat, some dissolve endothermically. Ammonium nitrate (NH NO ) is one such example and is used to make
4 3
instant cold packs, like the one pictured inFigure 11.5, which are used for treating injuries. A thin-walled
plastic bag of water is sealed inside a larger bag with solid NH NO . When the smaller bag is broken, a solution
4 3
of NH NO forms, absorbing heat from the surroundings (the injured area to which the pack is applied) and
4 3
providing a cold compress that decreases swelling. Endothermic dissolutions such as this one require a
greater energy input to separate the solute species than is recovered when the solutes are solvated, but they
are spontaneous nonetheless due to the increase in disorder that accompanies formation of the solution.
PAGE: 566
552 11 • Solutions and Colloids
FIGURE11.5 An instant cold pack gets cold when certain salts, such as ammonium nitrate, dissolve in water—an
endothermic process.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch this briefvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16endoexo)illustrating endothermic and exothermic dissolution
processes.
11.2 Electrolytes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and give examples of electrolytes
• Distinguish between the physical and chemical changes that accompany dissolution of ionic and covalent
electrolytes
• Relate electrolyte strength to solute-solvent attractive forces
When some substances are dissolved in water, they undergo either a physical or a chemical change that yields
ions in solution. These substances constitute an important class of compounds calledelectrolytes. Substances
that do not yield ions when dissolved are callednonelectrolytes. If the physical or chemical process that
generates the ions is essentially 100% efficient (all of the dissolved compound yields ions), then the substance
is known as astrong electrolyte. If only a relatively small fraction of the dissolved substance undergoes the
ion-producing process, it is called aweak electrolyte.
Substances may be identified as strong, weak, or nonelectrolytes by measuring the electrical conductance of
an aqueous solution containing the substance. To conduct electricity, a substance must contain freely mobile,
charged species. Most familiar is the conduction of electricity through metallic wires, in which case the mobile,
charged entities are electrons. Solutions may also conduct electricity if they contain dissolved ions, with
conductivity increasing as ion concentration increases. Applying a voltage to electrodes immersed in a
solution permits assessment of the relative concentration of dissolved ions, either quantitatively, by measuring
the electrical current flow, or qualitatively, by observing the brightness of a light bulb included in the circuit
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 567
11.2 • Electrolytes 553
(Figure 11.6).
FIGURE11.6 Solutions of nonelectrolytes such as ethanol do not contain dissolved ions and cannot conduct
electricity. Solutions of electrolytes contain ions that permit the passage of electricity. The conductivity of an
electrolyte solution is related to the strength of the electrolyte.
Ionic Electrolytes
Water and other polar molecules are attracted to ions, as shown inFigure 11.7. The electrostatic attraction
between an ion and a molecule with a dipole is called anion-dipole attraction. These attractions play an
important role in the dissolution of ionic compounds in water.
PAGE: 568
554 11 • Solutions and Colloids
FIGURE11.7 As potassium chloride (KCl) dissolves in water, the ions are hydrated. The polar water molecules are
attracted by the charges on the K+and Cl−ions. Water molecules in front of and behind the ions are not shown.
When ionic compounds dissolve in water, the ions in the solid separate and disperse uniformly throughout the
solution because water molecules surround and solvate the ions, reducing the strong electrostatic forces
between them. This process represents a physical change known asdissociation. Under most conditions, ionic
compounds will dissociate nearly completely when dissolved, and so they are classified as strong electrolytes.
Even sparingly, soluble ionic compounds are strong electrolytes, since the small amount that does dissolve will
dissociate completely.
Consider what happens at the microscopic level when solid KCl is added to water. Ion-dipole forces attract the
positive (hydrogen) end of the polar water molecules to the negative chloride ions at the surface of the solid,
and they attract the negative (oxygen) ends to the positive potassium ions. The water molecules surround
individual K+and Cl−ions, reducing the strong interionic forces that bind the ions together and letting them
move off into solution as solvated ions, asFigure 11.7shows. Overcoming the electrostatic attraction permits
the independent motion of each hydrated ion in a dilute solution as the ions transition from fixed positions in
the undissolved compound to widely dispersed, solvated ions in solution.
Covalent Electrolytes
Pure water is an extremely poor conductor of electricity because it is only very slightly ionized—only about two
out of every 1 billion molecules ionize at 25 °C. Water ionizes when one molecule of water gives up a proton (H+
ion) to another molecule of water, yielding hydronium and hydroxide ions.
In some cases, solutions prepared from covalent compounds conduct electricity because the solute molecules
react chemically with the solvent to produce ions. For example, pure hydrogen chloride is a gas consisting of
covalent HCl molecules. This gas contains no ions. However, an aqueous solution of HCl is a very good
conductor, indicating that an appreciable concentration of ions exists within the solution.
Because HCl is anacid, its molecules react with water, transferring H+ions to form hydronium ions (H O+) and
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 569
11.3 • Solubility 555
chloride ions (Cl−):
This reaction is essentially 100% complete for HCl (i.e., it is astrong acidand, consequently, a strong
electrolyte). Likewise, weak acids and bases that only react partially generate relatively low concentrations of
ions when dissolved in water and are classified as weak electrolytes. The reader may wish to review the
discussion of strong and weak acids provided in the earlier chapter of this text on reaction classes and
stoichiometry.
11.3 Solubility
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of temperature and pressure on solubility
• State Henry’s law and use it in calculations involving the solubility of a gas in a liquid
• Explain the degrees of solubility possible for liquid-liquid solutions
Imagine adding a small amount of sugar to a glass of water, stirring until all the sugar has dissolved, and then
adding a bit more. You can repeat this process until the sugar concentration of the solution reaches its natural
limit, a limit determined primarily by the relative strengths of the solute-solute, solute-solvent, and solvent-
solvent attractive forces discussed in the previous two modules of this chapter. You can be certain that you
have reached this limit because, no matter how long you stir the solution, undissolved sugar remains. The
concentration of sugar in the solution at this point is known as its solubility.
Thesolubilityof a solute in a particular solvent is the maximum concentration that may be achieved under
given conditions when the dissolution process isat equilibrium.
When a solute’s concentration is equal to its solubility, the solution is said to besaturatedwith that solute. If
the solute’s concentration is less than its solubility, the solution is said to beunsaturated. A solution that
contains a relatively low concentration of solute is called dilute, and one with a relatively high concentration is
called concentrated.
LINK TO LEARNING
Use thisinteractive simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16Phetsoluble)to prepare various saturated solutions.
Solutions may be prepared in which a solute concentrationexceedsits solubility. Such solutions are said to be
supersaturated, and they are interesting examples ofnonequilibriumstates (a detailed treatment of this
important concept is provided in the text chapters on equilibrium). For example, the carbonated beverage in
an open container that has not yet “gone flat” is supersaturated with carbon dioxide gas; given time, the CO
2
concentration will decrease until it reaches its solubility.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch thisimpressive video(http://openstax.org/l/16NaAcetate)showing the precipitation of sodium acetate
from a supersaturated solution.
Solutions of Gases in Liquids
As for any solution, the solubility of a gas in a liquid is affected by the intermolecular attractive forces between
solute and solvent species. Unlike solid and liquid solutes, however, there is no solute-solute intermolecular
attraction to overcome when a gaseous solute dissolves in a liquid solvent (seeFigure 11.4) since the atoms or
molecules comprising a gas are far separated and experience negligible interactions. Consequently, solute-
solvent interactions are the sole energetic factor affecting solubility. For example, the water solubility of
PAGE: 570
556 11 • Solutions and Colloids
oxygen is approximately three times greater than that of helium (there are greater dispersion forces between
water and the larger oxygen molecules) but 100 times less than the solubility of chloromethane, CHCl (polar
3
chloromethane molecules experience dipole–dipole attraction to polar water molecules). Likewise note the
solubility of oxygen in hexane, C H , is approximately 20 times greater than it is in water because greater
6 14
dispersion forces exist between oxygen and the larger hexane molecules.
Temperature is another factor affecting solubility, with gas solubility typically decreasing as temperature
increases (Figure 11.8). This inverse relation between temperature and dissolved gas concentration is
responsible for one of the major impacts of thermal pollution in natural waters.
FIGURE11.8 The solubilities of these gases in water decrease as the temperature increases. All solubilities were
measured with a constant pressure of 101.3 kPa (1 atm) of gas above the solutions.
When the temperature of a river, lake, or stream is raised, the solubility of oxygen in the water is decreased.
Decreased levels of dissolved oxygen may have serious consequences for the health of the water’s ecosystems
and, in severe cases, can result in large-scale fish kills (Figure 11.9).
FIGURE11.9 (a) The small bubbles of air in this glass of chilled water formed when the water warmed to room
temperature and the solubility of its dissolved air decreased. (b) The decreased solubility of oxygen in natural
waters subjected to thermal pollution can result in large-scale fish kills. (credit a: modification of work by Liz West;
credit b: modification of work by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
The solubility of a gaseous solute is also affected by the partial pressure of solute in the gas to which the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 571
11.3 • Solubility 557
solution is exposed. Gas solubility increases as the pressure of the gas increases. Carbonated beverages
provide a nice illustration of this relationship. The carbonation process involves exposing the beverage to a
relatively high pressure of carbon dioxide gas and then sealing the beverage container, thus saturating the
beverage with CO at this pressure. When the beverage container is opened, a familiar hiss is heard as the
2
carbon dioxide gas pressure is released, and some of the dissolved carbon dioxide is typically seen leaving
solution in the form of small bubbles (Figure 11.10). At this point, the beverage issupersaturatedwith carbon
dioxide and, with time, the dissolved carbon dioxide concentration will decrease to its equilibrium value and
the beverage will become “flat.”
FIGURE11.10 Opening the bottle of carbonated beverage reduces the pressure of thegaseouscarbon dioxide
above the beverage. The solubility of CO is thus lowered, and somedissolvedcarbon dioxide may be seen leaving
2
the solution as small gas bubbles. (credit: modification of work by Derrick Coetzee)
For many gaseous solutes, the relation between solubility,C, and partial pressure,P, is a proportional one:
g g
wherekis a proportionality constant that depends on the identities of the gaseous solute and solvent, and on
the solution temperature. This is a mathematical statement ofHenry’s law:The quantity of an ideal gas that
dissolves in a definite volume of liquid is directly proportional to the pressure of the gas.
EXAMPLE 11.1
Application of Henry’s Law
At 20 °C, the concentration of dissolved oxygen in water exposed to gaseous oxygen at a partial pressure of
101.3 kPa is 1.38 10−3mol L−1. Use Henry’s law to determine the solubility of oxygen when its partial
pressure is 20.7 kPa, the approximate pressure of oxygen in earth’s atmosphere.
Solution
According to Henry’s law, for an ideal solution the solubility,C, of a gas (1.38 10−3mol L−1, in this case) is
g
directly proportional to the pressure,P, of the undissolved gas above the solution (101.3 kPa in this case).
g
Because bothC andP are known, this relation can be rearragned and used to solve fork.
g g
PAGE: 572
558 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Now, usekto find the solubility at the lower pressure.
Note that various units may be used to express the quantities involved in these sorts of computations. Any
combination of units that yield to the constraints of dimensional analysis are acceptable.
Check Your Learning
Exposing a 100.0 mL sample of water at 0 °C to an atmosphere containing a gaseous solute at 152 torr resulted
in the dissolution of 1.45 10−3g of the solute. Use Henry’s law to determine the solubility of this gaseous
solute when its pressure is 760 torr.
Answer:
7.25 10−3in 100.0 mL or 0.0725 g/L
EXAMPLE 11.2
Thermal Pollution and Oxygen Solubility
A certain species of freshwater trout requires a dissolved oxygen concentration of 7.5 mg/L. Could these fish
thrive in a thermally polluted mountain stream (water temperature is 30.0 °C, partial pressure of atmospheric
oxygen is 0.17 atm)? Use the data inFigure 11.8to estimate a value for the Henry's law constant at this
temperature.
Solution
First, estimate the Henry’s law constant for oxygen in water at the specified temperature of 30.0 °C (Figure
11.8indicates the solubility at this temperature is approximately ~1.2 mol/L).
Then, use thiskvalue to compute the oxygen solubility at the specified oxygen partial pressure, 0.17 atm.
Finally, convert this dissolved oxygen concentration from mol/L to mg/L.
This concentration is lesser than the required minimum value of 7.5 mg/L, and so these trout would likely not
thrive in the polluted stream.
Check Your Learning
What dissolved oxygen concentration is expected for the stream above when it returns to a normal summer
time temperature of 15 °C?
Answer:
8.2 mg/L
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 573
11.3 • Solubility 559
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Decompression Sickness or “The Bends”
Decompression sickness (DCS), or “the bends,” is an effect of the increased pressure of the air inhaled by
scuba divers when swimming underwater at considerable depths. In addition to the pressure exerted by
the atmosphere, divers are subjected to additional pressure due to the water above them, experiencing an
increase of approximately 1 atm for each 10 m of depth. Therefore, the air inhaled by a diver while
submerged contains gases at the corresponding higher ambient pressure, and the concentrations of the
gases dissolved in the diver’s blood are proportionally higher per Henry’s law.
As the diver ascends to the surface of the water, the ambient pressure decreases and the dissolved gases
becomes less soluble. If the ascent is too rapid, the gases escaping from the diver’s blood may form bubbles
that can cause a variety of symptoms ranging from rashes and joint pain to paralysis and death. To avoid
DCS, divers must ascend from depths at relatively slow speeds (10 or 20 m/min) or otherwise make several
decompression stops, pausing for several minutes at given depths during the ascent. When these
preventive measures are unsuccessful, divers with DCS are often provided hyperbaric oxygen therapy in
pressurized vessels called decompression (or recompression) chambers (Figure 11.11). Researchers are
also investigating related body reactions and defenses in order to develop better testing and treatment for
decompression sicknetss. For example, Ingrid Eftedal, a barophysiologist specializing in bodily reactions
to diving, has shown that white blood cells undergo chemical and genetic changes as a result of the
condition; these can potentially be used to create biomarker tests and other methods to manage
decompression sickness.
FIGURE11.11 (a) US Navy divers undergo training in a recompression chamber. (b) Divers receive hyperbaric
oxygen therapy.
Deviations fromHenry’s laware observed when a chemical reaction takes place between the gaseous solute
and the solvent. Thus, for example, the solubility of ammonia in water increases more rapidly with increasing
pressure than predicted by the law because ammonia, being a base, reacts to some extent with water to form
ammonium ions and hydroxide ions.
Gases can form supersaturated solutions. If a solution of a gas in a liquid is prepared either at low temperature
or under pressure (or both), then as the solution warms or as the gas pressure is reduced, the solution may
become supersaturated. In 1986, more than 1700 people in Cameroon were killed when a cloud of gas, almost
certainly carbon dioxide, bubbled from Lake Nyos (Figure 11.12), a deep lake in a volcanic crater. The water at
the bottom of Lake Nyos is saturated with carbon dioxide by volcanic activity beneath the lake. It is believed
PAGE: 574
560 11 • Solutions and Colloids
that the lake underwent a turnover due to gradual heating from below the lake, and the warmer, less-dense
water saturated with carbon dioxide reached the surface. Consequently, tremendous quantities of dissolved
CO were released, and the colorless gas, which is denser than air, flowed down the valley below the lake and
2
suffocated humans and animals living in the valley.
FIGURE11.12 (a) It is believed that the 1986 disaster that killed more than 1700 people near Lake Nyos in
Cameroon resulted when a large volume of carbon dioxide gas was released from the lake. (b) A CO vent has since
2
been installed to help outgas the lake in a slow, controlled fashion and prevent a similar catastrophe from
happening in the future. (credit a: modification of work by Jack Lockwood; credit b: modification of work by Bill
Evans)
Solutions of Liquids in Liquids
Some liquids may be mixed in any proportions to yield solutions; in other words, they have infinite mutual
solubility and are said to bemiscible. Ethanol, sulfuric acid, and ethylene glycol (popular for use as antifreeze,
pictured inFigure 11.13) are examples of liquids that are completely miscible with water. Two-cycle motor oil
is miscible with gasoline, mixtures of which are used as lubricating fuels for various types of outdoor power
equipment (chainsaws, leaf blowers, and so on).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 575
11.3 • Solubility 561
FIGURE11.13 Water and antifreeze are miscible; mixtures of the two are homogeneous in all proportions. (credit:
“dno1967”/Wikimedia commons)
Miscible liquids are typically those with very similar polarities. Consider, for example, liquids that are polar or
capable of hydrogen bonding. For such liquids, the dipole-dipole attractions (or hydrogen bonding) of the
solute molecules with the solvent molecules are at least as strong as those between molecules in the pure
solute or in the pure solvent. Hence, the two kinds of molecules mix easily. Likewise, nonpolar liquids are
miscible with each other because there is no appreciable difference in the strengths of solute-solute, solvent-
solvent, and solute-solvent intermolecular attractions. The solubility of polar molecules in polar solvents and
of nonpolar molecules in nonpolar solvents is, again, an illustration of the chemical axiom “like dissolves like.”
Two liquids that do not mix to an appreciable extent are calledimmiscible. Separate layers are formed when
immiscible liquids are poured into the same container. Gasoline, oil (Figure 11.14), benzene, carbon
tetrachloride, some paints, and many other nonpolar liquids are immiscible with water. Relatively weak
attractive forces between the polar water molecules and the nonpolar liquid molecules are not adequate to
overcome much stronger hydrogen bonding between water molecules. The distinction between immiscibility
and miscibility is really one of extent, so that miscible liquids are of infinite mutual solubility, while liquids
said to be immiscible are of very low (though not zero) mutual solubility.
PAGE: 576
562 11 • Solutions and Colloids
FIGURE11.14 Water and oil are immiscible. Mixtures of these two substances will form two separate layers with
the less dense oil floating on top of the water. (credit: “Yortw”/Flickr)
Two liquids, such as bromine and water, that are ofmoderatemutual solubility are said to bepartially
miscible. Two partially miscible liquids usually form two layers when mixed. In the case of the bromine and
water mixture, the upper layer is water, saturated with bromine, and the lower layer is bromine saturated with
water. Since bromine is nonpolar, and, thus, not very soluble in water, the water layer is only slightly discolored
by the bright orange bromine dissolved in it. Since the solubility of water in bromine is very low, there is no
noticeable effect on the dark color of the bromine layer (Figure 11.15).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 577
11.3 • Solubility 563
FIGURE11.15 Bromine (the deep orange liquid on the left) and water (the clear liquid in the middle) are partially
miscible. The top layer in the mixture on the right is a saturated solution of bromine in water; the bottom layer is a
saturated solution of water in bromine. (credit: Paul Flowers)
Solutions of Solids in Liquids
The dependence of solubility on temperature for a number of solids in water is shown by the solubility curves
inFigure 11.16. Reviewing these data indicates a general trend of increasing solubility with temperature,
although there are exceptions, as illustrated by the ionic compound cerium sulfate.
FIGURE11.16 This graph shows how the solubility of several solids changes with temperature.
PAGE: 578
564 11 • Solutions and Colloids
The temperature dependence of solubility can be exploited to prepare supersaturated solutions of certain
compounds. A solution may be saturated with the compound at an elevated temperature (where the solute is
more soluble) and subsequently cooled to a lower temperature without precipitating the solute. The resultant
solution contains solute at a concentration greater than its equilibrium solubility at the lower temperature (i.e.,
it is supersaturated) and is relatively stable. Precipitation of the excess solute can be initiated by adding a seed
crystal (see the video in the Link to Learning earlier in this module) or by mechanically agitating the solution.
Some hand warmers, such as the one pictured inFigure 11.17, take advantage of this behavior.
FIGURE11.17 This hand warmer produces heat when the sodium acetate in a supersaturated solution
precipitates. Precipitation of the solute is initiated by a mechanical shockwave generated when the flexible metal
disk within the solution is “clicked.” (credit: modification of work by “Velela”/Wikimedia Commons)
LINK TO LEARNING
Thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16handwarmer)shows the crystallization process occurring in a hand
warmer.
11.4 Colligative Properties
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express concentrations of solution components using mole fraction and molality
• Describe the effect of solute concentration on various solution properties (vapor pressure, boiling point,
freezing point, and osmotic pressure)
• Perform calculations using the mathematical equations that describe these various colligative effects
• Describe the process of distillation and its practical applications
• Explain the process of osmosis and describe how it is applied industrially and in nature
The properties of a solution are different from those of either the pure solute(s) or solvent. Many solution
properties are dependent upon the chemical identity of the solute. Compared to pure water, a solution of
hydrogen chloride is more acidic, a solution of ammonia is more basic, a solution of sodium chloride is more
dense, and a solution of sucrose is more viscous. There are a few solution properties, however, that depend
onlyupon the total concentration of solute species, regardless of their identities. Thesecolligative properties
include vapor pressure lowering, boiling point elevation, freezing point depression, and osmotic pressure.
This small set of properties is of central importance to many natural phenomena and technological
applications, as will be described in this module.
Mole Fraction and Molality
Several units commonly used to express the concentrations of solution components were introduced in an
earlier chapter of this text, each providing certain benefits for use in different applications. For example,
molarity (M) is a convenient unit for use in stoichiometric calculations, since it is defined in terms of the molar
amounts of solute species:
Because solution volumes vary with temperature, molar concentrations will likewise vary. When expressed as
molarity, the concentration of a solution with identical numbers of solute and solvent species will be different
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 579
11.4 • Colligative Properties 565
at different temperatures, due to the contraction/expansion of the solution. More appropriate for calculations
involving many colligative properties are mole-based concentration units whose values are not dependent on
temperature. Two such units aremole fraction(introduced in the previous chapter on gases) andmolality.
The mole fraction,X, of a component is the ratio of its molar amount to the total number of moles of all
solution components:
By this definition, the sum of mole fractions for all solution components (the solvent and all solutes) is equal to
one.
Molalityis a concentration unit defined as the ratio of the numbers of moles of solute to the mass of the solvent
in kilograms:
Since these units are computed using only masses and molar amounts, they do not vary with temperature and,
thus, are better suited for applications requiring temperature-independent concentrations, including several
colligative properties, as will be described in this chapter module.
EXAMPLE 11.3
Calculating Mole Fraction and Molality
The antifreeze in most automobile radiators is a mixture of equal volumes of ethylene glycol and water, with
minor amounts of other additives that prevent corrosion. What are the (a) mole fraction and (b) molality of
ethylene glycol, C H (OH) , in a solution prepared from 2.22 103g of ethylene glycol and 2.00 103g of water
2 4 2
(approximately 2 L of glycol and 2 L of water)?
Solution
(a) The mole fraction of ethylene glycol may be computed by first deriving molar amounts of both solution
components and then substituting these amounts into the definition of mole fraction.
Notice that mole fraction is a dimensionless property, being the ratio of properties with identical units (moles).
(b) Derive moles of solute and mass of solvent (in kg).
First, use the given mass of ethylene glycol and its molar mass to find the moles of solute:
Then, convert the mass of the water from grams to kilograms:
Finally, calculate molality per its definition:
PAGE: 580
566 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Check Your Learning
What are the mole fraction and molality of a solution that contains 0.850 g of ammonia, NH , dissolved in 125
3
g of water?
Answer:
7.14 10−3; 0.399m
EXAMPLE 11.4
Converting Mole Fraction and Molal Concentrations
Calculate the mole fraction of solute and solvent in a 3.0msolution of sodium chloride.
Solution
Converting from one concentration unit to another is accomplished by first comparing the two unit definitions.
In this case, both units have the same numerator (moles of solute) but different denominators. The provided
molal concentration may be written as:
The numerator for this solution’s mole fraction is, therefore, 3.0 mol NaCl. The denominator may be computed
by deriving the molar amount of water corresponding to 1.0 kg
and then substituting these molar amounts into the definition for mole fraction.
Check Your Learning
The mole fraction of iodine, I , dissolved in dichloromethane, CH Cl , is 0.115. What is the molal
2 2 2
concentration,m, of iodine in this solution?
Answer:
1.50m
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 581
11.4 • Colligative Properties 567
EXAMPLE 11.5
Molality and Molarity Conversions
Intravenous infusion of a 0.556Maqueous solution of glucose (density of 1.04 g/mL) is part of some post-
operative recovery therapies. What is the molal concentration of glucose in this solution?
Solution
The provided molal concentration may be explicitly written as:
Consider the definition of molality:
The amount of glucose in 1-L of this solution is 0.556 mol, so the mass of water in this volume of solution is
needed.
First, compute the mass of 1.00 L of the solution:
This is the mass of both the water and its solute, glucose, and so the mass of glucose must be subtracted.
Compute the mass of glucose from its molar amount:
Subtracting the mass of glucose yields the mass of water in the solution:
Finally, the molality of glucose in this solution is computed as:
Check Your Learning
Nitric acid, HNO (aq), is commercially available as a 33.7 m aqueous solution (density = 1.35 g/mL). What is
3
the molarity of this solution?
Answer:
14.6 M
Vapor Pressure Lowering
As described in the chapter on liquids and solids, the equilibrium vapor pressure of a liquid is the pressure
exerted by its gaseous phase when vaporization and condensation are occurring at equal rates:
Dissolving a nonvolatile substance in a volatile liquid results in a lowering of the liquid’s vapor pressure. This
phenomenon can be rationalized by considering the effect of added solute molecules on the liquid's
vaporization and condensation processes. To vaporize, solvent molecules must be present at the surface of the
solution. The presence of solute decreases the surface area available to solvent molecules and thereby reduces
the rate of solvent vaporization. Since the rate of condensation is unaffected by the presence of solute, the net
result is that the vaporization-condensation equilibrium is achieved with fewer solvent molecules in the vapor
phase (i.e., at a lower vapor pressure) (Figure 11.18). While this interpretation is useful, it does not account for
several important aspects of the colligative nature of vapor pressure lowering. A more rigorous explanation
involves the property ofentropy, a topic of discussion in a later text chapter on thermodynamics. For purposes
of understanding the lowering of a liquid's vapor pressure, it is adequate to note that the more dispersed
nature of matter in a solution, compared to separate solvent and solute phases, serves to effectively stabilize
the solvent molecules and hinder their vaporization. A lower vapor pressure results, and a correspondingly
PAGE: 582
568 11 • Solutions and Colloids
higher boiling point as described in the next section of this module.
FIGURE11.18 The presence of nonvolatile solutes lowers the vapor pressure of a solution by impeding the
evaporation of solvent molecules.
The relationship between the vapor pressures of solution components and the concentrations of those
components is described byRaoult’s law:The partial pressure exerted by any component of an ideal solution
is equal to the vapor pressure of the pure component multiplied by its mole fraction in the solution.
whereP is the partial pressure exerted by component A in the solution, is the vapor pressure of pure A,
A
andX is the mole fraction of A in the solution.
A
Recalling that the total pressure of a gaseous mixture is equal to the sum of partial pressures for all its
components (Dalton’s law of partial pressures), the total vapor pressure exerted by a solution containingi
components is
A nonvolatile substance is one whose vapor pressure is negligible (P* ≈ 0), and so the vapor pressure above a
solution containing only nonvolatile solutes is due only to the solvent:
EXAMPLE 11.6
Calculation of a Vapor Pressure
Compute the vapor pressure of an ideal solution containing 92.1 g of glycerin, C H (OH) , and 184.4 g of
3 5 3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 583
11.4 • Colligative Properties 569
ethanol, C H OH, at 40 °C. The vapor pressure of pure ethanol is 0.178 atm at 40 °C. Glycerin is essentially
2 5
nonvolatile at this temperature.
Solution
Since the solvent is the only volatile component of this solution, its vapor pressure may be computed per
Raoult’s law as:
First, calculate the molar amounts of each solution component using the provided mass data.
Next, calculate the mole fraction of the solvent (ethanol) and use Raoult’s law to compute the solution’s vapor
pressure.
Check Your Learning
A solution contains 5.00 g of urea, CO(NH ) (a nonvolatile solute) and 0.100 kg of water. If the vapor pressure
22
of pure water at 25 °C is 23.7 torr, what is the vapor pressure of the solution assuming ideal behavior?
Answer:
23.4 torr
Distillation of Solutions
Solutions whose components have significantly different vapor pressures may be separated by a selective
vaporization process known as distillation. Consider the simple case of a mixture of two volatile liquids, A and
B, with A being the more volatile liquid. Raoult’s law can be used to show that the vapor above the solution is
enriched in component A, that is, the mole fraction of A in the vapor is greater than the mole fraction of A in
the liquid (see end-of-chapter Exercise 65). By appropriately heating the mixture, component A may be
vaporized, condensed, and collected—effectively separating it from component B.
Distillation is widely applied in both laboratory and industrial settings, being used to refine petroleum, to
isolate fermentation products, and to purify water. A typical apparatus for laboratory-scale distillations is
shown inFigure 11.19.
PAGE: 584
570 11 • Solutions and Colloids
FIGURE11.19 A typical laboratory distillation unit is shown in (a) a photograph and (b) a schematic diagram of the
components. (credit a: modification of work by “Rifleman82”/Wikimedia commons; credit b: modification of work by
“Slashme”/Wikimedia Commons)
Oil refineries use large-scalefractional distillationto separate the components of crude oil. The crude oil is
heated to high temperatures at the base of a tallfractionating column, vaporizing many of the components that
rise within the column. As vaporized components reach adequately cool zones during their ascent, they
condense and are collected. The collected liquids are simpler mixtures of hydrocarbons and other petroleum
compounds that are of appropriate composition for various applications (e.g., diesel fuel, kerosene, gasoline),
as depicted inFigure 11.20.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 585
11.4 • Colligative Properties 571
FIGURE11.20 Crude oil is a complex mixture that is separated by large-scale fractional distillation to isolate
various simpler mixtures.
Boiling Point Elevation
As described in the chapter on liquids and solids, theboiling pointof a liquid is the temperature at which its
vapor pressure is equal to ambient atmospheric pressure. Since the vapor pressure of a solution is lowered due
to the presence of nonvolatile solutes, it stands to reason that the solution’s boiling point will subsequently be
increased. Vapor pressure increases with temperature, and so a solution will require a higher temperature
than will pure solvent to achieve any given vapor pressure, including one equivalent to that of the surrounding
atmosphere. The increase in boiling point observed when nonvolatile solute is dissolved in a solvent, ΔT, is
b
calledboiling point elevationand is directly proportional to the molal concentration of solute species:
whereK is theboiling point elevation constant, or theebullioscopic constantandmis the molal
b
concentration (molality) of all solute species.
Boiling point elevation constants are characteristic properties that depend on the identity of the solvent.
Values ofK for several solvents are listed inTable 11.2.
b
Boiling Point Elevation and Freezing Point Depression Constants for Several Solvents
Solvent Boiling Point (°C at 1 atm) K (ºCm−1) Freezing Point (°C at 1 atm) K (ºCm−1)
b f
water 100.0 0.512 0.0 1.86
TABLE11.2
PAGE: 586
572 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Solvent Boiling Point (°C at 1 atm) K (ºCm−1) Freezing Point (°C at 1 atm) K (ºCm−1)
b f
hydrogen acetate 118.1 3.07 16.6 3.9
benzene 80.1 2.53 5.5 5.12
chloroform 61.26 3.63 −63.5 4.68
nitrobenzene 210.9 5.24 5.67 8.1
TABLE11.2
The extent to which the vapor pressure of a solvent is lowered and the boiling point is elevated depends on the
total number of solute particles present in a given amount of solvent, not on the mass or size or chemical
identities of the particles. A 1maqueous solution of sucrose (342 g/mol) and a 1maqueous solution of
ethylene glycol (62 g/mol) will exhibit the same boiling point because each solution has one mole of solute
particles (molecules) per kilogram of solvent.
EXAMPLE 11.7
Calculating the Boiling Point of a Solution
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a 0.33msolution of a nonvolatile solute in
benzene?
Solution
Use the equation relating boiling point elevation to solute molality to solve this problem in two steps.
Step 1.Calculate the change in boiling point.
Step 2.Add the boiling point elevation to the pure solvent’s boiling point.
Check Your Learning
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of the antifreeze described inExample 11.3?
Answer:
109.2 °C
EXAMPLE 11.8
The Boiling Point of an Iodine Solution
Find the boiling point of a solution of 92.1 g of iodine, I , in 800.0 g of chloroform, CHCl , assuming that the
2 3
iodine is nonvolatile and that the solution is ideal.
Solution
A four-step approach to solving this problem is outlined below.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 587
11.4 • Colligative Properties 573
Step 1.Convert from grams to moles ofI using the molar mass ofI in the unit conversion factor.
2 2
Result: 0.363 mol
Step 2.Determine the molality of the solution from the number of moles of solute and the mass of solvent,
in kilograms.
Result: 0.454m
Step 3.Use the direct proportionality between the change in boiling point and molal concentration to
determine how much the boiling point changes.
Result: 1.65 °C
Step 4.Determine the new boiling point from the boiling point of the pure solvent and the change.
Result: 62.91 °C
Check each result as a self-assessment.
Check Your Learning
What is the boiling point of a solution of 1.0 g of glycerin, C H (OH) , in 47.8 g of water? Assume an ideal
3 5 3
solution.
Answer:
100.12 °C
Freezing Point Depression
Solutions freeze at lower temperatures than pure liquids. This phenomenon is exploited in “de-icing” schemes
that use salt (Figure 11.21), calcium chloride, or urea to melt ice on roads and sidewalks, and in the use of
ethylene glycol as an “antifreeze” in automobile radiators. Seawater freezes at a lower temperature than fresh
water, and so the Arctic and Antarctic oceans remain unfrozen even at temperatures below 0 °C (as do the body
fluids of fish and other cold-blooded sea animals that live in these oceans).
FIGURE11.21 Rock salt (NaCl), calcium chloride (CaCl ), or a mixture of the two are used to melt ice. (credit:
2
modification of work by Eddie Welker)
The decrease in freezing point of a dilute solution compared to that of the pure solvent, ΔT, is called the
f
freezing point depressionand is directly proportional to the molal concentration of the solute
wheremis the molal concentration of the solute andK is called thefreezing point depression constant(or
f
cryoscopic constant). Just as for boiling point elevation constants, these are characteristic properties whose
PAGE: 588
574 11 • Solutions and Colloids
values depend on the chemical identity of the solvent. Values ofK for several solvents are listed inTable 11.2.
f
EXAMPLE 11.9
Calculation of the Freezing Point of a Solution
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of the 0.33msolution of a nonvolatile
nonelectrolyte solute in benzene described inExample 11.4?
Solution
Use the equation relating freezing point depression to solute molality to solve this problem in two steps.
Step 1.Calculate the change in freezing point.
Step 2.Subtract the freezing point change observed from the pure solvent’s freezing point.
Check Your Learning
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of a 1.85msolution of a nonvolatile nonelectrolyte
solute in nitrobenzene?
Answer:
−9.3 °C
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Colligative Properties and De-Icing
Sodium chloride and its group 2 analogs calcium and magnesium chloride are often used to de-ice
roadways and sidewalks, due to the fact that a solution of any one of these salts will have a freezing point
lower than 0°C, the freezing point of pure water. The group 2 metal salts are frequently mixed with the
cheaper and more readily available sodium chloride (“rock salt”) for use on roads, since they tend to be
somewhat less corrosive than the NaCl, and they provide a larger depression of the freezing point, since
they dissociate to yield three particles per formula unit, rather than two particles like the sodium chloride.
Because these ionic compounds tend to hasten the corrosion of metal, they would not be a wise choice to
use in antifreeze for the radiator in your car or to de-ice a plane prior to takeoff. For these applications,
covalent compounds, such as ethylene or propylene glycol, are often used. The glycols used in radiator
fluid not only lower the freezing point of the liquid, but they elevate the boiling point, making the fluid
useful in both winter and summer. Heated glycols are often sprayed onto the surface of airplanes prior to
takeoff in inclement weather in the winter to remove ice that has already formed and prevent the formation
of more ice, which would be particularly dangerous if formed on the control surfaces of the aircraft (Figure
11.22).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 589
11.4 • Colligative Properties 575
FIGURE11.22 Freezing point depression is exploited to remove ice from (a) roadways and (b) the control
surfaces of aircraft.
Phase Diagram for a Solution
The colligative effects on vapor pressure, boiling point, and freezing point described in the previous section
are conveniently summarized by comparing the phase diagrams for a pure liquid and a solution derived from
that liquid (Figure 11.23).
FIGURE11.23 Phase diagrams for a pure solvent (solid curves) and a solution formed by dissolving nonvolatile
solute in the solvent (dashed curves).
The liquid-vapor curve for the solution is locatedbeneaththe corresponding curve for the solvent, depicting
the vapor pressurelowering, ΔP, that results from the dissolution of nonvolatile solute. Consequently, at any
given pressure, the solution’s boiling point is observed at a higher temperature than that for the pure solvent,
reflecting the boiling point elevation, ΔT, associated with the presence of nonvolatile solute. The solid-liquid
b
curve for the solution is displaced left of that for the pure solvent, representing the freezing point depression,
ΔT, that accompanies solution formation. Finally, notice that the solid-gas curves for the solvent and its
f
solution are identical. This is the case for many solutions comprising liquid solvents and nonvolatile solutes.
Just as for vaporization, when a solution of this sort is frozen, it is actually just thesolventmolecules that
PAGE: 590
576 11 • Solutions and Colloids
undergo the liquid-to-solid transition, forming pure solid solvent that excludes solute species. The solid and
gaseous phases, therefore, are composed of solvent only, and so transitions between these phases are not
subject to colligative effects.
Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure of Solutions
A number of natural and synthetic materials exhibitselective permeation, meaning that only molecules or ions
of a certain size, shape, polarity, charge, and so forth, are capable of passing through (permeating) the
material. Biological cell membranes provide elegant examples of selective permeation in nature, while dialysis
tubing used to remove metabolic wastes from blood is a more simplistic technological example. Regardless of
how they may be fabricated, these materials are generally referred to assemipermeable membranes.
Consider the apparatus illustrated inFigure 11.24, in which samples of pure solvent and a solution are
separated by a membrane that only solvent molecules may permeate. Solvent molecules will diffuse across the
membrane in both directions. Since the concentration ofsolventis greater in the pure solvent than the
solution, these molecules will diffuse from the solvent side of the membrane to the solution side at a faster rate
than they will in the reverse direction. The result is a net transfer of solvent molecules from the pure solvent to
the solution. Diffusion-driven transfer of solvent molecules through a semipermeable membrane is a process
known asosmosis.
FIGURE11.24 (a) A solution and pure solvent are initially separated by an osmotic membrane. (b) Net transfer of
solvent molecules to the solution occurs until its osmotic pressure yields equal rates of transfer in both directions.
When osmosis is carried out in an apparatus like that shown inFigure 11.24, the volume of the solution
increases as it becomes diluted by accumulation of solvent. This causes the level of the solution to rise,
increasing its hydrostatic pressure (due to the weight of the column of solution in the tube) and resulting in a
faster transfer of solvent molecules back to the pure solvent side. When the pressure reaches a value that
yields a reverse solvent transfer rate equal to the osmosis rate, bulk transfer of solvent ceases. This pressure is
called theosmotic pressure (Π)of the solution. The osmotic pressure of a dilute solution is related to its
solute molarity,M, and absolute temperature,T, according to the equation
whereRis the universal gas constant.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 591
11.4 • Colligative Properties 577
EXAMPLE 11.10
Calculation of Osmotic Pressure
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the osmotic pressure (atm) of a 0.30Msolution of glucose in water
that is used for intravenous infusion at body temperature, 37 °C?
Solution
Find the osmotic pressure,Π, using the formulaΠ=MRT, whereTis on the Kelvin scale (310 K) and the value
ofRis expressed in appropriate units (0.08206 L atm/mol K).
Check Your Learning
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the osmotic pressure (atm) a solution with a volume of 0.750 L that
contains 5.0 g of methanol, CH OH, in water at 37 °C?
3
Answer:
5.3 atm
If a solution is placed in an apparatus like the one shown inFigure 11.25, applying pressure greater than the
osmotic pressure of the solution reverses the osmosis and pushes solvent molecules from the solution into the
pure solvent. This technique of reverse osmosis is used for large-scale desalination of seawater and on smaller
scales to produce high-purity tap water for drinking.
FIGURE11.25 Applying a pressure greater than the osmotic pressure of a solution will reverse osmosis. Solvent
molecules from the solution are pushed into the pure solvent.
PAGE: 592
578 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Reverse Osmosis Water Purification
In the process of osmosis, diffusion serves to move water through a semipermeable membrane from a less
concentrated solution to a more concentrated solution. Osmotic pressure is the amount of pressure that
must be applied to the more concentrated solution to cause osmosis to stop. If greater pressure is applied,
the water will go from the more concentrated solution to a less concentrated (more pure) solution. This is
called reverse osmosis. Reverse osmosis (RO) is used to purify water in many applications, from
desalination plants in coastal cities, to water-purifying machines in grocery stores (Figure 11.26), and
smaller reverse-osmosis household units. With a hand-operated pump, small RO units can be used in
third-world countries, disaster areas, and in lifeboats. Our military forces have a variety of generator-
operated RO units that can be transported in vehicles to remote locations.
FIGURE11.26 Reverse osmosis systems for purifying drinking water are shown here on (a) small and (b) large
scales. (credit a: modification of work by Jerry Kirkhart; credit b: modification of work by Willard J. Lathrop)
Examples of osmosis are evident in many biological systems because cells are surrounded by semipermeable
membranes. Carrots and celery that have become limp because they have lost water can be made crisp again
by placing them in water. Water moves into the carrot or celery cells by osmosis. A cucumber placed in a
concentrated salt solution loses water by osmosis and absorbs some salt to become a pickle. Osmosis can also
affect animal cells. Solute concentrations are particularly important when solutions are injected into the body.
Solutes in body cell fluids and blood serum give these solutions an osmotic pressure of approximately 7.7 atm.
Solutions injected into the body must have the same osmotic pressure as blood serum; that is, they should be
isotonicwith blood serum. If a less concentrated solution, ahypotonicsolution, is injected in sufficient
quantity to dilute the blood serum, water from the diluted serum passes into the blood cells by osmosis,
causing the cells to expand and rupture. This process is calledhemolysis. When a more concentrated solution,
ahypertonicsolution, is injected, the cells lose water to the more concentrated solution, shrivel, and possibly
die in a process calledcrenation. These effects are illustrated inFigure 11.27.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 593
11.4 • Colligative Properties 579
FIGURE11.27 Red blood cell membranes are water permeable and will (a) swell and possibly rupture in a
hypotonic solution; (b) maintain normal volume and shape in an isotonic solution; and (c) shrivel and possibly die in
a hypertonic solution. (credit a/b/c: modifications of work by “LadyofHats”/Wikimedia commons)
Determination of Molar Masses
Osmotic pressure and changes in freezing point, boiling point, and vapor pressure are directly proportional to
the number of solute species present in a given amount of solution. Consequently, measuring one of these
properties for a solution prepared using a known mass of solute permits determination of the solute’s molar
mass.
EXAMPLE 11.11
Determination of a Molar Mass from a Freezing Point Depression
A solution of 4.00 g of a nonelectrolyte dissolved in 55.0 g of benzene is found to freeze at 2.32 °C. Assuming
ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of this compound?
Solution
Solve this problem using the following steps.
Step 1.Determine the change in freezing point from the observed freezing point and the freezing point of
pure benzene(Table 11.2).
PAGE: 594
580 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Step 2.Determine the molal concentration from K,the freezing point depression constant for benzene
f
(Table 11.2),andΔT.
f
Step 3.Determine the number of moles of compound in the solution from the molal concentration and the
mass of solvent used to make the solution.
Step 4.Determine the molar mass from the mass of the solute and the number of moles in that mass.
Check Your Learning
A solution of 35.7 g of a nonelectrolyte in 220.0 g of chloroform has a boiling point of 64.5 °C. Assuming ideal
solution behavior, what is the molar mass of this compound?
Answer:
1.8 102g/mol
EXAMPLE 11.12
Determination of a Molar Mass from Osmotic Pressure
A 0.500 L sample of an aqueous solution containing 10.0 g of hemoglobin has an osmotic pressure of 5.9 torr at
22 °C. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of hemoglobin?
Solution
Here is one set of steps that can be used to solve the problem:
Step 1.Convert the osmotic pressure to atmospheres, then determine the molar concentration from the
osmotic pressure.
Step 2.Determine the number of moles of hemoglobin in the solution from the concentration and the
volume of the solution.
Step 3.Determine the molar mass from the mass of hemoglobin and the number of moles in that mass.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 595
11.4 • Colligative Properties 581
Check Your Learning
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of a protein if a solution of 0.02 g of the protein in
25.0 mL of solution has an osmotic pressure of 0.56 torr at 25 °C?
Answer:
3 104g/mol
Colligative Properties of Electrolytes
As noted previously in this module, the colligative properties of a solution depend only on the number, not on
the identity, of solute species dissolved. The concentration terms in the equations for various colligative
properties (freezing point depression, boiling point elevation, osmotic pressure) pertain toall solute species
present in the solution. For the solutions considered thus far in this chapter, the solutes have been
nonelectrolytes that dissolve physically without dissociation or any other accompanying process. Each
molecule that dissolves yields one dissolved solute molecule. The dissolution of an electroyte, however, is not
this simple, as illustrated by the two common examples below:
Considering the first of these examples, and assuming complete dissociation, a 1.0maqueous solution of NaCl
contains 2.0 mole of ions (1.0 mol Na+and 1.0 mol Cl−) per each kilogram of water, and its freezing point
depression is expected to be
When this solution is actually prepared and its freezing point depression measured, however, a value of 3.4 °C
is obtained. Similar discrepancies are observed for other ionic compounds, and the differences between the
measured and expected colligative property values typically become more significant as solute concentrations
increase. These observations suggest that the ions of sodium chloride (and other strong electrolytes) are not
completely dissociated in solution.
To account for this and avoid the errors accompanying the assumption of total dissociation, an experimentally
measured parameter named in honor of Nobel Prize-winning German chemist Jacobus Henricus van’t Hoff is
used. Thevan’t Hoff factor (i)is defined as the ratio of solute particles in solution to the number of formula
units dissolved:
Values for measured van’t Hoff factors for several solutes, along with predicted values assuming complete
dissociation, are shown inTable 11.3.
Predicated and Measured van’t Hoff Factors for Several 0.050mAqueous Solutions
Formula unit Classification Dissolution products i(predicted) i(measured)
C H O (glucose) Nonelectrolyte C H O 1 1.0
12 22 11 12 22 11
NaCl Strong electrolyte Na+, Cl− 2 1.9
HCl Strong electrolyte (acid) H O+, Cl− 2 1.9
3
MgSO Strong electrolyte Mg2+, SO 2−, 2 1.3
4 4
TABLE11.3
PAGE: 596
582 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Formula unit Classification Dissolution products i(predicted) i(measured)
MgCl Strong electrolyte Mg2+, 2Cl− 3 2.7
2
FeCl Strong electrolyte Fe3+, 3Cl− 4 3.4
3
TABLE11.3
In 1923, the chemists PeterDebyeand ErichHückelproposed a theory to explain the apparent incomplete
ionization of strong electrolytes. They suggested that although interionic attraction in an aqueous solution is
very greatly reduced by solvation of the ions and the insulating action of the polar solvent, it is not completely
nullified. The residual attractions prevent the ions from behaving as totally independent particles (Figure
11.28). In some cases, a positive and negative ion may actually touch, giving a solvated unit called an ion pair.
Thus, theactivity, or the effective concentration, of any particular kind of ion is less than that indicated by the
actual concentration. Ions become more and more widely separated the more dilute the solution, and the
residual interionic attractions become less and less. Thus, in extremely dilute solutions, the effective
concentrations of the ions (their activities) are essentially equal to the actual concentrations. Note that the
van’t Hoff factors for the electrolytes inTable 11.3are for 0.05msolutions, at which concentration the value of
ifor NaCl is 1.9, as opposed to an ideal value of 2.
FIGURE11.28 Dissociation of ionic compounds in water is not always complete due to the formation of ion pairs.
EXAMPLE 11.13
The Freezing Point of a Solution of an Electrolyte
The concentration of ions in seawater is approximately the same as that in a solution containing 4.2 g of NaCl
dissolved in 125 g of water. Use this information and a predicted value for the van’t Hoff factor (Table 11.3) to
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 597
11.5 • Colloids 583
determine the freezing temperature the solution (assume ideal solution behavior).
Solution
Solve this problem using the following series of steps.
Step 1.Convert from grams to moles of NaCl using the molar mass of NaCl in the unit conversion factor.
Result: 0.072 mol NaCl
Step 2.Determine the number of moles of ions present in the solution using the number of moles of ions
in 1 mole of NaCl as the conversion factor (2 mol ions/1 mol NaCl).
Result: 0.14 mol ions
Step 3.Determine the molality of the ions in the solution from the number of moles of ions and the mass of
solvent, in kilograms.
Result: 1.2m
Step 4.Use the direct proportionality between the change in freezing point and molal concentration to
determine how much the freezing point changes.
Result: 2.1 °C
Step 5.Determine the new freezing point from the freezing point of the pure solvent and the change.
Result: −2.1 °C
Check each result as a self-assessment, taking care to avoid rounding errors by retaining guard digits in
each step’s result for computing the next step’s result.
Check Your Learning
Assuming complete dissociation and ideal solution behavior, calculate the freezing point of a solution of 0.724
g of CaCl in 175 g of water.
2
Answer:
−0.208 °C
11.5 Colloids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the composition and properties of colloidal dispersions
• List and explain several technological applications of colloids
As a child, you may have made suspensions such as mixtures of mud and water, flour and water, or a
suspension of solid pigments in water, known as tempera paint. Thesesuspensionsare heterogeneous
mixtures composed of relatively large particles that are visible (or that can be seen with a magnifying glass).
They are cloudy, and the suspended particles settle out after mixing. On the other hand, a solution is a
homogeneous mixture in which no settling occurs and in which the dissolved species are molecules or ions.
Solutions exhibit completely different behavior from suspensions. A solution may be colored, but it is
transparent, the molecules or ions are invisible, and they do not settle out on standing. Another class of
mixtures calledcolloids(orcolloidal dispersions) exhibit properties intermediate between those of
suspensions and solutions (Figure 11.29). The particles in a colloid are larger than most simple molecules;
PAGE: 598
584 11 • Solutions and Colloids
however, colloidal particles are small enough that they do not settle out upon standing.
FIGURE11.29 (a) A solution is a homogeneous mixture that appears clear, such as the saltwater in this aquarium.
(b) In a colloid, such as milk, the particles are much larger but remain dispersed and do not settle. (c) A suspension,
such as mud, is a heterogeneous mixture of suspended particles that appears cloudy and in which the particles can
settle. (credit a photo: modification of work by Adam Wimsatt; credit b photo: modification of work by Melissa
Wiese; credit c photo: modification of work by Peter Burgess)
The particles in a colloid are large enough to scatter light, a phenomenon called theTyndall effect. This can
make colloidal mixtures appear cloudy or opaque, such as the searchlight beams shown inFigure 11.30.
Clouds are colloidal mixtures. They are composed of water droplets that are much larger than molecules, but
that are small enough that they do not settle out.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 599
11.5 • Colloids 585
FIGURE11.30 The paths of searchlight beams are made visible when light is scattered by colloidal-size particles
in the air (fog, smoke, etc.). (credit: “Bahman”/Wikimedia Commons)
The term “colloid”—from the Greek wordskolla, meaning “glue,” andeidos, meaning “like”—was first used in
1861 by Thomas Graham to classify mixtures such as starch in water and gelatin. Many colloidal particles are
aggregates of hundreds or thousands of molecules, but others (such as proteins and polymer molecules)
consist of a single extremely large molecule. The protein and synthetic polymer molecules that form colloids
may have molecular masses ranging from a few thousand to many million atomic mass units.
Analogous to the identification of solution components as “solute” and “solvent,” the components of a colloid
are likewise classified according to their relative amounts. The particulate component typically present in a
relatively minor amount is called thedispersed phaseand the substance or solution throughout which the
particulate is dispersed is called thedispersion medium. Colloids may involve virtually any combination of
physical states (gas in liquid, liquid in solid, solid in gas, etc.), as illustrated by the examples of colloidal
systems given inTable 11.4.
Examples of Colloidal Systems
Dispersed Phase Dispersion Medium Common Examples Name
solid gas smoke, dust —
solid liquid starch in water, some inks, paints, milk of magnesia sol
solid solid some colored gems, some alloys —
liquid gas clouds, fogs, mists, sprays aerosol
liquid liquid milk, mayonnaise, butter emulsion
liquid solid jellies, gels, pearl, opal (H O in SiO ) gel
2 2
TABLE11.4
PAGE: 600
586 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Dispersed Phase Dispersion Medium Common Examples Name
gas liquid foams, whipped cream, beaten egg whites foam
gas solid pumice, floating soaps —
TABLE11.4
Preparation of Colloidal Systems
Colloids are prepared by producing particles of colloidal dimensions and distributing these particles
throughout a dispersion medium. Particles of colloidal size are formed by two methods:
1. Dispersion methods: breaking down larger particles. For example, paint pigments are produced by
dispersing large particles by grinding in special mills.
2. Condensation methods: growth from smaller units, such as molecules or ions. For example, clouds form
when water molecules condense and form very small droplets.
A few solid substances, when brought into contact with water, disperse spontaneously and form colloidal
systems. Gelatin, glue, starch, and dehydrated milk powder behave in this manner. The particles are already of
colloidal size; the water simply disperses them. Powdered milk particles of colloidal size are produced by
dehydrating milk spray. Some atomizers produce colloidal dispersions of a liquid in air.
Anemulsionmay be prepared by shaking together or blending two immiscible liquids. This breaks one liquid
into droplets of colloidal size, which then disperse throughout the other liquid. Oil spills in the ocean may be
difficult to clean up, partly because wave action can cause the oil and water to form an emulsion. In many
emulsions, however, the dispersed phase tends to coalesce, form large drops, and separate. Therefore,
emulsions are usually stabilized by anemulsifying agent, a substance that inhibits the coalescence of the
dispersed liquid. For example, a little soap will stabilize an emulsion of kerosene in water. Milk is an emulsion
of butterfat in water, with the protein casein serving as the emulsifying agent. Mayonnaise is an emulsion of oil
in vinegar, with egg yolk components as the emulsifying agents.
Condensation methods form colloidal particles by aggregation of molecules or ions. If the particles grow
beyond the colloidal size range, drops or precipitates form, and no colloidal system results. Clouds form when
water molecules aggregate and form colloid-sized particles. If these water particles coalesce to form
adequately large water drops of liquid water or crystals of solid water, they settle from the sky as rain, sleet, or
snow. Many condensation methods involve chemical reactions. A red colloidal suspension of iron(III)
hydroxide may be prepared by mixing a concentrated solution of iron(III) chloride with hot water:
A colloidal gold sol results from the reduction of a very dilute solution of gold(III) chloride by a reducing agent
such as formaldehyde, tin(II) chloride, or iron(II) sulfate:
Some gold sols prepared in 1857 are still intact (the particles have not coalesced and settled), illustrating the
long-term stability of many colloids.
Soaps and Detergents
Pioneers made soap by boiling fats with a strongly basic solution made by leaching potassium carbonate,
K CO , from wood ashes with hot water. Animal fats contain polyesters of fatty acids (long-chain carboxylic
2 3
acids). When animal fats are treated with a base like potassium carbonate or sodium hydroxide, glycerol and
salts of fatty acids such as palmitic, oleic, and stearic acid are formed. The salts of fatty acids are calledsoaps.
The sodium salt of stearic acid, sodium stearate, has the formula C H CO Na and contains an uncharged
17 35 2
nonpolar hydrocarbon chain, the C H — unit, and an ionic carboxylate group, the — unit (Figure
17 35
11.31).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 601
11.5 • Colloids 587
FIGURE11.31 Soaps contain a nonpolar hydrocarbon end (blue) and an ionic end (red). The ionic end is a
carboxylate group. The length of the hydrocarbon end can vary from soap to soap.
Detergents(soap substitutes) also contain nonpolar hydrocarbon chains, such as C H —, and an ionic group,
12 25
such as a sulfate— or a sulfonate— (Figure 11.32). Soaps form insoluble calcium and magnesium
compounds in hard water; detergents form water-soluble products—a definite advantage for detergents.
FIGURE11.32 Detergents contain a nonpolar hydrocarbon end (blue) and an ionic end (red). The ionic end can be
either a sulfate or a sulfonate. The length of the hydrocarbon end can vary from detergent to detergent.
The cleaning action of soaps and detergents can be explained in terms of the structures of the molecules
involved. The hydrocarbon (nonpolar) end of a soap or detergent molecule dissolves in, or is attracted to,
nonpolar substances such as oil, grease, or dirt particles. The ionic end is attracted by water (polar), illustrated
inFigure 11.33. As a result, the soap or detergent molecules become oriented at the interface between the dirt
particles and the water so they act as a kind of bridge between two different kinds of matter, nonpolar and
polar. Molecules such as this are termedamphiphilicsince they have both a hydrophobic (“water-fearing”)
part and a hydrophilic (“water-loving”) part. As a consequence, dirt particles become suspended as colloidal
particles and are readily washed away.
FIGURE11.33 This diagrammatic cross section of an emulsified drop of oil in water shows how soap or detergent
acts as an emulsifier.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill
The blowout of the Deepwater Horizon oil drilling rig on April 20, 2010, in the Gulf of Mexico near
Mississippi began the largest marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. In the 87 days
following the blowout, an estimated 4.9 million barrels (210 million gallons) of oil flowed from the ruptured
well 5000 feet below the water’s surface. The well was finally declared sealed on September 19, 2010.
Crude oil is immiscible with and less dense than water, so the spilled oil rose to the surface of the water.
PAGE: 602
588 11 • Solutions and Colloids
Floating booms, skimmer ships, and controlled burns were used to remove oil from the water’s surface in
an attempt to protect beaches and wetlands along the Gulf coast. In addition to removal of the oil, attempts
were also made to lessen its environmental impact by rendering it “soluble” (in the loose sense of the term)
and thus allowing it to be diluted to hopefully less harmful levels by the vast volume of ocean water. This
approach used 1.84 million gallons of the oil dispersant Corexit 9527, most of which was injected
underwater at the site of the leak, with small amounts being sprayed on top of the spill. Corexit 9527
contains 2-butoxyethanol (C H O ), an amphiphilic molecule whose polar and nonpolar ends are useful
6 14 2
for emulsifying oil into small droplets, increasing the surface area of the oil and making it more available to
marine bacteria for digestion (Figure 11.34). While this approach avoids many of the immediate hazards
that bulk oil poses to marine and coastal ecosystems, it introduces the possibility of long-term effects
resulting from the introduction of the complex and potential toxic components of petroleum into the
ocean’s food chain. A number of organizations are involved in monitoring the extended impact of this oil
spill, including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (visit thiswebsite
(http://openstax.org/l/16gulfspill)for additional details).
FIGURE11.34 (a) This NASA satellite image shows the oil slick from the Deepwater Horizon spill. (b) A US Air
Force plane sprays Corexit, a dispersant. (c) The molecular structure of 2-butoxyethanol is shown. (credit a:
modification of work by “NASA, FT2, demis.nl”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by “NASA/
MODIS Rapid Response Team”/Wikimedia Commons)
Electrical Properties of Colloidal Particles
Dispersed colloidal particles are often electrically charged. A colloidal particle of iron(III) hydroxide, for
example, does not contain enough hydroxide ions to compensate exactly for the positive charges on the
iron(III) ions. Thus, each individual colloidal particle bears a positive charge, and the colloidal dispersion
consists of charged colloidal particles and some free hydroxide ions, which keep the dispersion electrically
neutral. Most metal hydroxide colloids have positive charges, whereas most metals and metal sulfides form
negatively charged dispersions. All colloidal particles in any one system have charges of the same sign. This
helps keep them dispersed because particles containing like charges repel each other.
The charged nature of some colloidal particles may be exploited to remove them from a variety of mixtures.
For example, the particles comprising smoke are often colloidally dispersed and electrically charged.
Frederick Cottrell, an American chemist, developed a process to remove these particles. The charged particles
are attracted to highly charged electrodes, where they are neutralized and deposited as dust (Figure 11.36).
This is one of the important methods used to clean up the smoke from a variety of industrial processes. The
process is also important in the recovery of valuable products from the smoke and flue dust of smelters,
furnaces, and kilns. There are also similar electrostatic air filters designed for home use to improve indoor air
quality.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 603
11.5 • Colloids 589
Portrait of a Chemist
Frederick Gardner Cottrell
FIGURE11.35 (a) Frederick Cottrell developed (b) the electrostatic precipitator, a device designed to curb air
pollution by removing colloidal particles from air. (credit b: modification of work by “SpLot”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Born in Oakland, CA, in 1877, FrederickCottrelldevoured textbooks as if they were novels and graduated
from high school at the age of 16. He then entered the University of California (UC), Berkeley, completing a
Bachelor’s degree in three years. He saved money from his $1200 annual salary as a chemistry teacher at
Oakland High School to fund his studies in chemistry in Berlin with Nobel prize winner Jacobus Henricus
van’t Hoff, and in Leipzig with Wilhelm Ostwald, another Nobel awardee. After earning his PhD in physical
chemistry, he returned to the United States to teach at UC Berkeley. He also consulted for the DuPont
Company, where he developed the electrostatic precipitator, a device designed to curb air pollution by
removing colloidal particles from air. Cottrell used the proceeds from his invention to fund a nonprofit
research corporation to finance scientific research.
PAGE: 604
590 11 • Solutions and Colloids
FIGURE11.36 In a Cottrell precipitator, positively and negatively charged particles are attracted to highly charged
electrodes, where they are neutralized and deposited as dust.
Gels
Gelatin desserts, such as Jell-O, are a type of colloid (Figure 11.37). Gelatin sets on cooling because the hot
aqueous mixture of gelatin coagulates as it cools, yielding an extremely viscous body known as agel. A gel is a
colloidal dispersion of a liquid phase throughout a solid phase. It appears that the fibers of the dispersing
medium form a complex three-dimensional network, the interstices being filled with the liquid medium or a
dilute solution of the dispersing medium.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 605
11.5 • Colloids 591
FIGURE11.37 Gelatin desserts are colloids in which an aqueous solution of sweeteners and flavors is dispersed
throughout a medium of solid proteins. (credit photo: modification of work by Steven Depolo)
Pectin, a carbohydrate from fruit juices, is a gel-forming substance important in jelly making. Silica gel, a
colloidal dispersion of hydrated silicon dioxide, is formed when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a dilute
solution of sodium silicate. Canned Heat is a flammable gel made by mixing alcohol and a saturated aqueous
solution of calcium acetate.
PAGE: 606
592 11 • Key Terms
Key Terms
alloy solid mixture of a metallic element and one ion pair solvated anion/cation pair held together
or more additional elements by moderate electrostatic attraction
amphiphilic molecules possessing both ion-dipole attraction electrostatic attraction
hydrophobic (nonpolar) and a hydrophilic (polar) between an ion and a polar molecule
parts isotonic of equal osmotic pressure
boiling point elevation elevation of the boiling miscible mutually soluble in all proportions;
point of a liquid by addition of a solute typically refers to liquid substances
boiling point elevation constant the molality (m) a concentration unit defined as the
proportionality constant in the equation relating ratio of the numbers of moles of solute to the
boiling point elevation to solute molality; also mass of the solvent in kilograms
known as the ebullioscopic constant nonelectrolyte substance that does not produce
colligative property property of a solution that ions when dissolved in water
depends only on the concentration of a solute osmosis diffusion of solvent molecules through a
species semipermeable membrane
colloid (also, colloidal dispersion) mixture in which osmotic pressure (Π) opposing pressure required
relatively large solid or liquid particles are to prevent bulk transfer of solvent molecules
dispersed uniformly throughout a gas, liquid, or through a semipermeable membrane
solid partially miscible of moderate mutual solubility;
crenation process whereby biological cells become typically refers to liquid substances
shriveled due to loss of water by osmosis Raoult’s law the relationship between a solution’s
dispersed phase substance present as relatively vapor pressure and the vapor pressures and
large solid or liquid particles in a colloid concentrations of its components
dispersion medium solid, liquid, or gas in which saturated of concentration equal to solubility;
colloidal particles are dispersed containing the maximum concentration of solute
dissociation physical process accompanying the possible for a given temperature and pressure
dissolution of an ionic compound in which the semipermeable membrane a membrane that
compound’s constituent ions are solvated and selectively permits passage of certain ions or
dispersed throughout the solution molecules
electrolyte substance that produces ions when solubility extent to which a solute may be
dissolved in water dissolved in water, or any solvent
emulsifying agent amphiphilic substance used to solvation exothermic process in which
stabilize the particles of some emulsions intermolecular attractive forces between the
emulsion colloid formed from immiscible liquids solute and solvent in a solution are established
freezing point depression lowering of the freezing spontaneous process physical or chemical change
point of a liquid by addition of a solute that occurs without the addition of energy from
freezing point depression constant (also, an external source
cryoscopic constant) proportionality constant in strong electrolyte substance that dissociates or
the equation relating freezing point depression to ionizes completely when dissolved in water
solute molality supersaturated of concentration that exceeds
gel colloidal dispersion of a liquid in a solid solubility; a nonequilibrium state
hemolysis rupture of red blood cells due to the suspension heterogeneous mixture in which
accumulation of excess water by osmosis relatively large component particles are
Henry’s law the proportional relationship between temporarily dispersed but settle out over time
the concentration of dissolved gas in a solution Tyndall effect scattering of visible light by a
and the partial pressure of the gas in contact with colloidal dispersion
the solution unsaturated of concentration less than solubility
hypertonic of greater osmotic pressure van’t Hoff factor (i) the ratio of the number of
hypotonic of less osmotic pressure moles of particles in a solution to the number of
ideal solution solution that forms with no moles of formula units dissolved in the solution
accompanying energy change weak electrolyte substance that ionizes only
immiscible of negligible mutual solubility; partially when dissolved in water
typically refers to liquid substances
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 607
11 • Key Equations 593
Key Equations
ΔT =Km
b b
ΔT =Km
f f
Π=MRT
Summary
11.1The Dissolution Process saturated solution contains solute at a concentration
equal to its solubility. A supersaturated solution is
A solution forms when two or more substances
one in which a solute’s concentration exceeds its
combine physically to yield a mixture that is
solubility—a nonequilibrium (unstable) condition
homogeneous at the molecular level. The solvent is
that will result in solute precipitation when the
the most concentrated component and determines
solution is appropriately perturbed. Miscible liquids
the physical state of the solution. The solutes are the
are soluble in all proportions, and immiscible
other components typically present at
liquids exhibit very low mutual solubility.
concentrations less than that of the solvent.
Solubilities for gaseous solutes decrease with
Solutions may form endothermically or
increasing temperature, while those for most, but
exothermically, depending upon the relative
not all, solid solutes increase with temperature. The
magnitudes of solute and solvent intermolecular
concentration of a gaseous solute in a solution is
attractive forces. Ideal solutions form with no
proportional to the partial pressure of the gas to
appreciable change in energy.
which the solution is exposed, a relation known as
11.2Electrolytes Henry’s law.
Substances that dissolve in water to yield ions are 11.4Colligative Properties
called electrolytes. Electrolytes may be covalent
Properties of a solution that depend only on the
compounds that chemically react with water to
concentration of solute particles are called
produce ions (for example, acids and bases), or they
colligative properties. They include changes in the
may be ionic compounds that dissociate to yield
vapor pressure, boiling point, and freezing point of
their constituent cations and anions, when
the solvent in the solution. The magnitudes of these
dissolved. Dissolution of an ionic compound is
properties depend only on the total concentration of
facilitated by ion-dipole attractions between the ions
solute particles in solution, not on the type of
of the compound and the polar water molecules.
particles. The total concentration of solute particles
Soluble ionic substances and strong acids ionize
in a solution also determines its osmotic pressure.
completely and are strong electrolytes, while weak
This is the pressure that must be applied to the
acids and bases ionize to only a small extent and are
solution to prevent diffusion of molecules of pure
weak electrolytes. Nonelectrolytes are substances
solvent through a semipermeable membrane into
that do not produce ions when dissolved in water.
the solution. Ionic compounds may not completely
11.3Solubility dissociate in solution due to activity effects, in which
case observed colligative effects may be less than
The extent to which one substance will dissolve in
predicted.
another is determined by several factors, including
the types and relative strengths of intermolecular 11.5Colloids
attractive forces that may exist between the
Colloids are mixtures in which one or more
substances’ atoms, ions, or molecules. This
substances are dispersed as relatively large solid
tendency to dissolve is quantified as a substance’s
particles or liquid droplets throughout a solid,
solubility, its maximum concentration in a solution
liquid, or gaseous medium. The particles of a colloid
at equilibrium under specified conditions. A
remain dispersed and do not settle due to gravity,
PAGE: 608
594 11 • Exercises
and they are often electrically charged. Colloids are technological applications.
widespread in nature and are involved in many
Exercises
11.1The Dissolution Process
1. How do solutions differ from compounds? From other mixtures?
2. Which of the principal characteristics of solutions are evident in the solutions of K Cr O shown inFigure
2 2 7
11.2?
3. When KNO is dissolved in water, the resulting solution is significantly colder than the water was
3
originally.
(a) Is the dissolution of KNO an endothermic or an exothermic process?
3
(b) What conclusions can you draw about the intermolecular attractions involved in the process?
(c) Is the resulting solution an ideal solution?
4. Give an example of each of the following types of solutions:
(a) a gas in a liquid
(b) a gas in a gas
(c) a solid in a solid
5. Indicate the most important types of intermolecular attractions in each of the following solutions:
(a) The solution inFigure 11.2.
(b) NO(l) in CO(l)
(c) Cl (g) in Br (l)
2 2
(d) HCl(g) in benzene C H (l)
6 6
(e) Methanol CH OH(l) in H O(l)
3 2
6. Predict whether each of the following substances would be more soluble in water (polar solvent) or in a
hydrocarbon such as heptane (C H , nonpolar solvent):
7 16
(a) vegetable oil (nonpolar)
(b) isopropyl alcohol (polar)
(c) potassium bromide (ionic)
7. Heat is released when some solutions form; heat is absorbed when other solutions form. Provide a
molecular explanation for the difference between these two types of spontaneous processes.
8. Solutions of hydrogen in palladium may be formed by exposing Pd metal to H gas. The concentration of
2
hydrogen in the palladium depends on the pressure of H gas applied, but in a more complex fashion than
2
can be described by Henry’s law. Under certain conditions, 0.94 g of hydrogen gas is dissolved in 215 g of
palladium metal (solution density = 10.8 g cm3).
(a) Determine the molarity of this solution.
(b) Determine the molality of this solution.
(c) Determine the percent by mass of hydrogen atoms in this solution.
11.2Electrolytes
9. Explain why the ions Na+and Cl−are strongly solvated in water but not in hexane, a solvent composed of
nonpolar molecules.
10. Explain why solutions of HBr in benzene (a nonpolar solvent) are nonconductive, while solutions in water
(a polar solvent) are conductive.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 609
11 • Exercises 595
11. Consider the solutions presented:
(a) Which of the following sketches best represents the ions in a solution of Fe(NO ) (aq)?
33
(b) Write a balanced chemical equation showing the products of the dissolution of Fe(NO ) .
33
12. Compare the processes that occur when methanol (CH OH), hydrogen chloride (HCl), and sodium
3
hydroxide (NaOH) dissolve in water. Write equations and prepare sketches showing the form in which
each of these compounds is present in its respective solution.
13. What is the expected electrical conductivity of the following solutions?
(a) NaOH(aq)
(b) HCl(aq)
(c) C H O (aq) (glucose)
6 12 6
(d) NH (aq)
3
14. Why are mostsolidionic compounds electrically nonconductive, whereas aqueous solutions of ionic
compounds are good conductors? Would you expect aliquid(molten) ionic compound to be electrically
conductive or nonconductive? Explain.
15. Indicate the most important type of intermolecular attraction responsible for solvation in each of the
following solutions:
(a) the solutions inFigure 11.7
(b) methanol, CH OH, dissolved in ethanol, C H OH
3 2 5
(c) methane, CH , dissolved in benzene, C H
4 6 6
(d) the polar halocarbon CF Cl dissolved in the polar halocarbon CF ClCFCl
2 2 2 2
(e) O (l) in N (l)
2 2
11.3Solubility
16. Suppose you are presented with a clear solution of sodium thiosulfate, Na S O . How could you determine
2 2 3
whether the solution is unsaturated, saturated, or supersaturated?
17. Supersaturated solutions of most solids in water are prepared by cooling saturated solutions.
Supersaturated solutions of most gases in water are prepared by heating saturated solutions. Explain the
reasons for the difference in the two procedures.
18. Suggest an explanation for the observations that ethanol, C H OH, is completely miscible with water and
2 5
that ethanethiol, C H SH, is soluble only to the extent of 1.5 g per 100 mL of water.
2 5
19. Calculate the percent by mass of KBr in a saturated solution of KBr in water at 10 °C. SeeFigure 11.16for
useful data, and report the computed percentage to one significant digit.
20. Which of the following gases is expected to be most soluble in water? Explain your reasoning.
(a) CH
4
(b) CCl
4
(c) CHCl
3
21. At 0 °C and 1.00 atm, as much as 0.70 g of O can dissolve in 1 L of water. At 0 °C and 4.00 atm, how many
2
grams of O dissolve in 1 L of water?
2
PAGE: 610
596 11 • Exercises
22. Refer toFigure 11.10.
(a) How did the concentration of dissolved CO in the beverage change when the bottle was opened?
2
(b) What caused this change?
(c) Is the beverage unsaturated, saturated, or supersaturated with CO ?
2
23. The Henry’s law constant for CO is 3.4 10−2M/atm at 25 °C. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what
2
pressure of carbon dioxide is needed to maintain a CO concentration of 0.10Min a can of lemon-lime
2
soda?
24. The Henry’s law constant for O is 1.3 10−3M/atm at 25 °C. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what mass
2
of oxygen would be dissolved in a 40-L aquarium at 25 °C, assuming an atmospheric pressure of 1.00 atm,
and that the partial pressure of O is 0.21 atm?
2
25. Assuming ideal solution behavior, how many liters of HCl gas, measured at 30.0 °C and 745 torr, are
required to prepare 1.25 L of a 3.20-Msolution of hydrochloric acid?
11.4Colligative Properties
26. Which is/are part of the macroscopic domain of solutions and which is/are part of the microscopic
domain: boiling point elevation, Henry’s law, hydrogen bond, ion-dipole attraction, molarity,
nonelectrolyte, nonstoichiometric compound, osmosis, solvated ion?
27. What is the microscopic explanation for the macroscopic behavior illustrated inFigure 11.14?
28. Sketch a qualitative graph of the pressure versus time for water vapor above a sample of pure water and a
sugar solution, as the liquids evaporate to half their original volume.
29. A solution of potassium nitrate, an electrolyte, and a solution of glycerin (C H (OH) ), a nonelectrolyte,
3 5 3
both boil at 100.3 °C. What other physical properties of the two solutions are identical?
30. What are the mole fractions of H PO and water in a solution of 14.5 g of H PO in 125 g of water?
3 4 3 4
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
31. What are the mole fractions of HNO and water in a concentrated solution of nitric acid (68.0% HNO by
3 3
mass)?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
32. Calculate the mole fraction of each solute and solvent:
(a) 583 g of H SO in 1.50 kg of water—the acid solution used in an automobile battery
2 4
(b) 0.86 g of NaCl in 1.00 102g of water—a solution of sodium chloride for intravenous injection
(c) 46.85 g of codeine, C H NO , in 125.5 g of ethanol, C H OH
18 21 3 2 5
(d) 25 g of I in 125 g of ethanol, C H OH
2 2 5
33. Calculate the mole fraction of each solute and solvent:
(a) 0.710 kg of sodium carbonate (washing soda), Na CO , in 10.0 kg of water—a saturated solution at 0 °C
2 3
(b) 125 g of NH NO in 275 g of water—a mixture used to make an instant ice pack
4 3
(c) 25 g of Cl in 125 g of dichloromethane, CH Cl
2 2 2
(d) 0.372 g of tetrahydropyridine, C H N, in 125 g of chloroform, CHCl
5 9 3
34. Calculate the mole fractions of methanol, CH OH; ethanol, C H OH; and water in a solution that is 40%
3 2 5
methanol, 40% ethanol, and 20% water by mass. (Assume the data are good to two significant figures.)
35. What is the difference between a 1Msolution and a 1msolution?
36. What is the molality of phosphoric acid, H PO , in a solution of 14.5 g of H PO in 125 g of water?
3 4 3 4
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
37. What is the molality of nitric acid in a concentrated solution of nitric acid (68.0% HNO by mass)?
3
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
38. Calculate the molality of each of the following solutions:
(a) 583 g of H SO in 1.50 kg of water—the acid solution used in an automobile battery
2 4
(b) 0.86 g of NaCl in 1.00 102g of water—a solution of sodium chloride for intravenous injection
(c) 46.85 g of codeine, C H NO , in 125.5 g of ethanol, C H OH
18 21 3 2 5
(d) 25 g of I in 125 g of ethanol, C H OH
2 2 5
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 611
11 • Exercises 597
39. Calculate the molality of each of the following solutions:
(a) 0.710 kg of sodium carbonate (washing soda), Na CO , in 10.0 kg of water—a saturated solution at 0°C
2 3
(b) 125 g of NH NO in 275 g of water—a mixture used to make an instant ice pack
4 3
(c) 25 g of Cl in 125 g of dichloromethane, CH Cl
2 2 2
(d) 0.372 g of tetrahydropyridine, C H N, in 125 g of chloroform, CHCl
5 9 3
40. The concentration of glucose, C H O , in normal spinal fluid is What is the molality of the
6 12 6
solution?
41. A 13.0% solution of K CO by mass has a density of 1.09 g/cm3. Calculate the molality of the solution.
2 3
42. Why does 1 mol of sodium chloride depress the freezing point of 1 kg of water almost twice as much as 1
mol of glycerin?
43. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of 115.0 g of nonvolatile sucrose,
C H O , in 350.0 g of water?
12 22 11
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question
(b) Answer the question
44. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of 9.04 g of I in 75.5 g of benzene,
2
assuming the I is nonvolatile?
2
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
45. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing temperature of a solution of 115.0 g of sucrose,
C H O , in 350.0 g of water?
12 22 11
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
46. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of a solution of 9.04 g of I in 75.5 g of
2
benzene?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the following question.
(b) Answer the question.
47. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the osmotic pressure of an aqueous solution of 1.64 g of
Ca(NO ) in water at 25 °C? The volume of the solution is 275 mL.
32
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
48. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is osmotic pressure of a solution of bovine insulin (molar mass,
5700 g mol−1) at 18 °C if 100.0 mL of the solution contains 0.103 g of the insulin?
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Answer the question.
49. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molar mass of a solution of 5.00 g of a compound in 25.00 g
of carbon tetrachloride (bp 76.8 °C;K = 5.02 °C/m) that boils at 81.5 °C at 1 atm?
b
(a) Outline the steps necessary to answer the question.
(b) Solve the problem.
50. A sample of an organic compound (a nonelectrolyte) weighing 1.35 g lowered the freezing point of 10.0 g
of benzene by 3.66 °C. Assuming ideal solution behavior, calculate the molar mass of the compound.
51. A 1.0msolution of HCl in benzene has a freezing point of 0.4 °C. Is HCl an electrolyte in benzene? Explain.
52. A solution contains 5.00 g of urea, CO(NH ) , a nonvolatile compound, dissolved in 0.100 kg of water. If the
22
vapor pressure of pure water at 25 °C is 23.7 torr, what is the vapor pressure of the solution (assuming
ideal solution behavior)?
53. A 12.0-g sample of a nonelectrolyte is dissolved in 80.0 g of water. The solution freezes at −1.94 °C.
Assuming ideal solution behavior, calculate the molar mass of the substance.
54. Arrange the following solutions in order by their decreasing freezing points: 0.1mNa PO , 0.1mC H OH,
3 4 2 5
0.01mCO , 0.15mNaCl, and 0.2mCaCl .
2 2
55. Calculate the boiling point elevation of 0.100 kg of water containing 0.010 mol of NaCl, 0.020 mol of
Na SO , and 0.030 mol of MgCl , assuming complete dissociation of these electrolytes and ideal solution
2 4 2
behavior.
56. How could you prepare a 3.08maqueous solution of glycerin, C H O ? Assuming ideal solution behavior,
3 8 3
what is the freezing point of this solution?
PAGE: 612
598 11 • Exercises
57. A sample of sulfur weighing 0.210 g was dissolved in 17.8 g of carbon disulfide, CS (K = 2.34 °C/m). If the
2 b
boiling point elevation was 0.107 °C, what is the formula of a sulfur molecule in carbon disulfide
(assuming ideal solution behavior)?
58. In a significant experiment performed many years ago, 5.6977 g of cadmium iodide in 44.69 g of water
raised the boiling point 0.181 °C. What does this suggest about the nature of a solution of CdI ?
2
59. Lysozyme is an enzyme that cleaves cell walls. A 0.100-L sample of a solution of lysozyme that contains
0.0750 g of the enzyme exhibits an osmotic pressure of 1.32 10−3atm at 25 °C. Assuming ideal solution
behavior, what is the molar mass of lysozyme?
60. The osmotic pressure of a solution containing 7.0 g of insulin per liter is 23 torr at 25 °C. Assuming ideal
solution behavior, what is the molar mass of insulin?
61. The osmotic pressure of human blood is 7.6 atm at 37 °C. What mass of glucose, C H O , is required to
6 12 6
make 1.00 L of aqueous solution for intravenous feeding if the solution must have the same osmotic
pressure as blood at body temperature, 37 °C (assuming ideal solution behavior)?
62. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the freezing point of a solution of dibromobenzene, C H Br , in
6 4 2
0.250 kg of benzene, if the solution boils at 83.5 °C?
63. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the boiling point of a solution of NaCl in water if the solution
freezes at −0.93 °C?
64. The sugar fructose contains 40.0% C, 6.7% H, and 53.3% O by mass. A solution of 11.7 g of fructose in 325
g of ethanol has a boiling point of 78.59 °C. The boiling point of ethanol is 78.35 °C, andK for ethanol is
b
1.20 °C/m. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molecular formula of fructose?
65. The vapor pressure of methanol, CH OH, is 94 torr at 20 °C. The vapor pressure of ethanol, C H OH, is 44
3 2 5
torr at the same temperature.
(a) Calculate the mole fraction of methanol and of ethanol in a solution of 50.0 g of methanol and 50.0 g of
ethanol.
(b) Ethanol and methanol form a solution that behaves like an ideal solution. Calculate the vapor pressure
of methanol and of ethanol above the solution at 20 °C.
(c) Calculate the mole fraction of methanol and of ethanol in the vapor above the solution.
66. The triple point of air-free water is defined as 273.16 K. Why is it important that the water be free of air?
67. Meat can be classified as fresh (not frozen) even though it is stored at −1 °C. Why wouldn’t meat freeze at
this temperature?
68. An organic compound has a composition of 93.46% C and 6.54% H by mass. A solution of 0.090 g of this
compound in 1.10 g of camphor melts at 158.4 °C. The melting point of pure camphor is 178.4 °C.K for
f
camphor is 37.7 °C/m. Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the molecular formula of the solute?
Show your calculations.
69. A sample of HgCl weighing 9.41 g is dissolved in 32.75 g of ethanol, C H OH (K = 1.20 °C/m). The boiling
2 2 5 b
point elevation of the solution is 1.27 °C. Is HgCl an electrolyte in ethanol? Show your calculations.
2
70. A salt is known to be an alkali metal fluoride. A quick approximate determination of freezing point
indicates that 4 g of the salt dissolved in 100 g of water produces a solution that freezes at about −1.4 °C.
Assuming ideal solution behavior, what is the formula of the salt? Show your calculations.
11.5Colloids
71. Identify the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium in each of the following colloidal systems: starch
dispersion, smoke, fog, pearl, whipped cream, floating soap, jelly, milk, and ruby.
72. Distinguish between dispersion methods and condensation methods for preparing colloidal systems.
73. How do colloids differ from solutions with regard to dispersed particle size and homogeneity?
74. Explain the cleansing action of soap.
75. How can it be demonstrated that colloidal particles are electrically charged?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 613
CHAPTER 12
Kinetics
Figure12.1 An agama lizard basks in the sun. As its body warms, the chemical reactions of its metabolism speed
up.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1Chemical Reaction Rates
12.2Factors Affecting Reaction Rates
12.3Rate Laws
12.4Integrated Rate Laws
12.5Collision Theory
12.6Reaction Mechanisms
12.7Catalysis
INTRODUCTION The lizard in the photograph is not simply enjoying the sunshine or working on its tan. The
heat from the sun’s rays is critical to the lizard’s survival. A warm lizard can move faster than a cold one
because the chemical reactions that allow its muscles to move occur more rapidly at higher temperatures. A
cold lizard is a slower lizard and an easier meal for predators.
From baking a cake to determining the useful lifespan of a bridge, rates of chemical reactions play important
roles in our understanding of processes that involve chemical changes. Two questions are typically posed
when planning to carry out a chemical reaction. The first is: “Will the reaction produce the desired products in
useful quantities?” The second question is: “How rapidly will the reaction occur?” A third question is often
asked when investigating reactions in greater detail: “What specific molecular-level processes take place as
the reaction occurs?” Knowing the answer to this question is of practical importance when the yield or rate of a
reaction needs to be controlled.
The study of chemical kinetics concerns the second and third questions—that is, the rate at which a reaction
yields products and the molecular-scale means by which a reaction occurs. This chapter examines the factors
PAGE: 614
600 12 • Kinetics
that influence the rates of chemical reactions, the mechanisms by which reactions proceed, and the
quantitative techniques used to describe the rates at which reactions occur.
12.1 Chemical Reaction Rates
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define chemical reaction rate
• Derive rate expressions from the balanced equation for a given chemical reaction
• Calculate reaction rates from experimental data
Arateis a measure of how some property varies with time. Speed is a familiar rate that expresses the distance
traveled by an object in a given amount of time. Wage is a rate that represents the amount of money earned by
a person working for a given amount of time. Likewise, the rate of a chemical reaction is a measure of how
much reactant is consumed, or how much product is produced, by the reaction in a given amount of time.
Therate of reactionis the change in the amount of a reactant or product per unit time. Reaction rates are
therefore determined by measuring the time dependence of some property that can be related to reactant or
product amounts. Rates of reactions that consume or produce gaseous substances, for example, are
conveniently determined by measuring changes in volume or pressure. For reactions involving one or more
colored substances, rates may be monitored via measurements of light absorption. For reactions involving
aqueous electrolytes, rates may be measured via changes in a solution’s conductivity.
For reactants and products in solution, their relative amounts (concentrations) are conveniently used for
purposes of expressing reaction rates. For example, the concentration of hydrogen peroxide, H O , in an
2 2
aqueous solution changes slowly over time as it decomposes according to the equation:
The rate at which the hydrogen peroxide decomposes can be expressed in terms of the rate of change of its
concentration, as shown here:
This mathematical representation of the change in species concentration over time is therate expressionfor
the reaction. The brackets indicate molar concentrations, and the symbol delta (Δ) indicates “change in.” Thus,
represents the molar concentration of hydrogen peroxide at some timet; likewise,
1
represents the molar concentration of hydrogen peroxide at a later timet; and Δ[H O ] represents the change
2 2 2
in molar concentration of hydrogen peroxide during the time interval Δt(that is,t −t). Since the reactant
2 1
concentration decreases as the reaction proceeds, Δ[H O ] is a negative quantity. Reaction rates are, by
2 2
convention, positive quantities, and so this negative change in concentration is multiplied by −1.Figure 12.2
provides an example of data collected during the decomposition of H O .
2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 615
12.1 • Chemical Reaction Rates 601
FIGURE12.2 The rate of decomposition of H O in an aqueous solution decreases as the concentration of H O
2 2 2 2
decreases.
To obtain the tabulated results for this decomposition, the concentration of hydrogen peroxide was measured
every 6 hours over the course of a day at a constant temperature of 40 °C. Reaction rates were computed for
each time interval by dividing the change in concentration by the corresponding time increment, as shown
here for the first 6-hour period:
Notice that the reaction rates vary with time, decreasing as the reaction proceeds. Results for the last 6-hour
period yield a reaction rate of:
This behavior indicates the reaction continually slows with time. Using the concentrations at the beginning
and end of a time period over which the reaction rate is changing results in the calculation of anaverage rate
for the reaction over this time interval. At any specific time, the rate at which a reaction is proceeding is known
as itsinstantaneous rate. The instantaneous rate of a reaction at “time zero,” when the reaction commences,
is itsinitial rate. Consider the analogy of a car slowing down as it approaches a stop sign. The vehicle’s initial
rate—analogous to the beginning of a chemical reaction—would be the speedometer reading at the moment the
driver begins pressing the brakes (t). A few moments later, the instantaneous rate at a specific moment—call it
0
t—would be somewhat slower, as indicated by the speedometer reading at that point in time. As time passes,
1
the instantaneous rate will continue to fall until it reaches zero, when the car (or reaction) stops. Unlike
instantaneous speed, the car’s average speed is not indicated by the speedometer; but it can be calculated as
the ratio of the distance traveled to the time required to bring the vehicle to a complete stop (Δt). Like the
decelerating car, the average rate of a chemical reaction will fall somewhere between its initial and final rates.
The instantaneous rate of a reaction may be determined one of two ways. If experimental conditions permit
the measurement of concentration changes over very short time intervals, then average rates computed as
described earlier provide reasonably good approximations of instantaneous rates. Alternatively, a graphical
procedure may be used that, in effect, yields the results that would be obtained if short time interval
measurements were possible. In a plot of the concentration of hydrogen peroxide against time, the
instantaneous rate of decomposition of H O at any timetis given by the slope of a straight line that is tangent
2 2
to the curve at that time (Figure 12.3). These tangent line slopes may be evaluated using calculus, but the
procedure for doing so is beyond the scope of this chapter.
PAGE: 616
602 12 • Kinetics
FIGURE12.3 This graph shows a plot of concentration versus time for a 1.000Msolution of H O . The rate at any
2 2
time is equal to the negative of the slope of a line tangent to the curve at that time. Tangents are shown att= 0 h
(“initial rate”) and att= 12 h (“instantaneous rate” at 12 h).
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Reaction Rates in Analysis: Test Strips for Urinalysis
Physicians often use disposable test strips to measure the amounts of various substances in a patient’s
urine (Figure 12.4). These test strips contain various chemical reagents, embedded in small pads at various
locations along the strip, which undergo changes in color upon exposure to sufficient concentrations of
specific substances. The usage instructions for test strips often stress that proper read time is critical for
optimal results. This emphasis on read time suggests that kinetic aspects of the chemical reactions
occurring on the test strip are important considerations.
The test for urinary glucose relies on a two-step process represented by the chemical equations shown
here:
The first equation depicts the oxidation of glucose in the urine to yield glucolactone and hydrogen
peroxide. The hydrogen peroxide produced subsequently oxidizes colorless iodide ion to yield brown
iodine, which may be visually detected. Some strips include an additional substance that reacts with iodine
to produce a more distinct color change.
The two test reactions shown above are inherently very slow, but their rates are increased by special
enzymes embedded in the test strip pad. This is an example ofcatalysis, a topic discussed later in this
chapter. A typical glucose test strip for use with urine requires approximately 30 seconds for completion of
the color-forming reactions. Reading the result too soon might lead one to conclude that the glucose
concentration of the urine sample is lower than it actually is (afalse-negativeresult). Waiting too long to
assess the color change can lead to afalse positivedue to the slower (not catalyzed) oxidation of iodide ion
by other substances found in urine.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 617
12.1 • Chemical Reaction Rates 603
FIGURE12.4 Test strips are commonly used to detect the presence of specific substances in a person’s urine.
Many test strips have several pads containing various reagents to permit the detection of multiple substances on
a single strip. (credit: Iqbal Osman)
Relative Rates of Reaction
The rate of a reaction may be expressed as the change in concentration of any reactant or product. For any
given reaction, these rate expressions are all related simply to one another according to the reaction
stoichiometry. The rate of the general reaction
can be expressed in terms of the decrease in the concentration of A or the increase in the concentration of B.
These two rate expressions are related by the stoichiometry of the reaction:
Consider the reaction represented by the following equation:
The relation between the reaction rates expressed in terms of nitrogen production and ammonia
consumption, for example, is:
This may be represented in an abbreviated format by omitting the units of the stoichiometric factor:
Note that a negative sign has been included as a factor to account for the opposite signs of the two amount
changes (the reactant amount is decreasing while the product amount is increasing). For homogeneous
reactions, both the reactants and products are present in the same solution and thus occupy the same volume,
so the molar amounts may be replaced with molar concentrations:
Similarly, the rate of formation of H is three times the rate of formation of N because three moles of H are
2 2 2
produced for each mole of N produced.
2
Figure 12.5illustrates the change in concentrations over time for the decomposition of ammonia into nitrogen
PAGE: 618
604 12 • Kinetics
and hydrogen at 1100 °C. Slopes of the tangent lines att= 500 s show that the instantaneous rates derived
from all three species involved in the reaction are related by their stoichiometric factors. The rate of hydrogen
production, for example, is observed to be three times greater than that for nitrogen production:
FIGURE12.5 Changes in concentrations of the reactant and products for the reaction The
rates of change of the three concentrations are related by the reaction stoichiometry, as shown by the different
slopes of the tangents att= 500 s.
EXAMPLE 12.1
Expressions for Relative Reaction Rates
The first step in the production of nitric acid is the combustion of ammonia:
Write the equations that relate the rates of consumption of the reactants and the rates of formation of the
products.
Solution
Considering the stoichiometry of this homogeneous reaction, the rates for the consumption of reactants and
formation of products are:
Check Your Learning
The rate of formation of Br is 6.0 10−6mol/L/s in a reaction described by the following net ionic equation:
2
Write the equations that relate the rates of consumption of the reactants and the rates of formation of the
products.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 619
12.2 • Factors Affecting Reaction Rates 605
Answer:
EXAMPLE 12.2
Reaction Rate Expressions for Decomposition of H O
2 2
The graph inFigure 12.3shows the rate of the decomposition of H O over time:
2 2
Based on these data, the instantaneous rate of decomposition of H O att= 11.1 h is determined to be
2 2
3.20 10−2mol/L/h, that is:
What is the instantaneous rate of production of H O and O ?
2 2
Solution
The reaction stoichiometry shows that
Therefore:
and
Check Your Learning
If the rate of decomposition of ammonia, NH , at 1150 K is 2.10 10−6mol/L/s, what is the rate of production
3
of nitrogen and hydrogen?
Answer:
1.05 10−6mol/L/s, N and 3.15 10−6mol/L/s, H .
2 2
12.2 Factors Affecting Reaction Rates
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of chemical nature, physical state, temperature, concentration, and catalysis on reaction
rates
The rates at which reactants are consumed and products are formed during chemical reactions vary greatly.
Five factors typically affecting the rates of chemical reactions will be explored in this section: the chemical
nature of the reacting substances, the state of subdivision (one large lump versus many small particles) of the
reactants, the temperature of the reactants, the concentration of the reactants, and the presence of a catalyst.
The Chemical Nature of the Reacting Substances
The rate of a reaction depends on the nature of the participating substances. Reactions that appear similar
may have different rates under the same conditions, depending on the identity of the reactants. For example,
when small pieces of the metals iron and sodium are exposed to air, the sodium reacts completely with air
PAGE: 620
606 12 • Kinetics
overnight, whereas the iron is barely affected. The active metals calcium and sodium both react with water to
form hydrogen gas and a base. Yet calcium reacts at a moderate rate, whereas sodium reacts so rapidly that the
reaction is almost explosive.
The Physical States of the Reactants
A chemical reaction between two or more substances requires intimate contact between the reactants. When
reactants are in different physical states, or phases (solid, liquid, gaseous, dissolved), the reaction takes place
only at the interface between the phases. Consider the heterogeneous reaction between a solid phase and
either a liquid or gaseous phase. Compared with the reaction rate for large solid particles, the rate for smaller
particles will be greater because the surface area in contact with the other reactant phase is greater. For
example, large pieces of iron react more slowly with acids than they do with finely divided iron powder (Figure
12.6). Large pieces of wood smolder, smaller pieces burn rapidly, and saw dust burns explosively.
FIGURE12.6 (a) Iron powder reacts rapidly with dilute hydrochloric acid and produces bubbles of hydrogen gas:
2Fe(s) + 6HCl(aq) 2FeCl (aq) + 3H (g). (b) An iron nail reacts more slowly because the surface area exposed to
3 2
the acid is much less.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watchthis video(http://openstax.org/l/16cesium)to see the reaction of cesium with water in slow motion and a
discussion of how the state of reactants and particle size affect reaction rates.
Temperature of the Reactants
Chemical reactions typically occur faster at higher temperatures. Food can spoil quickly when left on the
kitchen counter. However, the lower temperature inside of a refrigerator slows that process so that the same
food remains fresh for days. Gas burners, hot plates, and ovens are often used in the laboratory to increase the
speed of reactions that proceed slowly at ordinary temperatures. For many chemical processes, reaction rates
are approximately doubled when the temperature is raised by 10 °C.
Concentrations of the Reactants
The rates of many reactions depend on the concentrations of the reactants. Rates usually increase when the
concentration of one or more of the reactants increases. For example, calcium carbonate (CaCO ) deteriorates
3
as a result of its reaction with the pollutant sulfur dioxide. The rate of this reaction depends on the amount of
sulfur dioxide in the air (Figure 12.7). An acidic oxide, sulfur dioxide combines with water vapor in the air to
produce sulfurous acid in the following reaction:
Calcium carbonate reacts with sulfurous acid as follows:
In a polluted atmosphere where the concentration of sulfur dioxide is high, calcium carbonate deteriorates
more rapidly than in less polluted air. Similarly, phosphorus burns much more rapidly in an atmosphere of
pure oxygen than in air, which is only about 20% oxygen.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 621
12.3 • Rate Laws 607
FIGURE12.7 Statues made from carbonate compounds such as limestone and marble typically weather slowly
over time due to the actions of water, and thermal expansion and contraction. However, pollutants like sulfur dioxide
can accelerate weathering. As the concentration of air pollutants increases, deterioration of limestone occurs more
rapidly. (credit: James P Fisher III)
LINK TO LEARNING
Phosphorus burns rapidly in air, but it will burn even more rapidly if the concentration of oxygen is higher.
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16phosphor)to see an example.
The Presence of a Catalyst
Relatively dilute aqueous solutions of hydrogen peroxide, H O , are commonly used as topical antiseptics.
2 2
Hydrogen peroxide decomposes to yield water and oxygen gas according to the equation:
Under typical conditions, this decomposition occurs very slowly. When dilute H O (aq) is poured onto an open
2 2
wound, however, the reaction occurs rapidly and the solution foams because of the vigorous production of
oxygen gas. This dramatic difference is caused by the presence of substances within the wound’s exposed
tissues that accelerate the decomposition process. Substances that function to increase the rate of a reaction
are calledcatalysts, a topic treated in greater detail later in this chapter.
LINK TO LEARNING
Chemical reactions occur when molecules collide with each other and undergo a chemical transformation.
Before physically performing a reaction in a laboratory, scientists can use molecular modeling simulations to
predict how the parameters discussed earlier will influence the rate of a reaction. Use thePhET Reactions &
Rates interactive(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)to explore how temperature, concentration, and the
nature of the reactants affect reaction rates.
12.3 Rate Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the form and function of a rate law
• Use rate laws to calculate reaction rates
• Use rate and concentration data to identify reaction orders and derive rate laws
As described in the previous module, the rate of a reaction is often affected by the concentrations of reactants.
Rate laws(sometimes calleddifferential rate laws) orrate equationsare mathematical expressions that
describe the relationship between the rate of a chemical reaction and the concentration of its reactants. As an
example, consider the reaction described by the chemical equation
PAGE: 622
608 12 • Kinetics
whereaandbare stoichiometric coefficients. The rate law for this reaction is written as:
in which [A] and [B] represent the molar concentrations of reactants, andkis therate constant, which is
specific for a particular reaction at a particular temperature. The exponentsmandnare thereaction orders
and are typically positive integers, though they can be fractions, negative, or zero. The rate constantkand the
reaction ordersmandnmust be determined experimentally by observing how the rate of a reaction changes
as the concentrations of the reactants are changed. The rate constantkis independent of the reactant
concentrations, but it does vary with temperature.
The reaction orders in a rate law describe the mathematical dependence of the rate on reactant
concentrations. Referring to the generic rate law above, the reaction ismorder with respect toAandnorder
with respect toB. For example, ifm= 1 andn= 2, the reaction is first order inAand second order inB. The
overall reaction orderis simply the sum of orders for each reactant. For the example rate law here, the
reaction is third order overall (1 + 2 = 3). A few specific examples are shown below to further illustrate this
concept.
The rate law:
describes a reaction that is first order in hydrogen peroxide and first order overall. The rate law:
describes a reaction that is second order in C H and second order overall. The rate law:
4 6
describes a reaction that is first order in H+, first order in OH−, and second order overall.
EXAMPLE 12.3
Writing Rate Laws from Reaction Orders
An experiment shows that the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with carbon monoxide:
is second order in NO and zero order in CO at 100 °C. What is the rate law for the reaction?
2
Solution
The reaction will have the form:
The reaction is second order in NO ; thusm= 2. The reaction is zero order in CO; thusn= 0. The rate law is:
2
Remember that a number raised to the zero power is equal to 1, thus [CO]0= 1, which is why the CO
concentration term may be omitted from the rate law: the rate of reaction is solely dependent on the
concentration of NO . A later chapter section on reaction mechanisms will explain how a reactant’s
2
concentration can have no effect on a reaction rate despite being involved in the reaction.
Check Your Learning
The rate law for the reaction:
has been determined to be rate =k[NO]2[H ]. What are the orders with respect to each reactant, and what is the
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 623
12.3 • Rate Laws 609
overall order of the reaction?
Answer:
order in NO = 2; order in H = 1; overall order = 3
2
Check Your Learning
In a transesterification reaction, a triglyceride reacts with an alcohol to form an ester and glycerol. Many
students learn about the reaction between methanol (CH OH) and ethyl acetate (CH CH OCOCH ) as a sample
3 3 2 3
reaction before studying the chemical reactions that produce biodiesel:
The rate law for the reaction between methanol and ethyl acetate is, under certain conditions, determined to
be:
What is the order of reaction with respect to methanol and ethyl acetate, and what is the overall order of
reaction?
Answer:
order in CH OH = 1; order in CH CH OCOCH = 0; overall order = 1
3 3 2 3
A common experimental approach to the determination of rate laws is themethod of initial rates. This
method involves measuring reaction rates for multiple experimental trials carried out using different initial
reactant concentrations. Comparing the measured rates for these trials permits determination of the reaction
orders and, subsequently, the rate constant, which together are used to formulate a rate law. This approach is
illustrated in the next two example exercises.
EXAMPLE 12.4
Determining a Rate Law from Initial Rates
Ozone in the upper atmosphere is depleted when it reacts with nitrogen oxides. The rates of the reactions of
nitrogen oxides with ozone are important factors in deciding how significant these reactions are in the
formation of the ozone hole over Antarctica (Figure 12.8). One such reaction is the combination of nitric oxide,
NO, with ozone, O :
3
PAGE: 624
610 12 • Kinetics
FIGURE12.8 A contour map showing stratospheric ozone concentration and the “ozone hole” that occurs over
Antarctica during its spring months. (credit: modification of work by NASA)
This reaction has been studied in the laboratory, and the following rate data were determined at 25 °C.
Trial [NO] (mol/L) [O ] (mol/L)
3
1 1.00 10−6 3.00 10−6 6.60 10−5
2 1.00 10−6 6.00 10−6 1.32 10−4
3 1.00 10−6 9.00 10−6 1.98 10−4
4 2.00 10−6 9.00 10−6 3.96 10−4
5 3.00 10−6 9.00 10−6 5.94 10−4
Determine the rate law and the rate constant for the reaction at 25 °C.
Solution
The rate law will have the form:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 625
12.3 • Rate Laws 611
Determine the values ofm,n, andkfrom the experimental data using the following three-part process:
Step 1.
Determine the value ofmfrom the data in which [NO] varies and [O] is constant.In the last three
3
experiments, [NO] varies while [O ] remains constant. When [NO] doubles from trial 3 to 4, the rate
3
doubles, and when [NO] triples from trial 3 to 5, the rate also triples. Thus, the rate is also directly
proportional to [NO], andmin the rate law is equal to 1.
Step 2.
Determine the value ofnfrom data in which [O] varies and [NO] is constant.In the first three experiments,
3
[NO] is constant and [O ] varies. The reaction rate changes in direct proportion to the change in [O ]. When
3 3
[O ] doubles from trial 1 to 2, the rate doubles; when [O ] triples from trial 1 to 3, the rate increases also
3 3
triples. Thus, the rate is directly proportional to [O ], andnis equal to 1.The rate law is thus:
3
Step 3.
Determine the value ofkfrom one set of concentrations and the corresponding rate. The data from trial 1
are used below:
Check Your Learning
Acetaldehyde decomposes when heated to yield methane and carbon monoxide according to the equation:
Determine the rate law and the rate constant for the reaction from the following experimental data:
Trial [CH CHO] (mol/L)
3
1 1.75 10−3 2.06 10−11
2 3.50 10−3 8.24 10−11
3 7.00 10−3 3.30 10−10
Answer:
withk= 6.73 10−6L/mol/s
EXAMPLE 12.5
Determining Rate Laws from Initial Rates
Using the initial rates method and the experimental data, determine the rate law and the value of the rate
constant for this reaction:
PAGE: 626
612 12 • Kinetics
Trial [NO] (mol/L) [Cl ] (mol/L)
2
1 0.10 0.10 0.00300
2 0.10 0.15 0.00450
3 0.15 0.10 0.00675
Solution
The rate law for this reaction will have the form:
As inExample 12.4, approach this problem in a stepwise fashion, determining the values ofmandnfrom the
experimental data and then using these values to determine the value ofk. In this example, however, an
explicit algebraic approach (vs. the implicit approach of the previous example) will be used to determine the
values ofmandn:
Step 1.
Determine the value ofmfrom the data in which [NO] varies and [Cl] is constant. Write the ratios with the
2
subscriptsxandyto indicate data from two different trials:
Using the third trial and the first trial, in which [Cl ] does not vary, gives:
2
Canceling equivalent terms in the numerator and denominator leaves:
which simplifies to:
Use logarithms to determine the value of the exponentm:
Confirm the result
Step 2.
Determine the value ofnfrom data in which [Cl] varies and [NO] is constant.
2
Cancelation gives:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 627
12.3 • Rate Laws 613
which simplifies to:
Thusnmust be 1, and the form of the rate law is:
Step 3.
Determine the numerical value of the rate constantkwith appropriate units.The units for the rate of a
reaction are mol/L/s. The units forkare whatever is needed so that substituting into the rate law
expression affords the appropriate units for the rate. In this example, the concentration units are mol3/L3.
The units forkshould be mol−2L2/s so that the rate is in terms of mol/L/s.
To determine the value ofkonce the rate law expression has been solved, simply plug in values from the
first experimental trial and solve fork:
Check Your Learning
Use the provided initial rate data to derive the rate law for the reaction whose equation is:
Trial [OCl−] (mol/L) [I−] (mol/L) Initial Rate (mol/L/s)
1 0.0040 0.0020 0.00184
2 0.0020 0.0040 0.00092
3 0.0020 0.0020 0.00046
Determine the rate law expression and the value of the rate constantkwith appropriate units for this reaction.
Answer:
2.00 = 2.00y
y= 1
Substituting the concentration data from trial 1 and solving forkyields:
Reaction Order and Rate Constant Units
In some of our examples, the reaction orders in the rate law happen to be the same as the coefficients in the
PAGE: 628
614 12 • Kinetics
chemical equation for the reaction. This is merely a coincidence and very often not the case.
Rate laws may exhibit fractional orders for some reactants, and negative reaction orders are sometimes
observed when an increase in the concentration of one reactant causes a decrease in reaction rate. A few
examples illustrating these points are provided:
It is important to note thatrate laws are determined by experiment only and are not reliably predicted by
reaction stoichiometry.
The units for a rate constant will vary as appropriate to accommodate the overall order of the reaction. The
unit of the rate constant for the second-order reaction described inExample 12.4was determined to be
For the third-order reaction described inExample 12.5, the unit forkwas derived to be
Dimensional analysis requires the rate constant unit for a reaction whose overall order isxto be
Table 12.1summarizes the rate constant units for common reaction orders.
Rate Constant Units for Common Reaction Orders
Overall Reaction Order (x) Rate Constant Unit (Lx−1mol1−xs−1)
0 (zero) mol L−1s−1
1 (first) s−1
2 (second) L mol−1s−1
3 (third) L2mol−2s−1
TABLE12.1
Note that the units in this table were derived using specific units for concentration (mol/L) and time (s), though
any valid units for these two properties may be used.
12.4 Integrated Rate Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the form and function of an integrated rate law
• Perform integrated rate law calculations for zero-, first-, and second-order reactions
• Define half-life and carry out related calculations
• Identify the order of a reaction from concentration/time data
The rate laws discussed thus far relate the rate and the concentrations of reactants. We can also determine a
second form of each rate law that relates the concentrations of reactants and time. These are calledintegrated
rate laws. We can use an integrated rate law to determine the amount of reactant or product present after a
period of time or to estimate the time required for a reaction to proceed to a certain extent. For example, an
integrated rate law is used to determine the length of time a radioactive material must be stored for its
radioactivity to decay to a safe level.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 629
12.4 • Integrated Rate Laws 615
Using calculus, the differential rate law for a chemical reaction can be integrated with respect to time to give
an equation that relates the amount of reactant or product present in a reaction mixture to the elapsed time of
the reaction. This process can either be very straightforward or very complex, depending on the complexity of
the differential rate law. For purposes of discussion, we will focus on the resulting integrated rate laws for first-
, second-, and zero-order reactions.
First-Order Reactions
Integration of the rate law for a simple first-order reaction (rate =k[A]) results in an equation describing how
the reactant concentration varies with time:
where [A]tis the concentration ofAat any timet, [A] is the initial concentration ofA, andkis the first-order
0
rate constant.
For mathematical convenience, this equation may be rearranged to other formats, including direct and
indirect proportionalities:
and a format showing a linear dependence of concentration in time:
EXAMPLE 12.6
The Integrated Rate Law for a First-Order Reaction
The rate constant for the first-order decomposition of cyclobutane, C H at 500 °C is 9.2 10−3s−1:
4 8
How long will it take for 80.0% of a sample of C H to decompose?
4 8
Solution
Since the relative change in reactant concentration is provided, a convenient format for the integrated rate law
is:
The initial concentration of C H , [A] , is not provided, but the provision that 80.0% of the sample has
4 8 0
decomposed is enough information to solve this problem. Letxbe the initial concentration, in which case the
concentration after 80.0% decomposition is 20.0% ofxor 0.200x.Rearranging the rate law to isolatetand
substituting the provided quantities yields:
Check Your Learning
Iodine-131 is a radioactive isotope that is used to diagnose and treat some forms of thyroid cancer. Iodine-131
decays to xenon-131 according to the equation:
PAGE: 630
616 12 • Kinetics
The decay is first-order with a rate constant of 0.138 d−1. How many days will it take for 90% of the iodine−131
in a 0.500Msolution of this substance to decay to Xe-131?
Answer:
16.7 days
In the next example exercise, a linear format for the integrated rate law will be convenient:
A plot of ln[A] versustfor a first-order reaction is a straight line with a slope of −kand ay-intercept of ln[A] . If
t 0
a set of rate data are plotted in this fashion but donotresult in a straight line, the reaction is not first order in
A.
EXAMPLE 12.7
Graphical Determination of Reaction Order and Rate Constant
Show that the data inFigure 12.2can be represented by a first-order rate law by graphing ln[H O ] versus time.
2 2
Determine the rate constant for the decomposition of H O from these data.
2 2
Solution
The data fromFigure 12.2are tabulated below, and a plot of ln[H O ] is shown inFigure 12.9.
2 2
Trial Time (h) [H O ] (M) ln[H O ]
2 2 2 2
1 0.00 1.000 0.000
2 6.00 0.500 −0.693
3 12.00 0.250 −1.386
4 18.00 0.125 −2.079
5 24.00 0.0625 −2.772
FIGURE12.9 A linear relationship between ln[H O ] and time suggests the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide is
2 2
a first-order reaction.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 631
12.4 • Integrated Rate Laws 617
The plot of ln[H O ] versus time is linear, indicating that the reaction may be described by a first-order rate
2 2
law.
According to the linear format of the first-order integrated rate law, the rate constant is given by the negative of
this plot’s slope.
The slope of this line may be derived from two values of ln[H O ] at different values oft(one near each end of
2 2
the line is preferable). For example, the value of ln[H O ] whentis 0.00 h is 0.000; the value whent= 24.00 h is
2 2
−2.772
Check Your Learning
Graph the following data to determine whether the reaction is first order.
Trial Time (s) [A]
1 4.0 0.220
2 8.0 0.144
3 12.0 0.110
4 16.0 0.088
5 20.0 0.074
Answer:
The plot of ln[A] vs.tis not linear, indicating the reaction is not first order:
t
Second-Order Reactions
The equations that relate the concentrations of reactants and the rate constant of second-order reactions can
be fairly complicated. To illustrate the point with minimal complexity, only the simplest second-order
reactions will be described here, namely, those whose rates depend on the concentration of just one reactant.
For these types of reactions, the differential rate law is written as:
PAGE: 632
618 12 • Kinetics
For these second-order reactions, the integrated rate law is:
where the terms in the equation have their usual meanings as defined earlier.
EXAMPLE 12.8
The Integrated Rate Law for a Second-Order Reaction
The reaction of butadiene gas (C H ) to yield C H gas is described by the equation:
4 6 8 12
This “dimerization” reaction is second order with a rate constant equal to 5.76 10−2L mol−1min−1under
certain conditions. If the initial concentration of butadiene is 0.200M, what is the concentration after 10.0
min?
Solution
For a second-order reaction, the integrated rate law is written
We know three variables in this equation: [A] = 0.200 mol/L,k= 5.76 10−2L/mol/min, andt= 10.0 min.
0
Therefore, we can solve for [A], the fourth variable:
Therefore 0.179 mol/L of butadiene remain at the end of 10.0 min, compared to the 0.200 mol/L that was
originally present.
Check Your Learning
If the initial concentration of butadiene is 0.0200M, what is the concentration remaining after 20.0 min?
Answer:
0.0195 mol/L
The integrated rate law for second-order reactions has the form of the equation of a straight line:
A plot of versustfor a second-order reaction is a straight line with a slope ofkand ay-intercept of If
the plot is not a straight line, then the reaction is not second order.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 633
12.4 • Integrated Rate Laws 619
EXAMPLE 12.9
Graphical Determination of Reaction Order and Rate Constant
The data below are for the same reaction described inExample 12.8. Prepare and compare two appropriate
data plots to identify the reaction as being either first or second order. After identifying the reaction order,
estimate a value for the rate constant.
Solution
Trial Time (s) [C H ] (M)
4 6
1 0 1.00 10−2
2 1600 5.04 10−3
3 3200 3.37 10−3
4 4800 2.53 10−3
5 6200 2.08 10−3
In order to distinguish a first-order reaction from a second-order reaction, prepare a plot of ln[C H ] versust
4 6t
and compare it to a plot of versust. The values needed for these plots follow.
Time (s) ln[C H ]
4 6
0 100 −4.605
1600 198 −5.289
3200 296 −5.692
4800 395 −5.978
6200 481 −6.175
The plots are shown inFigure 12.10, which clearly shows the plot of ln[C H ] versustis not linear, therefore
4 6t
the reaction is not first order. The plot of versustis linear, indicating that the reaction is second order.
PAGE: 634
620 12 • Kinetics
FIGURE12.10 These two graphs show first- and second-order plots for the dimerization of C H . The linear trend
4 6
in the second-order plot (right) indicates that the reaction follows second-order kinetics.
According to the second-order integrated rate law, the rate constant is equal to the slope of the versust
plot. Using the data fort= 0sandt= 6200s, the rate constant is estimated as follows:
Check Your Learning
Do the following data fit a second-order rate law?
Trial Time (s) [A] (M)
1 5 0.952
2 10 0.625
3 15 0.465
4 20 0.370
5 25 0.308
6 35 0.230
Answer:
Yes. The plot of vs.tis linear:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 635
12.4 • Integrated Rate Laws 621
Zero-Order Reactions
For zero-order reactions, the differential rate law is:
A zero-order reaction thus exhibits a constant reaction rate, regardless of the concentration of its reactant(s).
This may seem counterintuitive, since the reaction rate certainly can’t be finite when the reactant
concentration is zero. For purposes of this introductory text, it will suffice to note that zero-order kinetics are
observed for some reactions only under certain specific conditions. These same reactions exhibit different
kinetic behaviors when the specific conditions aren’t met, and for this reason the more prudent termpseudo-
zero-orderis sometimes used.
The integrated rate law for a zero-order reaction is a linear function:
A plot of [A] versustfor a zero-order reaction is a straight line with a slope of−kand ay-intercept of [A] .
0
Figure 12.11shows a plot of [NH ] versustfor the thermal decomposition of ammonia at the surface of two
3
different heated solids. The decomposition reaction exhibits first-order behavior at a quartz (SiO ) surface, as
2
suggested by the exponentially decaying plot of concentration versus time. On a tungsten surface, however, the
plot is linear, indicating zero-order kinetics.
EXAMPLE 12.10
Graphical Determination of Zero-Order Rate Constant
Use the data plot inFigure 12.11to graphically estimate the zero-order rate constant for ammonia
decomposition at a tungsten surface.
Solution
The integrated rate law for zero-order kinetics describes a linear plot of reactant concentration, [A], versus
t
time,t, with a slope equal to the negative of the rate constant, −k. Following the mathematical approach of
previous examples, the slope of the linear data plot (for decomposition on W) is estimated from the graph.
Using the ammonia concentrations att= 0 andt= 1000 s:
Check Your Learning
The zero-order plot inFigure 12.11shows an initial ammonia concentration of 0.0028 mol L−1decreasing
linearly with time for 1000 s. Assuming no change in this zero-order behavior, at what time (min) will the
concentration reach 0.0001 mol L−1?
Answer:
35 min
PAGE: 636
622 12 • Kinetics
FIGURE12.11 The decomposition of NH on a tungsten (W) surface is a zero-order reaction, whereas on a quartz
3
(SiO ) surface, the reaction is first order.
2
The Half-Life of a Reaction
Thehalf-life of a reaction (t )is the time required for one-half of a given amount of reactant to be consumed.
1/2
In each succeeding half-life, half of the remaining concentration of the reactant is consumed. Using the
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (Figure 12.2) as an example, we find that during the first half-life (from
0.00 hours to 6.00 hours), the concentration of H O decreases from 1.000Mto 0.500M. During the second
2 2
half-life (from 6.00 hours to 12.00 hours), it decreases from 0.500Mto 0.250M; during the third half-life, it
decreases from 0.250Mto 0.125M. The concentration of H O decreases by half during each successive
2 2
period of 6.00 hours. The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide is a first-order reaction, and, as can be shown,
the half-life of a first-order reaction is independent of the concentration of the reactant. However, half-lives of
reactions with other orders depend on the concentrations of the reactants.
First-Order Reactions
An equation relating the half-life of a first-order reaction to its rate constant may be derived from the
integrated rate law as follows:
Invoking the definition of half-life, symbolized requires that the concentration ofAat this point is one-half
its initial concentration:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 637
12.4 • Integrated Rate Laws 623
Substituting these terms into the rearranged integrated rate law and simplifying yields the equation for half-
life:
This equation describes an expected inverse relation between the half-life of the reaction and its rate constant,
k. Faster reactions exhibit larger rate constants and correspondingly shorter half-lives. Slower reactions
exhibit smaller rate constants and longer half-lives.
EXAMPLE 12.11
Calculation of a First-order Rate Constant using Half-Life
Calculate the rate constant for the first-order decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in water at 40 °C, using the
data given inFigure 12.12.
FIGURE12.12 The decomposition of H O at 40 °C is illustrated. The intensity of the
2 2
color symbolizes the concentration of H O at the indicated times; H O is actually colorless.
2 2 2 2
Solution
Inspecting the concentration/time data inFigure 12.12shows the half-life for the decomposition of H O is
2 2
2.16 104s:
Check Your Learning
The first-order radioactive decay of iodine-131 exhibits a rate constant of 0.138 d−1. What is the half-life for
this decay?
Answer:
5.02 d.
Second-Order Reactions
Following the same approach as used for first-order reactions, an equation relating the half-life of a second-
order reaction to its rate constant and initial concentration may be derived from its integrated rate law:
or
PAGE: 638
624 12 • Kinetics
Restrictttot
1/2
define [A] as one-half [A]
t 0
and then substitute into the integrated rate law and simplify:
For a second-order reaction, is inversely proportional to the concentration of the reactant, and the half-life
increases as the reaction proceeds because the concentration of reactant decreases. Unlike with first-order
reactions, the rate constant of a second-order reaction cannot be calculated directly from the half-life unless
the initial concentration is known.
Zero-Order Reactions
As for other reaction orders, an equation for zero-order half-life may be derived from the integrated rate law:
Restricting the time and concentrations to those defined by half-life: and Substituting
these terms into the zero-order integrated rate law yields:
As for all reaction orders, the half-life for a zero-order reaction is inversely proportional to its rate constant.
However, the half-life of a zero-order reaction increases as the initial concentration increases.
Equations for both differential and integrated rate laws and the corresponding half-lives for zero-, first-, and
second-order reactions are summarized inTable 12.2.
Summary of Rate Laws for Zero-, First-, and Second-Order Reactions
Zero-Order First-Order Second-Order
rate law rate =k rate =k[A] rate =k[A]2
units of rate constant Ms−1 s−1 M−1s−1
integrated rate law
TABLE12.2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 639
12.5 • Collision Theory 625
Zero-Order First-Order Second-Order
plot needed for linear fit of rate data [A] vs.t ln[A] vs.t vs.t
relationship between slope of linear
k= −slope k= −slope k= slope
plot and rate constant
half-life
TABLE12.2
EXAMPLE 12.12
Half-Life for Zero-Order and Second-Order Reactions
What is the half-life for the butadiene dimerization reaction described inExample 12.8?
Solution
The reaction in question is second order, is initiated with a 0.200 mol L−1reactant solution, and exhibits a rate
constant of 0.0576 L mol−1min−1. Substituting these quantities into the second-order half-life equation:
Check Your Learning
What is the half-life (min) for the thermal decomposition of ammonia on tungsten (seeFigure 12.11)?
Answer:
87 min
12.5 Collision Theory
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use the postulates of collision theory to explain the effects of physical state, temperature, and concentration on
reaction rates
• Define the concepts of activation energy and transition state
• Use the Arrhenius equation in calculations relating rate constants to temperature
We should not be surprised that atoms, molecules, or ions must collide before they can react with each other.
Atoms must be close together to form chemical bonds. This simple premise is the basis for a very powerful
theory that explains many observations regarding chemical kinetics, including factors affecting reaction rates.
Collision theoryis based on the following postulates:
1. The rate of a reaction is proportional to the rate of reactant collisions:
2. The reacting species must collide in an orientation that allows contact between the atoms that will become
bonded together in the product.
3. The collision must occur with adequate energy to permit mutual penetration of the reacting species’
valence shells so that the electrons can rearrange and form new bonds (and new chemical species).
We can see the importance of the two physical factors noted in postulates 2 and 3, the orientation and energy
PAGE: 640
626 12 • Kinetics
of collisions, when we consider the reaction of carbon monoxide with oxygen:
Carbon monoxide is a pollutant produced by the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels. To reduce this pollutant,
automobiles have catalytic converters that use a catalyst to carry out this reaction. It is also a side reaction of
the combustion of gunpowder that results in muzzle flash for many firearms. If carbon monoxide and oxygen
are present in sufficient amounts, the reaction will occur at high temperature and pressure.
The first step in the gas-phase reaction between carbon monoxide and oxygen is a collision between the two
molecules:
Although there are many different possible orientations the two molecules can have relative to each other,
consider the two presented inFigure 12.13. In the first case, the oxygen side of the carbon monoxide molecule
collides with the oxygen molecule. In the second case, the carbon side of the carbon monoxide molecule
collides with the oxygen molecule. The second case is clearly more likely to result in the formation of carbon
dioxide, which has a central carbon atom bonded to two oxygen atoms This is a rather simple
example of how important the orientation of the collision is in terms of creating the desired product of the
reaction.
FIGURE12.13 Illustrated are two collisions that might take place between carbon monoxide and oxygen
molecules. The orientation of the colliding molecules partially determines whether a reaction between the two
molecules will occur.
If the collision does take place with the correct orientation, there is still no guarantee that the reaction will
proceed to form carbon dioxide. In addition to a proper orientation, the collision must also occur with
sufficient energy to result in product formation. When reactant species collide with both proper orientation
and adequate energy, they combine to form an unstable species called anactivated complexor atransition
state. These species are very short lived and usually undetectable by most analytical instruments. In some
cases, sophisticated spectral measurements have been used to observe transition states.
Collision theory explains why most reaction rates increase as concentrations increase. With an increase in the
concentration of any reacting substance, the chances for collisions between molecules are increased because
there are more molecules per unit of volume. More collisions mean a faster reaction rate, assuming the energy
of the collisions is adequate.
Activation Energy and the Arrhenius Equation
The minimum energy necessary to form a product during a collision between reactants is called theactivation
energy (E). How this energy compares to the kinetic energy provided by colliding reactant molecules is a
a
primary factor affecting the rate of a chemical reaction. If the activation energy is much larger than the
average kinetic energy of the molecules, the reaction will occur slowly since only a few fast-moving molecules
will have enough energy to react. If the activation energy is much smaller than the average kinetic energy of
the molecules, a large fraction of molecules will be adequately energetic and the reaction will proceed rapidly.
Figure 12.14shows how the energy of a chemical system changes as it undergoes a reaction converting
reactants to products according to the equation
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 641
12.5 • Collision Theory 627
Thesereaction diagramsare widely used in chemical kinetics to illustrate various properties of the reaction
of interest. Viewing the diagram from left to right, the system initially comprises reactants only,A+B. Reactant
molecules with sufficient energy can collide to form a high-energy activated complex or transition state. The
unstable transition state can then subsequently decay to yield stable products,C+D. The diagram depicts the
reaction's activation energy,E, as the energy difference between the reactants and the transition state. Using a
a
specific energy, theenthalpy(see chapter on thermochemistry), the enthalpy change of the reaction, ΔH, is
estimated as the energy difference between the reactants and products. In this case, the reaction is exothermic
(ΔH< 0) since it yields a decrease in system enthalpy.
FIGURE12.14 Reaction diagram for the exothermic reaction
TheArrhenius equationrelates the activation energy and the rate constant,k, for many chemical reactions:
In this equation,Ris the ideal gas constant, which has a value 8.314 J/mol/K, T is temperature on the Kelvin
scale,E is the activation energy in joules per mole,eis the constant 2.7183, andAis a constant called the
a
frequency factor, which is related to the frequency of collisions and the orientation of the reacting molecules.
Postulates of collision theory are nicely accommodated by the Arrhenius equation. The frequency factor,A,
reflects how well the reaction conditions favor properly oriented collisions between reactant molecules. An
increased probability of effectively oriented collisions results in larger values forAand faster reaction rates.
The exponential term,e−Ea/RT, describes the effect of activation energy on reaction rate. According to kinetic
molecular theory (see chapter on gases), the temperature of matter is a measure of the average kinetic energy
of its constituent atoms or molecules. The distribution of energies among the molecules composing a sample
of matter at any given temperature is described by the plot shown inFigure 12.15(a). Two shaded areas under
the curve represent the numbers of molecules possessing adequate energy (RT) to overcome the activation
barriers (E). A lower activation energy results in a greater fraction of adequately energized molecules and a
a
faster reaction.
The exponential term also describes the effect of temperature on reaction rate. A higher temperature
represents a correspondingly greater fraction of molecules possessing sufficient energy (RT) to overcome the
activation barrier (E), as shown inFigure 12.15(b). This yields a greater value for the rate constant and a
a
correspondingly faster reaction rate.
PAGE: 642
628 12 • Kinetics
FIGURE12.15 Molecular energy distributions showing numbers of molecules with energies exceeding (a) two
different activation energies at a given temperature, and (b) a given activation energy at two different temperatures.
A convenient approach for determiningE for a reaction involves the measurement ofkat two or more
a
different temperatures and using an alternate version of the Arrhenius equation that takes the form of a linear
equation
A plot of lnkversus is linear with a slope equal to and ay-intercept equal to lnA.
EXAMPLE 12.13
Determination ofE
a
The variation of the rate constant with temperature for the decomposition of HI(g) to H (g) and I (g) is given
2 2
here. What is the activation energy for the reaction?
T(K) k(L/mol/s)
555 3.52 10−7
575 1.22 10−6
645 8.59 10−5
700 1.16 10−3
781 3.95 10−2
Solution
Use the provided data to derive values of and lnk:
lnk
1.80 10−3 −14.860
1.74 10−3 −13.617
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 643
12.5 • Collision Theory 629
lnk
1.55 10−3 −9.362
1.43 10−3 −6.759
1.28 10−3 −3.231
Figure 12.16is a graph of lnkversus In practice, the equation of the line (slope andy-intercept) that best
fits these plotted data points would be derived using a statistical process called regression. This is helpful for
most experimental data because a perfect fit of each data point with the line is rarely encountered. For the data
here, the fit is nearly perfect and the slope may be estimated using any two of the provided data pairs. Using
the first and last data points permits estimation of the slope.
FIGURE12.16 This graph shows the linear relationship between lnkand for the reaction
according to the Arrhenius equation.
Alternative approach: A more expedient approach involves deriving activation energy from measurements of
the rate constant at just two temperatures. In this approach, the Arrhenius equation is rearranged to a
convenient two-point form:
PAGE: 644
630 12 • Kinetics
Rearranging this equation to isolate activation energy yields:
Any two data pairs may be substituted into this equation—for example, the first and last entries from the above
data table:
and the result isE = 1.8 105J mol−1or 180 kJ mol−1
a
This approach yields the same result as the more rigorous graphical approach used above, as expected. In
practice, the graphical approach typically provides more reliable results when working with actual
experimental data.
Check Your Learning
The rate constant for the rate of decomposition of N O to NO and O in the gas phase is 1.66 L/mol/s at 650 K
2 5 2
and 7.39 L/mol/s at 700 K:
Assuming the kinetics of this reaction are consistent with the Arrhenius equation, calculate the activation
energy for this decomposition.
Answer:
1.1 105J mol−1or 110 kJ mol−1
12.6 Reaction Mechanisms
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish net reactions from elementary reactions (steps)
• Identify the molecularity of elementary reactions
• Write a balanced chemical equation for a process given its reaction mechanism
• Derive the rate law consistent with a given reaction mechanism
Chemical reactions very often occur in a step-wise fashion, involving two or more distinct reactions taking
place in sequence. A balanced equation indicates what is reacting and what is produced, but it reveals no
details about how the reaction actually takes place. Thereaction mechanism(or reaction path) provides
details regarding the precise, step-by-step process by which a reaction occurs.
The decomposition of ozone, for example, appears to follow a mechanism with two steps:
Each of the steps in a reaction mechanism is anelementary reaction. These elementary reactions occur
precisely as represented in the step equations, and they must sum to yield the balanced chemical equation
representing the overall reaction:
Notice that the oxygen atom produced in the first step of this mechanism is consumed in the second step and
therefore does not appear as a product in the overall reaction. Species that are produced in one step and
consumed in a subsequent step are calledintermediates.
While the overall reaction equation for the decomposition of ozone indicates that two molecules of ozone react
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 645
12.6 • Reaction Mechanisms 631
to give three molecules of oxygen, the mechanism of the reactiondoes not involve the direct collision and
reaction of two ozone molecules. Instead, one O decomposes to yield O and an oxygen atom, and a second O
3 2 3
molecule subsequently reacts with the oxygen atom to yield two additional O molecules.
2
Unlike balanced equations representing an overall reaction, the equations for elementary reactions are
explicit representations of the chemical change taking place. The reactant(s) in an elementary reaction’s
equation undergo only the bond-breaking and/or making events depicted to yield the product(s). For this
reason,the rate law for an elementary reaction may be derived directly from the balanced chemical equation
describing the reaction. This is not the case for typical chemical reactions, for which rate laws may be reliably
determined only via experimentation.
Unimolecular Elementary Reactions
Themolecularityof an elementary reaction is the number of reactant species (atoms, molecules, or ions). For
example, aunimolecular reactioninvolves the reaction of asinglereactant species to produce one or more
molecules of product:
The rate law for a unimolecular reaction is first order:
A unimolecular reaction may be one of several elementary reactions in a complex mechanism. For example,
the reaction:
illustrates a unimolecular elementary reaction that occurs as one part of a two-step reaction mechanism as
described above. However, some unimolecular reactions may be the only step of a single-step reaction
mechanism. (In other words, an “overall” reaction may also be an elementary reaction in some cases.) For
example, the gas-phase decomposition of cyclobutane, C H , to ethylene, C H , is represented by the following
4 8 2 4
chemical equation:
This equation represents the overall reaction observed, and it might also represent a legitimate unimolecular
elementary reaction. The rate law predicted from this equation, assuming it is an elementary reaction, turns
out to be the same as the rate law derived experimentally for the overall reaction, namely, one showing first-
order behavior:
This agreement between observed and predicted rate laws is interpreted to mean that the proposed
unimolecular, single-step process is a reasonable mechanism for the butadiene reaction.
Bimolecular Elementary Reactions
Abimolecular reactioninvolves two reactant species, for example:
For the first type, in which the two reactant molecules are different, the rate law is first-order inAand first
order inB(second-order overall):
PAGE: 646
632 12 • Kinetics
For the second type, in which two identical molecules collide and react, the rate law is second order inA:
Some chemical reactions occur by mechanisms that consist of a single bimolecular elementary reaction. One
example is the reaction of nitrogen dioxide with carbon monoxide:
(seeFigure 12.17)
FIGURE12.17 The probable mechanism for the reaction between NO and CO to yield NO and CO .
2 2
Bimolecular elementary reactions may also be involved as steps in a multistep reaction mechanism. The
reaction of atomic oxygen with ozone is the second step of the two-step ozone decomposition mechanism
discussed earlier in this section:
Termolecular Elementary Reactions
An elementarytermolecular reactioninvolves the simultaneous collision of three atoms, molecules, or ions.
Termolecular elementary reactions are uncommon because the probability of three particles colliding
simultaneously is less than one one-thousandth of the probability of two particles colliding. There are,
however, a few established termolecular elementary reactions. The reaction of nitric oxide with oxygen
appears to involve termolecular steps:
Likewise, the reaction of nitric oxide with chlorine appears to involve termolecular steps:
Relating Reaction Mechanisms to Rate Laws
It’s often the case that one step in a multistep reaction mechanism is significantly slower than the others.
Because a reaction cannot proceed faster than its slowest step, this step will limit the rate at which the overall
reaction occurs. The slowest step is therefore called therate-limiting step(or rate-determining step) of the
reactionFigure 12.18.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 647
12.6 • Reaction Mechanisms 633
FIGURE12.18 A cattle chute is a nonchemical example of a rate-determining step. Cattle can only be moved from
one holding pen to another as quickly as one animal can make its way through the chute. (credit: Loren Kerns)
As described earlier, rate laws may be derived directly from the chemical equations for elementary reactions.
This is not the case, however, for ordinary chemical reactions. The balanced equations most often encountered
represent the overall change for some chemical system, and very often this is the result of some multistep
reaction mechanisms. In every case, the rate law must be determined from experimental data and the reaction
mechanism subsequently deduced from the rate law (and sometimes from other data). The reaction of NO
2
and CO provides an illustrative example:
For temperatures above 225 °C, the rate law has been found to be:
The reaction is first order with respect to NO and first-order with respect to CO. This is consistent with a
2
single-step bimolecular mechanism and it ispossiblethat this is the mechanism for this reaction at high
temperatures.
At temperatures below 225 °C,the reaction is described by a rate law that is second order with respect to NO :
2
This rate law is not consistent with the single-step mechanism, but is consistent with the following two-step
mechanism:
The rate-determining (slower) step gives a rate law showing second-order dependence on the NO
2
concentration, and the sum of the two equations gives the net overall reaction.
In general, when the rate-determining (slower) step is the first step in a mechanism, the rate law for the overall
reaction is the same as the rate law for this step. However, when the rate-determining step is preceded by a
step involving a rapidly reversible reaction the rate law for the overall reaction may be more difficult to derive.
As discussed in several chapters of this text, a reversible reaction is atequilibriumwhen the rates of the
forward and reverse processes are equal. Consider the reversible elementary reaction in which NO dimerizes
to yield an intermediate species N O . When this reaction is at equilibrium:
2 2
This expression may be rearranged to express the concentration of the intermediate in terms of the reactant
NO:
PAGE: 648
634 12 • Kinetics
Since intermediate species concentrations are not used in formulating rate laws for overall reactions, this
approach is sometimes necessary, as illustrated in the following example exercise.
EXAMPLE 12.14
Deriving a Rate Law from a Reaction Mechanism
The two-step mechanism below has been proposed for a reaction between nitrogen monoxide and molecular
chlorine:
Use this mechanism to derive the equation and predicted rate law for the overall reaction.
Solution
The equation for the overall reaction is obtained by adding the two elementary reactions:
To derive a rate law from this mechanism, first write rates laws for each of the two steps.
Step 2 is the rate-determining step, and so the rate law for the overall reaction should be the same as for this
step. However, the step 2 rate law, as written, contains an intermediate species concentration, [NOCl ]. To
2
remedy this, use the first step’s rate laws to derive an expression for the intermediate concentration in terms of
the reactant concentrations.
Assuming step 1 is at equilibrium:
Substituting this expression into the rate law for step 2 yields:
Check Your Learning
The first step of a proposed multistep mechanism is:
Derive the equation relating atomic fluorine concentration to molecular fluorine concentration.
Answer:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 649
12.7 • Catalysis 635
12.7 Catalysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the function of a catalyst in terms of reaction mechanisms and potential energy diagrams
• List examples of catalysis in natural and industrial processes
Among the factors affecting chemical reaction rates discussed earlier in this chapter was the presence of a
catalyst, a substance that can increase the reaction rate without being consumed in the reaction. The concepts
introduced in the previous section on reaction mechanisms provide the basis for understanding how catalysts
are able to accomplish this very important function.
Figure 12.19shows reaction diagrams for a chemical process in the absence and presence of a catalyst.
Inspection of the diagrams reveals several traits of these reactions. Consistent with the fact that the two
diagrams represent the same overall reaction, both curves begin and end at the same energies (in this case,
because products are more energetic than reactants, the reaction is endothermic). The reaction mechanisms,
however, are clearly different. The uncatalyzed reaction proceeds via a one-step mechanism (one transition
state observed), whereas the catalyzed reaction follows a two-step mechanism (two transition states observed)
witha notably lesser activation energy. This difference illustrates the means by which a catalyst functions to
accelerate reactions, namely, by providing an alternative reaction mechanism with a lower activation energy.
Although the catalyzed reaction mechanism for a reaction needn’t necessarily involve a different number of
steps than the uncatalyzed mechanism, it must provide a reaction path whose rate determining step is faster
(lowerE).
a
FIGURE12.19 Reaction diagrams for an endothermic process in the absence (red curve) and presence (blue
curve) of a catalyst. The catalyzed pathway involves a two-step mechanism (note the presence of two transition
states) and an intermediate species (represented by the valley between the two transitions states).
EXAMPLE 12.15
Reaction Diagrams for Catalyzed Reactions
The two reaction diagrams here represent the same reaction: one without a catalyst and one with a catalyst.
Estimate the activation energy for each process, and identify which one involves a catalyst.
PAGE: 650
636 12 • Kinetics
Solution
Activation energies are calculated by subtracting the reactant energy from the transition state energy.
The catalyzed reaction is the one with lesser activation energy, in this case represented by diagram b.
Check Your Learning
Reaction diagrams for a chemical process with and without a catalyst are shown below. Both reactions involve
a two-step mechanism with a rate-determining first step. Compute activation energies for the first step of each
mechanism, and identify which corresponds to the catalyzed reaction. How do the second steps of these two
mechanisms compare?
Answer:
For the first step,E = 80 kJ for (a) and 70 kJ for (b), so diagram (b) depicts the catalyzed reaction. Activation
a
energies for the second steps of both mechanisms are the same, 20 kJ.
Homogeneous Catalysts
Ahomogeneous catalystis present in the same phase as the reactants. It interacts with a reactant to form an
intermediate substance, which then decomposes or reacts with another reactant in one or more steps to
regenerate the original catalyst and form product.
As an important illustration of homogeneous catalysis, consider the earth’s ozone layer. Ozone in the upper
atmosphere, which protects the earth from ultraviolet radiation, is formed when oxygen molecules absorb
ultraviolet light and undergo the reaction:
Ozone is a relatively unstable molecule that decomposes to yield diatomic oxygen by the reverse of this
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 651
12.7 • Catalysis 637
equation. This decomposition reaction is consistent with the following two-step mechanism:
A number of substances can catalyze the decomposition of ozone. For example, the nitric oxide–catalyzed
decomposition of ozone is believed to occur via the following three-step mechanism:
As required, the overall reaction is the same for both the two-step uncatalyzed mechanism and the three-step
NO-catalyzed mechanism:
Notice that NO is a reactant in the first step of the mechanism and a product in the last step. This is another
characteristic trait of a catalyst: Though it participates in the chemical reaction, it is not consumed by the
reaction.
Portrait of a Chemist
Mario J. Molina
The 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was shared by Paul J. Crutzen, Mario J.Molina(Figure 12.20), and F.
Sherwood Rowland “for their work in atmospheric chemistry, particularly concerning the formation and
1
decomposition of ozone.” Molina, a Mexican citizen, carried out the majority of his work at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
FIGURE12.20 (a) Mexican chemist Mario Molina (1943 –) shared the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1995 for his
research on (b) the Antarctic ozone hole. (credit a: courtesy of Mario Molina; credit b: modification of work by
NASA)
In 1974, Molina and Rowland published a paper in the journalNaturedetailing the threat of
chlorofluorocarbon gases to the stability of the ozone layer in earth’s upper atmosphere. The ozone layer
protects earth from solar radiation by absorbing ultraviolet light. As chemical reactions deplete the amount
of ozone in the upper atmosphere, a measurable “hole” forms above Antarctica, and an increase in the
1 “The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1995,” Nobel Prize.org, accessed February 18, 2015, http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/
chemistry/laureates/1995/.
PAGE: 652
638 12 • Kinetics
amount of solar ultraviolet radiation— strongly linked to the prevalence of skin cancers—reaches earth’s
surface. The work of Molina and Rowland was instrumental in the adoption of the Montreal Protocol, an
international treaty signed in 1987 that successfully began phasing out production of chemicals linked to
ozone destruction.
Molina and Rowland demonstrated that chlorine atoms from human-made chemicals can catalyze ozone
destruction in a process similar to that by which NO accelerates the depletion of ozone. Chlorine atoms are
generated when chlorocarbons or chlorofluorocarbons—once widely used as refrigerants and
propellants—are photochemically decomposed by ultraviolet light or react with hydroxyl radicals. A sample
mechanism is shown here using methyl chloride:
Chlorine radicals break down ozone and are regenerated by the following catalytic cycle:
A single monatomic chlorine can break down thousands of ozone molecules. Luckily, the majority of
atmospheric chlorine exists as the catalytically inactive forms Cl and ClONO .
2 2
Since receiving his portion of the Nobel Prize, Molina has continued his work in atmospheric chemistry at
MIT.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Enzymes in the human body act as catalysts for important chemical reactions in cellular metabolism. As such,
a deficiency of a particular enzyme can translate to a life-threatening disease. G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase) deficiency, a genetic condition that results in a shortage of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, is the most common enzyme deficiency in humans. This enzyme, shown inFigure 12.21, is the
rate-limiting enzyme for the metabolic pathway that supplies NADPH to cells (Figure 12.22).
FIGURE12.21 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is a rate-limiting enzyme for the metabolic pathway that
supplies NADPH to cells.
A disruption in this pathway can lead to reduced glutathione in red blood cells; once all glutathione is
consumed, enzymes and other proteins such as hemoglobin are susceptible to damage. For example,
hemoglobin can be metabolized to bilirubin, which leads to jaundice, a condition that can become severe.
People who suffer from G6PD deficiency must avoid certain foods and medicines containing chemicals that
can trigger damage their glutathione-deficient red blood cells.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 653
12.7 • Catalysis 639
FIGURE12.22 In the mechanism for the pentose phosphate pathway, G6PD catalyzes the reaction that regulates
NADPH, a co-enzyme that regulates glutathione, an antioxidant that protects red blood cells and other cells from
oxidative damage.
Heterogeneous Catalysts
Aheterogeneous catalystis a catalyst that is present in a different phase (usually a solid) than the reactants.
Such catalysts generally function by furnishing an active surface upon which a reaction can occur. Gas and
liquid phase reactions catalyzed by heterogeneous catalysts occur on the surface of the catalyst rather than
within the gas or liquid phase.
Heterogeneous catalysis typically involves the following processes:
1. Adsorption of the reactant(s) onto the surface of the catalyst
2. Activation of the adsorbed reactant(s)
3. Reaction of the adsorbed reactant(s)
4. Desorption of product(s) from the surface of the catalyst
Figure 12.23illustrates the steps of a mechanism for the reaction of compounds containing a carbon–carbon
double bond with hydrogen on a nickel catalyst. Nickel is the catalyst used in the hydrogenation of
polyunsaturated fats and oils (which contain several carbon–carbon double bonds) to produce saturated fats
and oils (which contain only carbon–carbon single bonds).
FIGURE12.23 Mechanism for the Ni-catalyzed reaction (a) Hydrogen is adsorbed on the
surface, breaking the H–H bonds and forming Ni–H bonds. (b) Ethylene is adsorbed on the surface, breaking the C–C
π-bond and forming Ni–C bonds. (c) Atoms diffuse across the surface and form new C–H bonds when they collide.
(d) C H molecules desorb from the Ni surface.
2 6
Many important chemical products are prepared via industrial processes that use heterogeneous catalysts,
including ammonia, nitric acid, sulfuric acid, and methanol. Heterogeneous catalysts are also used in the
catalytic converters found on most gasoline-powered automobiles (Figure 12.24).
PAGE: 654
640 12 • Kinetics
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Automobile Catalytic Converters
Scientists developed catalytic converters to reduce the amount of toxic emissions produced by burning
gasoline in internal combustion engines. By utilizing a carefully selected blend of catalytically active
metals, it is possible to effect complete combustion of all carbon-containing compounds to carbon dioxide
while also reducing the output of nitrogen oxides. This is particularly impressive when we consider that
one step involves adding more oxygen to the molecule and the other involves removing the oxygen (Figure
12.24).
FIGURE12.24 A catalytic converter allows for the combustion of all carbon-containing compounds to carbon
dioxide, while at the same time reducing the output of nitrogen oxide and other pollutants in emissions from
gasoline-burning engines.
Most modern, three-way catalytic converters possess a surface impregnated with a platinum-rhodium
catalyst, which catalyzes the conversion of nitric oxide into dinitrogen and oxygen as well as the conversion
of carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons such as octane into carbon dioxide and water vapor:
In order to be as efficient as possible, most catalytic converters are preheated by an electric heater. This
ensures that the metals in the catalyst are fully active even before the automobile exhaust is hot enough to
maintain appropriate reaction temperatures.
LINK TO LEARNING
The University of California at Davis’ “ChemWiki” provides athorough explanation(http://openstax.org/l/
16catconvert)of how catalytic converters work.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Enzyme Structure and Function
The study of enzymes is an important interconnection between biology and chemistry. Enzymes are usually
proteins (polypeptides) that help to control the rate of chemical reactions between biologically important
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 655
12.7 • Catalysis 641
compounds, particularly those that are involved in cellular metabolism. Different classes of enzymes perform
a variety of functions, as shown inTable 12.3.
Classes of Enzymes and Their Functions
Class Function
oxidoreductases redox reactions
transferases transfer of functional groups
hydrolases hydrolysis reactions
lyases group elimination to form double bonds
isomerases isomerization
ligases bond formation with ATP hydrolysis
TABLE12.3
Enzyme molecules possess an active site, a part of the molecule with a shape that allows it to bond to a specific
substrate (a reactant molecule), forming an enzyme-substrate complex as a reaction intermediate. There are
two models that attempt to explain how this active site works. The most simplistic model is referred to as the
lock-and-key hypothesis, which suggests that the molecular shapes of the active site and substrate are
complementary, fitting together like a key in a lock. The induced fit hypothesis, on the other hand, suggests
that the enzyme molecule is flexible and changes shape to accommodate a bond with the substrate. This is not
to suggest that an enzyme’s active site is completely malleable, however. Both the lock-and-key model and the
induced fit model account for the fact that enzymes can only bind with specific substrates, since in general a
particular enzyme only catalyzes a particular reaction (Figure 12.25).
FIGURE12.25 (a) According to the lock-and-key model, the shape of an enzyme’s active site is a perfect fit for the
substrate. (b) According to the induced fit model, the active site is somewhat flexible, and can change shape in order
to bond with the substrate.
LINK TO LEARNING
TheRoyal Society of Chemistry(http://openstax.org/l/16enzymes)provides an excellent introduction to
enzymes for students and teachers.
PAGE: 656
642 12 • Key Terms
Key Terms
activated complex (also, transition state) unstable concentration of a reactant to elapsed time of
combination of reactant species formed during a reaction
chemical reaction intermediate species produced in one step of a
activation energy (E) minimum energy necessary reaction mechanism and consumed in a
a
in order for a reaction to take place subsequent step
Arrhenius equation mathematical relationship method of initial rates common experimental
between a reaction’s rate constant, activation approach to determining rate laws that involves
energy, and temperature measuring reaction rates at varying initial
average rate rate of a chemical reaction computed reactant concentrations
as the ratio of a measured change in amount or molecularity number of reactant species involved
concentration of substance to the time interval in an elementary reaction
over which the change occurred overall reaction order sum of the reaction orders
bimolecular reaction elementary reaction for each substance represented in the rate law
involving two reactant species rate constant (k) proportionality constant in a rate
catalyst substance that increases the rate of a law
reaction without itself being consumed by the rate expression mathematical representation
reaction defining reaction rate as change in amount,
collision theory model that emphasizes the energy concentration, or pressure of reactant or product
and orientation of molecular collisions to explain species per unit time
and predict reaction kinetics rate law (also, rate equation) (also, differential rate
elementary reaction reaction that takes place in a laws) mathematical equation showing the
single step, precisely as depicted in its chemical dependence of reaction rate on the rate constant
equation and the concentration of one or more reactants
frequency factor (A) proportionality constant in rate of reaction measure of the speed at which a
the Arrhenius equation, related to the relative chemical reaction takes place
number of collisions having an orientation rate-determining step (also, rate-limiting step)
capable of leading to product formation slowest elementary reaction in a reaction
half-life of a reaction (t ) time required for half of mechanism; determines the rate of the overall
l/2
a given amount of reactant to be consumed reaction
heterogeneous catalyst catalyst present in a reaction diagram used in chemical kinetics to
different phase from the reactants, furnishing a illustrate various properties of a reaction
surface at which a reaction can occur reaction mechanism stepwise sequence of
homogeneous catalyst catalyst present in the elementary reactions by which a chemical change
same phase as the reactants takes place
initial rate instantaneous rate of a chemical reaction order value of an exponent in a rate law
reaction att= 0 s (immediately after the reaction (for example, zero order for 0, first order for 1,
has begun) second order for 2, and so on)
instantaneous rate rate of a chemical reaction at termolecular reaction elementary reaction
any instant in time, determined by the slope of involving three reactant species
the line tangential to a graph of concentration as a unimolecular reaction elementary reaction
function of time involving a single reactant species
integrated rate law equation that relates the
Key Equations
integrated rate law for zero-order reactions:
half-life for a zero-order reaction
integrated rate law for first-order reactions:
half-life for a first-order reaction
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 657
12 • Summary 643
integrated rate law for second-order reactions:
half-life for a second-order reaction
Summary
12.1Chemical Reaction Rates for some reaction orders, reactant concentration.
The half-life of a zero-order reaction decreases as
The rate of a reaction can be expressed either in
the initial concentration of the reactant in the
terms of the decrease in the amount of a reactant or
reaction decreases. The half-life of a first-order
the increase in the amount of a product per unit
reaction is independent of concentration, and the
time. Relations between different rate expressions
half-life of a second-order reaction decreases as the
for a given reaction are derived directly from the
concentration increases.
stoichiometric coefficients of the equation
representing the reaction. 12.5Collision Theory
12.2Factors Affecting Reaction Rates Chemical reactions typically require collisions
between reactant species. These reactant collisions
The rate of a chemical reaction is affected by several
must be of proper orientation and sufficient energy
parameters. Reactions involving two phases proceed
in order to result in product formation. Collision
more rapidly when there is greater surface area
theory provides a simple but effective explanation
contact. If temperature or reactant concentration is
for the effect of many experimental parameters on
increased, the rate of a given reaction generally
reaction rates. The Arrhenius equation describes the
increases as well. A catalyst can increase the rate of
relation between a reaction’s rate constant,
a reaction by providing an alternative pathway with
activation energy, temperature, and dependence on
a lower activation energy.
collision orientation.
12.3Rate Laws
12.6Reaction Mechanisms
Rate laws (differential rate laws) provide a
The sequence of individual steps, or elementary
mathematical description of how changes in the
reactions, by which reactants are converted into
concentration of a substance affect the rate of a
products during the course of a reaction is called the
chemical reaction. Rate laws are determined
reaction mechanism. The molecularity of an
experimentally and cannot be predicted by reaction
elementary reaction is the number of reactant
stoichiometry. The order of reaction describes how
species involved, typically one (unimolecular), two
much a change in the concentration of each
(bimolecular), or, less commonly, three
substance affects the overall rate, and the overall
(termolecular). The overall rate of a reaction is
order of a reaction is the sum of the orders for each
determined by the rate of the slowest in its
substance present in the reaction. Reaction orders
mechanism, called the rate-determining step.
are typically first order, second order, or zero order,
Unimolecular elementary reactions have first-order
but fractional and even negative orders are possible.
rate laws, while bimolecular elementary reactions
12.4Integrated Rate Laws have second-order rate laws. By comparing the rate
laws derived from a reaction mechanism to that
Integrated rate laws are mathematically derived
determined experimentally, the mechanism may be
from differential rate laws, and they describe the
deemed either incorrect or plausible.
time dependence of reactant and product
concentrations. 12.7Catalysis
The half-life of a reaction is the time required to Catalysts affect the rate of a chemical reaction by
decrease the amount of a given reactant by one-half. altering its mechanism to provide a lower activation
A reaction’s half-life varies with rate constant and, energy. Catalysts can be homogenous (in the same
PAGE: 658
644 12 • Exercises
phase as the reactants) or heterogeneous (a different phase than the reactants).
Exercises
12.1Chemical Reaction Rates
1. What is the difference between average rate, initial rate, and instantaneous rate?
2. Ozone decomposes to oxygen according to the equation Write the equation that
relates the rate expressions for this reaction in terms of the disappearance of O and the formation of
3
oxygen.
3. In the nuclear industry, chlorine trifluoride is used to prepare uranium hexafluoride, a volatile compound
of uranium used in the separation of uranium isotopes. Chlorine trifluoride is prepared by the reaction
Write the equation that relates the rate expressions for this reaction in
terms of the disappearance of Cl and F and the formation of ClF .
2 2 3
4. A study of the rate of dimerization of C H gave the data shown in the table:
4 6
Time (s) 0 1600 3200 4800 6200
[C H ] (M) 1.00 10−2 5.04 10−3 3.37 10−3 2.53 10−3 2.08 10−3
4 6
(a) Determine the average rate of dimerization between 0 s and 1600 s, and between 1600 s and 3200 s.
(b) Estimate the instantaneous rate of dimerization at 3200 s from a graph of time versus [C H ]. What are the
4 6
units of this rate?
(c) Determine the average rate of formation of C H at 1600 s and the instantaneous rate of formation at 3200
8 12
s from the rates found in parts (a) and (b).
5. A study of the rate of the reaction represented as gave the following data:
Time (s) 0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 35.0
[A] (M) 1.00 0.775 0.625 0.465 0.360 0.285 0.230
(a) Determine the average rate of disappearance ofAbetween 0.0 s and 10.0 s, and between 10.0 s and 20.0 s.
(b) Estimate the instantaneous rate of disappearance ofAat 15.0 s from a graph of time versus [A]. What are
the units of this rate?
(c) Use the rates found in parts (a) and (b) to determine the average rate of formation ofBbetween 0.00 s and
10.0 s, and the instantaneous rate of formation ofBat 15.0 s.
6. Consider the following reaction in aqueous solution:
If the rate of disappearance of Br–(aq) at a particular moment during the reaction is 3.5 10−4mol L−1s−1,
what is the rate of appearance of Br (aq) at that moment?
2
12.2Factors Affecting Reaction Rates
7. Describe the effect of each of the following on the rate of the reaction of magnesium metal with a solution
of hydrochloric acid: the molarity of the hydrochloric acid, the temperature of the solution, and the size of
the pieces of magnesium.
8. Explain why an egg cooks more slowly in boiling water in Denver than in New York City. (Hint: Consider the
effect of temperature on reaction rate and the effect of pressure on boiling point.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 659
12 • Exercises 645
9. Go to thePhET Reactions & Rates(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)interactive. Use the Single
Collision tab to represent how the collision between monatomic oxygen (O) and carbon monoxide (CO)
results in the breaking of one bond and the formation of another. Pull back on the red plunger to release
the atom and observe the results. Then, click on “Reload Launcher” and change to “Angled shot” to see the
difference.
(a) What happens when the angle of the collision is changed?
(b) Explain how this is relevant to rate of reaction.
10. In thePhET Reactions & Rates(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)interactive, use the “Many
Collisions” tab to observe how multiple atoms and molecules interact under varying conditions. Select a
molecule to pump into the chamber. Set the initial temperature and select the current amounts of each
reactant. Select “Show bonds” under Options. How is the rate of the reaction affected by concentration and
temperature?
11. In thePhET Reactions & Rates(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)interactive, on the Many Collisions
tab, set up a simulation with 15 molecules of A and 10 molecules of BC. Select “Show Bonds” under
Options.
(a) Leave the Initial Temperature at the default setting. Observe the reaction. Is the rate of reaction fast or
slow?
(b) Click “Pause” and then “Reset All,” and then enter 15 molecules of A and 10 molecules of BC once
again. Select “Show Bonds” under Options. This time, increase the initial temperature until, on the graph,
the total average energy line is completely above the potential energy curve. Describe what happens to the
reaction.
12.3Rate Laws
12. How do the rate of a reaction and its rate constant differ?
13. Doubling the concentration of a reactant increases the rate of a reaction four times. With this knowledge,
answer the following questions:
(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?
(b) Tripling the concentration of a different reactant increases the rate of a reaction three times. What is
the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?
14. Tripling the concentration of a reactant increases the rate of a reaction nine-fold. With this knowledge,
answer the following questions:
(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?
(b) Increasing the concentration of a reactant by a factor of four increases the rate of a reaction four-fold.
What is the order of the reaction with respect to that reactant?
15. How will the rate of reaction change for the process: if the rate law
for the reaction is
(a) Decreasing the pressure of NO from 0.50 atm to 0.250 atm.
2
(b) Increasing the concentration of CO from 0.01Mto 0.03M.
16. How will each of the following affect the rate of the reaction: if the
rate law for the reaction is ?
(a) Increasing the pressure of NO from 0.1 atm to 0.3 atm
2
(b) Increasing the concentration of CO from 0.02Mto 0.06M.
17. Regular flights of supersonic aircraft in the stratosphere are of concern because such aircraft produce
nitric oxide, NO, as a byproduct in the exhaust of their engines. Nitric oxide reacts with ozone, and it has
been suggested that this could contribute to depletion of the ozone layer. The reaction
is first order with respect to both NO and O with a rate constant of 2.20 107
3
L/mol/s. What is the instantaneous rate of disappearance of NO when [NO] = 3.3 10−6Mand [O ] = 5.9
3
10−7M?
PAGE: 660
646 12 • Exercises
18. Radioactive phosphorus is used in the study of biochemical reaction mechanisms because phosphorus
atoms are components of many biochemical molecules. The location of the phosphorus (and the location
of the molecule it is bound in) can be detected from the electrons (beta particles) it produces:
rate = 4.85 10−2
What is the instantaneous rate of production of electrons in a sample with a phosphorus concentration of
0.0033M?
19. The rate constant for the radioactive decay of14C is 1.21 10−4year−1. The products of the decay are
nitrogen atoms and electrons (beta particles):
What is the instantaneous rate of production of N atoms in a sample with a carbon-14 content of 6.5
10−9M?
20. The decomposition of acetaldehyde is a second order reaction with a rate constant of 4.71 10−8L mol−1
s−1. What is the instantaneous rate of decomposition of acetaldehyde in a solution with a concentration of
5.55 10−4M?
21. Alcohol is removed from the bloodstream by a series of metabolic reactions. The first reaction produces
acetaldehyde; then other products are formed. The following data have been determined for the rate at which
alcohol is removed from the blood of an average male, although individual rates can vary by 25–30%. Women
metabolize alcohol a little more slowly than men:
[C H OH] (M) 4.4 10−2 3.3 10−2 2.2 10−2
2 5
Rate (mol L−1h−1) 2.0 10−2 2.0 10−2 2.0 10−2
Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction.
22. Under certain conditions the decomposition of ammonia on a metal surface gives the following data:
[NH ] (M) 1.0 10−3 2.0 10−3 3.0 10−3
3
Rate (mol L−1h−1) 1.5 10−6 1.5 10−6 1.5 10−6
Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction.
23. Nitrosyl chloride, NOCl, decomposes to NO and Cl .
2
Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the overall order for this reaction from the following data:
[NOCl] (M) 0.10 0.20 0.30
Rate (mol L−1h−1) 8.0 10−10 3.2 10−9 7.2 10−9
24. From the following data, determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the order with respect toAfor the
reaction
[A] (M) 1.33 10−2 2.66 10−2 3.99 10−2
Rate (mol L−1h−1) 3.80 10−7 1.52 10−6 3.42 10−6
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 661
12 • Exercises 647
25. Nitrogen monoxide reacts with chlorine according to the equation:
The following initial rates of reaction have been observed for certain reactant concentrations:
[NO] (mol/L) [Cl ] (mol/L) Rate (mol L−1h−1)
2
0.50 0.50 1.14
1.00 0.50 4.56
1.00 1.00 9.12
What is the rate law that describes the rate’s dependence on the concentrations of NO and Cl ? What is the rate
2
constant? What are the orders with respect to each reactant?
26. Hydrogen reacts with nitrogen monoxide to form dinitrogen monoxide (laughing gas) according to the
equation:
Determine the rate law, the rate constant, and the orders with respect to each reactant from the following data:
[NO] (M) 0.30 0.60 0.60
[H ] (M) 0.35 0.35 0.70
2
Rate (mol L−1s−1) 2.835 10−3 1.134 10−2 2.268 10−2
27. For the reaction the following data were obtained at 30 °C:
[A] (M) 0.230 0.356 0.557
Rate (mol L−1s−1) 4.17 10−4 9.99 10−4 2.44 10−3
(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to [A], and what is the rate law?
(b) What is the rate constant?
28. For the reaction the following data were obtained at 30 °C:
[Q] (M) 0.170 0.212 0.357
initial
Rate (mol L−1s−1) 6.68 10−3 1.04 10−2 2.94 10−2
(a) What is the order of the reaction with respect to [Q], and what is the rate law?
(b) What is the rate constant?
29. The rate constant for the first-order decomposition at 45 °C of dinitrogen pentoxide, N O , dissolved in
2 5
chloroform, CHCl , is 6.2 10−4min−1.
3
What is the rate of the reaction when [N O ] = 0.40M?
2 5
PAGE: 662
648 12 • Exercises
30. The annual production of HNO in 2013 was 60 million metric tons Most of that was prepared by the
3
following sequence of reactions, each run in a separate reaction vessel.
(a)
(b)
(c)
The first reaction is run by burning ammonia in air over a platinum catalyst. This reaction is fast. The
reaction in equation (c) is also fast. The second reaction limits the rate at which nitric acid can be
prepared from ammonia. If equation (b) is second order in NO and first order in O , what is the rate of
2
formation of NO when the oxygen concentration is 0.50Mand the nitric oxide concentration is 0.75M?
2
The rate constant for the reaction is 5.8 10−6L2mol−2s−1.
31. The following data have been determined for the reaction:
1 2 3
(M) 0.10 0.20 0.30
(M) 0.050 0.050 0.010
Rate (mol L−1s−1) 3.05 10−4 6.20 10−4 1.83 10−4
Determine the rate law and the rate constant for this reaction.
12.4Integrated Rate Laws
32. Describe how graphical methods can be used to determine the order of a reaction and its rate constant
from a series of data that includes the concentration ofAat varying times.
33. Use the data provided to graphically determine the order and rate constant of the following reaction:
Time (s) 0 5.00 103 1.00 104 1.50 104
[SO Cl ] (M) 0.100 0.0896 0.0802 0.0719
2 2
Time (s) 2.50 104 3.00 104 4.00 104
[SO Cl ] (M) 0.0577 0.0517 0.0415
2 2
34. Pure ozone decomposes slowly to oxygen, Use the data provided in a graphical method
and determine the order and rate constant of the reaction.
Time (h) 0 2.0 103 7.6 103 1.00 104
[O ] (M) 1.00 10−5 4.98 10−6 2.07 10−6 1.66 10−6
3
Time (h) 1.23 104 1.43 104 1.70 104
[O ] (M) 1.39 10−6 1.22 10−6 1.05 10−6
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 663
12 • Exercises 649
35. From the given data, use a graphical method to determine the order and rate constant of the following
reaction:
Time (s) 5.0 10.0 15.0 20.0 25.0 30.0 35.0 40.0
[X] (M) 0.0990 0.0497 0.0332 0.0249 0.0200 0.0166 0.0143 0.0125
36. What is the half-life for the first-order decay of phosphorus-32? The rate constant
for the decay is 4.85 10−2day−1.
37. What is the half-life for the first-order decay of carbon-14? The rate constant for the
decay is 1.21 10−4year−1.
38. What is the half-life for the decomposition of NOCl when the concentration of NOCl is 0.15M? The rate
constant for this second-order reaction is 8.0 10−8L mol−1s−1.
39. What is the half-life for the decomposition of O when the concentration of O is 2.35 10−6M? The rate
3 3
constant for this second-order reaction is 50.4 L mol−1h−1.
40. The reaction of compound Ato give compounds Cand Dwas found to be second-order in A. The rate
constant for the reaction was determined to be 2.42 L mol−1s−1. If the initial concentration is 0.500 mol/L,
what is the value of t ?
1/2
41. The half-life of a reaction of compoundAto give compoundsDandEis 8.50 min when the initial
concentration ofAis 0.150 M. How long will it take for the concentration to drop to 0.0300 M if the
reaction is (a) first order with respect toAor (b) second order with respect toA?
42. Some bacteria are resistant to the antibiotic penicillin because they produce penicillinase, an enzyme with a
molecular weight of 3 104g/mol that converts penicillin into inactive molecules. Although the kinetics of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions can be complex, at low concentrations this reaction can be described by a rate law
that is first order in the catalyst (penicillinase) and that also involves the concentration of penicillin. From the
following data: 1.0 L of a solution containing 0.15 µg (0.15 10−6g) of penicillinase, determine the order of the
reaction with respect to penicillin and the value of the rate constant.
[Penicillin] (M) Rate (mol L−1min−1)
2.0 10−6 1.0 10−10
3.0 10−6 1.5 10−10
4.0 10−6 2.0 10−10
43. Both technetium-99 and thallium-201 are used to image heart muscle in patients with suspected heart
problems. The half-lives are 6 h and 73 h, respectively. What percent of the radioactivity would remain for
each of the isotopes after 2 days (48 h)?
44. There are two molecules with the formula C H . Propene, is the monomer of the polymer
3 6
polypropylene, which is used for indoor-outdoor carpets. Cyclopropane is used as an anesthetic:
When heated to 499 °C, cyclopropane rearranges (isomerizes) and forms propene with a rate constant of
5.95 10−4s−1. What is the half-life of this reaction? What fraction of the cyclopropane remains after 0.75
h at 499 °C?
PAGE: 664
650 12 • Exercises
45. Fluorine-18 is a radioactive isotope that decays by positron emission to form oxygen-18 with a half-life of
109.7 min. (A positron is a particle with the mass of an electron and a single unit of positive charge; the
equation is Physicians use18F to study the brain by injecting a quantity of fluoro-
substituted glucose into the blood of a patient. The glucose accumulates in the regions where the brain is
active and needs nourishment.
(a) What is the rate constant for the decomposition of fluorine-18?
(b) If a sample of glucose containing radioactive fluorine-18 is injected into the blood, what percent of the
radioactivity will remain after 5.59 h?
(c) How long does it take for 99.99% of the18F to decay?
46. Suppose that the half-life of steroids taken by an athlete is 42 days. Assuming that the steroids biodegrade
by a first-order process, how long would it take for of the initial dose to remain in the athlete’s body?
47. Recently, the skeleton of King Richard III was found under a parking lot in England. If tissue samples from
the skeleton contain about 93.79% of the carbon-14 expected in living tissue, what year did King Richard
III die? The half-life for carbon-14 is 5730 years.
48. Nitroglycerine is an extremely sensitive explosive. In a series of carefully controlled experiments, samples of
the explosive were heated to 160 °C and their first-order decomposition studied. Determine the average rate
constants for each experiment using the following data:
Initial
[C H N O ] 4.88 3.52 2.29 1.81 5.33 4.05 2.95 1.72
3 5 3 9
(M)
t(s) 300 300 300 300 180 180 180 180
%
52.0 52.9 53.2 53.9 34.6 35.9 36.0 35.4
Decomposed
49. For the past 10 years, the unsaturated hydrocarbon 1,3-butadiene has ranked
38th among the top 50 industrial chemicals. It is used primarily for the manufacture of synthetic rubber.
An isomer exists also as cyclobutene:
The isomerization of cyclobutene to butadiene is first-order and the rate constant has been measured as
2.0 10−4s−1at 150 °C in a 0.53-L flask. Determine the partial pressure of cyclobutene and its
concentration after 30.0 minutes if an isomerization reaction is carried out at 150 °C with an initial
pressure of 55 torr.
12.5Collision Theory
50. Chemical reactions occur when reactants collide. What are two factors that may prevent a collision from
producing a chemical reaction?
51. When every collision between reactants leads to a reaction, what determines the rate at which the
reaction occurs?
52. What is the activation energy of a reaction, and how is this energy related to the activated complex of the
reaction?
53. Account for the relationship between the rate of a reaction and its activation energy.
54. Describe how graphical methods can be used to determine the activation energy of a reaction from a
series of data that includes the rate of reaction at varying temperatures.
55. How does an increase in temperature affect rate of reaction? Explain this effect in terms of the collision
theory of the reaction rate.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 665
12 • Exercises 651
56. The rate of a certain reaction doubles for every 10 °C rise in temperature.
(a) How much faster does the reaction proceed at 45 °C than at 25 °C?
(b) How much faster does the reaction proceed at 95 °C than at 25 °C?
57. In an experiment, a sample of NaClO was 90% decomposed in 48 min. Approximately how long would
3
this decomposition have taken if the sample had been heated 20 °C higher? (Hint: Assume the rate
doubles for each 10 °C rise in temperature.)
58. The rate constant at 325 °C for the decomposition reaction is 6.1 10−8s−1, and the
activation energy is 261 kJ per mole of C H . Determine the frequency factor for the reaction.
4 8
59. The rate constant for the decomposition of acetaldehyde, CH CHO, to methane, CH , and carbon
3 4
monoxide, CO, in the gas phase is 1.1 10−2L mol−1s−1at 703 K and 4.95 L mol−1s−1at 865 K. Determine
the activation energy for this decomposition.
60. An elevated level of the enzyme alkaline phosphatase (ALP) in human serum is an indication of possible
liver or bone disorder. The level of serum ALP is so low that it is very difficult to measure directly.
However, ALP catalyzes a number of reactions, and its relative concentration can be determined by
measuring the rate of one of these reactions under controlled conditions. One such reaction is the
conversion of p-nitrophenyl phosphate (PNPP) to p-nitrophenoxide ion (PNP) and phosphate ion. Control
of temperature during the test is very important; the rate of the reaction increases 1.47 times if the
temperature changes from 30 °C to 37 °C. What is the activation energy for the ALP–catalyzed conversion
of PNPP to PNP and phosphate?
61. In terms of collision theory, to which of the following is the rate of a chemical reaction proportional?
(a) the change in free energy per second
(b) the change in temperature per second
(c) the number of collisions per second
(d) the number of product molecules
62. Hydrogen iodide, HI, decomposes in the gas phase to produce hydrogen, H , and iodine, I . The value of the
2 2
rate constant,k, for the reaction was measured at several different temperatures and the data are shown here:
Temperature (K) k(L mol−1s−1)
555 6.23 10−7
575 2.42 10−6
645 1.44 10−4
700 2.01 10−3
What is the value of the activation energy (in kJ/mol) for this reaction?
63. The element Co exists in two oxidation states, Co(II) and Co(III), and the ions form many complexes. The rate at
which one of the complexes of Co(III) was reduced by Fe(II) in water was measured. Determine the activation
energy of the reaction from the following data:
T(K) k(s−1)
293 0.054
298 0.100
PAGE: 666
652 12 • Exercises
64. The hydrolysis of the sugar sucrose to the sugars glucose and fructose,
follows a first-order rate law for the disappearance of sucrose: rate =k[C H O ] (The products of the
12 22 11
reaction, glucose and fructose, have the same molecular formulas but differ in the arrangement of the
atoms in their molecules.)
(a) In neutral solution,k= 2.1 10−11s−1at 27 °C and 8.5 10−11s−1at 37 °C. Determine the activation
energy, the frequency factor, and the rate constant for this equation at 47 °C (assuming the kinetics
remain consistent with the Arrhenius equation at this temperature).
(b) When a solution of sucrose with an initial concentration of 0.150Mreaches equilibrium, the
concentration of sucrose is 1.65 10−7M. How long will it take the solution to reach equilibrium at 27 °C
in the absence of a catalyst? Because the concentration of sucrose at equilibrium is so low, assume that the
reaction is irreversible.
(c) Why does assuming that the reaction is irreversible simplify the calculation in part (b)?
65. Use thePhET Reactions & Rates interactive simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)to simulate
a system. On the “Single collision” tab of the simulation applet, enable the “Energy view” by clicking the
“+” icon. Select the first reaction (A is yellow, B is purple, and C is navy blue). Using
the “straight shot” default option, try launching theAatom with varying amounts of energy. What changes
when the Total Energy line at launch is below the transition state of the Potential Energy line? Why? What
happens when it is above the transition state? Why?
66. Use thePhET Reactions & Rates interactive simulation(http://openstax.org/l/16PHETreaction)to simulate
a system. On the “Single collision” tab of the simulation applet, enable the “Energy view” by clicking the
“+” icon. Select the first reaction (A is yellow, B is purple, and C is navy blue). Using
the “angled shot” option, try launching theAatom with varying angles, but with more Total energy than
the transition state. What happens when theAatom hits theBCmolecule from different directions? Why?
12.6Reaction Mechanisms
67. Why are elementary reactions involving three or more reactants very uncommon?
68. In general, can we predict the effect of doubling the concentration ofAon the rate of the overall reaction
? Can we predict the effect if the reaction is known to be an elementary reaction?
69. Define these terms:
(a) unimolecular reaction
(b) bimolecular reaction
(c) elementary reaction
(d) overall reaction
70. What is the rate law for the elementary termolecular reaction For
71. Given the following reactions and the corresponding rate laws, in which of the reactions might the
elementary reaction and the overall reaction be the same?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 667
12 • Exercises 653
72. Write the rate law for each of the following elementary reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
73. Nitrogen monoxide, NO, reacts with hydrogen, H , according to the following equation:
2
What would the rate law be if the mechanism for this reaction were:
2
74. Experiments were conducted to study the rate of the reaction represented by this equation.
Initial concentrations and rates of reaction are given here.
Initial Concentration Initial Concentration, Initial Rate of Formation
Experiment
[NO] (mol L−1) [H ] (mol L−1min−1) of N (mol L−1min−1)
2 2
1 0.0060 0.0010 1.8 10−4
2 0.0060 0.0020 3.6 10−4
3 0.0010 0.0060 0.30 10−4
4 0.0020 0.0060 1.2 10−4
Consider the following questions:
(a) Determine the order for each of the reactants, NO and H , from the data given and show your reasoning.
2
(b) Write the overall rate law for the reaction.
(c) Calculate the value of the rate constant,k, for the reaction. Include units.
(d) For experiment 2, calculate the concentration of NO remaining when exactly one-half of the original
amount of H had been consumed.
2
(e) The following sequence of elementary steps is a proposed mechanism for the reaction.
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 3:
Based on the data presented, which of these is the rate determining step? Show that the mechanism is
consistent with the observed rate law for the reaction and the overall stoichiometry of the reaction.
75. The reaction of CO with Cl gives phosgene (COCl ), a nerve gas that was used in World War I. Use the
2 2
mechanism shown here to complete the following exercises:
(fast, k represents the forward rate constant,k the reverse rate constant)
1 −1
(slow,k the rate constant)
2
(fast,k the rate constant)
3
(a) Write the overall reaction.
(b) Identify all intermediates.
(c) Write the rate law for each elementary reaction.
(d) Write the overall rate law expression.
12.7Catalysis
76. Account for the increase in reaction rate brought about by a catalyst.
2 This question is taken from the Chemistry Advanced Placement Examination and is used with the permission of the Educational
Testing Service.
PAGE: 668
654 12 • Exercises
77. Compare the functions of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.
78. Consider this scenario and answer the following questions: Chlorine atoms resulting from decomposition
of chlorofluoromethanes, such as CCl F , catalyze the decomposition of ozone in the atmosphere. One
2 2
simplified mechanism for the decomposition is:
(a) Explain why chlorine atoms are catalysts in the gas-phase transformation:
(b) Nitric oxide is also involved in the decomposition of ozone by the mechanism:
Is NO a catalyst for the decomposition? Explain your answer.
79. For each of the following pairs of reaction diagrams, identify which of the pair is catalyzed:
(a)
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 669
12 • Exercises 655
80. For each of the following pairs of reaction diagrams, identify which of the pairs is catalyzed:
(a)
(b)
81. For each of the following reaction diagrams, estimate the activation energy (E) of the reaction:
a
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 670
656 12 • Exercises
82. For each of the following reaction diagrams, estimate the activation energy (E) of the reaction:
a
(a)
(b)
83. Assuming the diagrams inExercise 12.81represent different mechanisms for the same reaction, which of
the reactions has the faster rate?
84. Consider the similarities and differences in the two reaction diagrams shown inExercise 12.82. Do these
diagrams represent two different overall reactions, or do they represent the same overall reaction taking
place by two different mechanisms? Explain your answer.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 671
CHAPTER 13
Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
Figure13.1 Transport of carbon dioxide in the body involves several reversible chemical reactions, including
hydrolysis and acid ionization (among others).
CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1Chemical Equilibria
13.2Equilibrium Constants
13.3Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle
13.4Equilibrium Calculations
INTRODUCTION Imagine a beach populated with sunbathers and swimmers. As those basking in the sun get
too hot, they enter the surf to swim and cool off. As the swimmers tire, they return to the beach to rest. If the
rate at which sunbathers enter the surf were to equal the rate at which swimmers return to the sand, then the
numbers (though not the identities) of sunbathers and swimmers would remain constant. This scenario
illustrates a dynamic phenomenon known asequilibrium, in which opposing processes occur at equal rates.
Chemical and physical processes are subject to this phenomenon; these processes are at equilibrium when the
forward and reverse reaction rates are equal. Equilibrium systems are pervasive in nature; the various
reactions involving carbon dioxide dissolved in blood are examples (seeFigure 13.1). This chapter provides a
thorough introduction to the essential aspects of chemical equilibria.
13.1 Chemical Equilibria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the nature of equilibrium systems
• Explain the dynamic nature of a chemical equilibrium
The convention for writing chemical equations involves placing reactant formulas on the left side of a reaction
PAGE: 672
658 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
arrow and product formulas on the right side. By this convention, and the definitions of “reactant” and
“product,” a chemical equation represents the reaction in question as proceeding from left to right.Reversible
reactions, however, may proceed in both forward (left to right) and reverse (right to left) directions. When the
rates of the forward and reverse reactions are equal, the concentrations of the reactant and product species
remain constant over time and the system is atequilibrium. The relative concentrations of reactants and
products in equilibrium systems vary greatly; some systems contain mostly products at equilibrium, some
contain mostly reactants, and some contain appreciable amounts of both.
Figure 13.2illustrates fundamental equilibrium concepts using the reversible decomposition of colorless
dinitrogen tetroxide to yield brown nitrogen dioxide, an elementary reaction described by the equation:
Note that a special double arrow is used to emphasize the reversible nature of the reaction.
FIGURE13.2 (a) A sealed tube containing colorless N O darkens as it decomposes to yield brown NO . (b)
2 4 2
Changes in concentration over time as the decomposition reaction achieves equilibrium. (c) At equilibrium, the
forward and reverse reaction rates are equal.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 673
13.1 • Chemical Equilibria 659
For this elementary process, rate laws for the forward and reverse reactions may be derived directly from the
reaction stoichiometry:
As the reaction begins (t= 0), the concentration of the N O reactant is finite and that of the NO product is
2 4 2
zero, so the forward reaction proceeds at a finite rate while the reverse reaction rate is zero. As time passes,
N O is consumed and its concentration falls, while NO is produced and its concentration increases (Figure
2 4 2
13.2b). The decreasing concentration of the reactant slows the forward reaction rate, and the increasing
product concentration speeds the reverse reaction rate (Figure 13.2c). This process continues untilthe
forward and reverse reaction rates become equal, at which time the reaction has reached equilibrium, as
characterized by constant concentrations of its reactants and products (shaded areas ofFigure 13.2band
Figure 13.2c). It’s important to emphasize that chemical equilibria are dynamic; a reaction at equilibrium has
not “stopped,” but is proceeding in the forward and reverse directions at the same rate. This dynamic nature is
essential to understanding equilibrium behavior as discussed in this and subsequent chapters of the text.
FIGURE13.3 A two-person juggling act illustrates the dynamic aspect of chemical equilibria. Each person is
throwing and catching clubs at the same rate, and each holds a (approximately) constant number of clubs.
Physical changes, such as phase transitions, are also reversible and may establish equilibria. This concept was
introduced in another chapter of this text through discussion of the vapor pressure of a condensed phase
(liquid or solid). As one example, consider the vaporization of bromine:
When liquid bromine is added to an otherwise empty container and the container is sealed, the forward
process depicted above (vaporization) will commence and continue at a roughly constant rate as long as the
exposed surface area of the liquid and its temperature remain constant. As increasing amounts of gaseous
bromine are produced, the rate of the reverse process (condensation) will increase until it equals the rate of
vaporization and equilibrium is established. A photograph showing this phase transition equilibrium is
provided inFigure 13.4.
PAGE: 674
660 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
FIGURE13.4 A sealed tube containing an equilibrium mixture of liquid and gaseous bromine. (credit:
http://images-of-elements.com/bromine.php)
13.2 Equilibrium Constants
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive reaction quotients from chemical equations representing homogeneous and heterogeneous reactions
• Calculate values of reaction quotients and equilibrium constants, using concentrations and pressures
• Relate the magnitude of an equilibrium constant to properties of the chemical system
The status of a reversible reaction is conveniently assessed by evaluating itsreaction quotient (Q). For a
reversible reaction described by
the reaction quotient is derived directly from the stoichiometry of the balanced equation as
where the subscript c denotes the use of molar concentrations in the expression. If the reactants and products
are gaseous, a reaction quotient may be similarly derived using partial pressures:
Note that the reaction quotient equations above are a simplification of more rigorous expressions that use
relativevalues for concentrations and pressures rather thanabsolutevalues. These relative concentration and
pressure values are dimensionless (they have no units); consequently, so are the reaction quotients. For
purposes of this introductory text, it will suffice to use the simplified equations and to disregard units when
computingQ. In most cases, this will introduce only modest errors in calculations involving reaction quotients.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 675
13.2 • Equilibrium Constants 661
EXAMPLE 13.1
Writing Reaction Quotient Expressions
Write the concentration-based reaction quotient expression for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
Check Your Learning
Write the concentration-based reaction quotient expression for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Answer:
(a) (b) (c)
PAGE: 676
662 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
FIGURE13.5 Changes in concentrations andQ for a chemical equilibrium achieved beginning with (a) a mixture of
c
reactants only and (b) products only.
The numerical value ofQvaries as a reaction proceeds towards equilibrium; therefore, it can serve as a useful
indicator of the reaction’s status. To illustrate this point, consider the oxidation of sulfur dioxide:
Two different experimental scenarios are depicted inFigure 13.5, one in which this reaction is initiated with a
mixture of reactants only, SO and O , and another that begins with only product, SO . For the reaction that
2 2 3
begins with a mixture of reactants only,Qis initially equal to zero:
As the reaction proceeds toward equilibrium in the forward direction, reactant concentrations decrease (as
does the denominator ofQ), product concentration increases (as does the numerator ofQ), and the reaction
c c
quotient consequently increases. When equilibrium is achieved, the concentrations of reactants and product
remain constant, as does the value ofQ.
c
If the reaction begins with only product present, the value ofQ is initially undefined (immeasurably large, or
c
infinite):
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 677
13.2 • Equilibrium Constants 663
In this case, the reaction proceeds toward equilibrium in the reverse direction. The product concentration and
the numerator ofQ decrease with time, the reactant concentrations and the denominator ofQ increase, and
c c
the reaction quotient consequently decreases until it becomes constant at equilibrium.
The constant value ofQexhibited by a system at equilibrium is called theequilibrium constant,K:
Comparison of the data plots inFigure 13.5shows that both experimental scenarios resulted in the same value
for the equilibrium constant. This is a general observation for all equilibrium systems, known as thelaw of
mass action: At a given temperature, the reaction quotient for a system at equilibrium is constant.
EXAMPLE 13.2
Evaluating a Reaction Quotient
Gaseous nitrogen dioxide forms dinitrogen tetroxide according to this equation:
When 0.10 mol NO is added to a 1.0-L flask at 25 °C, the concentration changes so that at equilibrium, [NO ] =
2 2
0.016Mand [N O ] = 0.042M.
2 4
(a) What is the value of the reaction quotient before any reaction occurs?
(b) What is the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction?
Solution
As for all equilibrium calculations in this text, use the simplified equations forQandKand disregard any
concentration or pressure units, as noted previously in this section.
(a) Before any product is formed, and [N O ] = 0M. Thus,
2 4
(b) At equilibrium, The equilibrium constant is 1.6 102.
Check Your Learning
For the reaction the concentrations at equilibrium are [SO ] = 0.90M, [O ] = 0.35
2 2
M, and [SO ] = 1.1M. What is the value of the equilibrium constant,K?
3 c
Answer:
K =4.3
c
By its definition, the magnitude of an equilibrium constant explicitly reflects the composition of a reaction
mixture at equilibrium, and it may be interpreted with regard to the extent of the forward reaction. A reaction
exhibiting a largeKwill reach equilibrium when most of the reactant has been converted to product, whereas a
smallKindicates the reaction achieves equilibrium after very little reactant has been converted. It’s important
to keep in mind that the magnitude ofKdoesnotindicate how rapidly or slowly equilibrium will be reached.
Some equilibria are established so quickly as to be nearly instantaneous, and others so slowly that no
perceptible change is observed over the course of days, years, or longer.
The equilibrium constant for a reaction can be used to predict the behavior of mixtures containing its
reactants and/or products. As demonstrated by the sulfur dioxide oxidation process described above, a
chemical reaction will proceed in whatever direction is necessary to achieve equilibrium. ComparingQtoKfor
PAGE: 678
664 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
an equilibrium system of interest allows prediction of what reaction (forward or reverse), if any, will occur.
To further illustrate this important point, consider the reversible reaction shown below:
The bar charts inFigure 13.6represent changes in reactant and product concentrations for three different
reaction mixtures. The reaction quotients for mixtures 1 and 3 are initially lesser than the reaction’s
equilibrium constant, so each of these mixtures will experience a net forward reaction to achieve equilibrium.
The reaction quotient for mixture 2 is initially greater than the equilibrium constant, so this mixture will
proceed in the reverse direction until equilibrium is established.
FIGURE13.6 Compositions of three mixtures before (Q ≠ K ) and after (Q = K ) equilibrium is established for the
c c c c
reaction
EXAMPLE 13.3
Predicting the Direction of Reaction
Given here are the starting concentrations of reactants and products for three experiments involving this
reaction:
Determine in which direction the reaction proceeds as it goes to equilibrium in each of the three experiments
shown.
Reactants/Products Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3
[CO] 0.020M 0.011M 0.0094M
i
[H O] 0.020M 0.0011M 0.0025M
2 i
[CO ] 0.0040M 0.037M 0.0015M
2i
[H ] 0.0040M 0.046M 0.0076M
2i
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 679
13.2 • Equilibrium Constants 665
Solution
Experiment 1:
Q <K (0.040 < 0.64)
c c
The reaction will proceed in the forward direction.
Experiment 2:
Q >K (140 > 0.64)
c c
The reaction will proceed in the reverse direction.
Experiment 3:
Q <K (0.48 < 0.64)
c c
The reaction will proceed in the forward direction.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each of the following reactions will
proceed to reach equilibrium.
(a) A 1.00-L flask containing 0.0500 mol of NO(g), 0.0155 mol of Cl (g), and 0.500 mol of NOCl:
2
(b) A 5.0-L flask containing 17 g of NH , 14 g of N , and 12 g of H :
3 2 2
(c) A 2.00-L flask containing 230 g of SO (g):
3
Answer:
(a)Q = 6.45 103, forward. (b)Q = 0.23, reverse. (c)Q = 0, forward.
c c c
Homogeneous Equilibria
Ahomogeneous equilibriumis one in which all reactants and products (and any catalysts, if applicable) are
present in the same phase. By this definition, homogeneous equilibria take place insolutions. These solutions
are most commonly either liquid or gaseous phases, as shown by the examples below:
These examples all involve aqueous solutions, those in which water functions as the solvent. In the last two
PAGE: 680
666 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
examples, water also functions as a reactant, but its concentration isnotincluded in the reaction quotient. The
reason for this omission is related to the more rigorous form of theQ(orK) expression mentioned previously
in this chapter, in whichrelative concentrations for liquids and solids are equal to 1 and needn’t be included.
Consequently, reaction quotients include concentration or pressure terms only for gaseous and solute species.
The equilibria below all involve gas-phase solutions:
For gas-phase solutions, the equilibrium constant may be expressed in terms of either the molar
concentrations (K) or partial pressures (K) of the reactants and products. A relation between these twoK
c p
values may be simply derived from the ideal gas equation and the definition of molarity:
wherePis partial pressure,Vis volume,nis molar amount,Ris the gas constant,Tis temperature, andMis
molar concentration.
For the gas-phase reaction
And so, the relationship betweenK andK is
c P
where Δnis the difference in the molar amounts of product and reactant gases, in this case:
EXAMPLE 13.4
Calculation ofK
P
Write the equations relatingK toK for each of the following reactions:
c P
(a)
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 681
13.2 • Equilibrium Constants 667
(c)
(d)K is equal to 0.28 for the following reaction at 900 °C:
c
What isK at this temperature?
P
Solution
(a) Δn= (2) − (1) = 1
K =K (RT)Δn=K (RT)1=K (RT)
P c c c
(b) Δn= (2) − (2) = 0
K =K (RT)Δn=K (RT)0=K
P c c c
(c) Δn= (2) − (1 + 3) = −2
K =K (RT)Δn=K (RT)−2=
P c c
(d)K =K (RT)Δn= (0.28)[(0.0821)(1173)]−2= 3.0 10−5
P c
Check Your Learning
Write the equations relatingK toK for each of the following reactions:
c P
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) At 227 °C, the following reaction hasK = 0.0952:
c
What would be the value ofK at this temperature?
P
Answer:
(a)K =K (RT)−1; (b)K =K (RT); (c)K =K (RT); (d) 160 or 1.6 102
P c P c P c
Heterogeneous Equilibria
Aheterogeneous equilibriuminvolves reactants and products in two or more different phases, as illustrated
by the following examples:
Again, note that concentration terms are only included for gaseous and solute species, as discussed previously.
Two of the above examples include terms for gaseous species only in their equilibrium constants, and soK
p
expressions may also be written:
PAGE: 682
668 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
Coupled Equilibria
The equilibrium systems discussed so far have all been relatively simple, involving just single reversible
reactions. Many systems, however, involve two or morecoupledequilibrium reactions, those which have in
common one or more reactant or product species. Since the law of mass action allows for a straightforward
derivation of equilibrium constant expressions from balanced chemical equations, the K value for a system
involving coupled equilibria can be related to the K values of the individual reactions. Three basic
manipulations are involved in this approach, as described below.
1. Changing the direction of a chemical equation essentially swaps the identities of “reactants” and “products,”
and so the equilibrium constant for the reversed equation is simply the reciprocal of that for the forward
equation.
2. Changing the stoichiometric coefficients in an equation by some factorxresults in an exponential change in
the equilibrium constant by that same factor:
3. Adding two or more equilibrium equations together yields an overall equation whose equilibrium constant is
the mathematical product of the individual reaction’s K values:
The net reaction for these coupled equilibria is obtained by summing the two equilibrium equations and
canceling any redundancies:
Comparing the equilibrium constant for the net reaction to those for the two coupled equilibrium reactions
reveals the following relationship:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 683
13.3 • Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle 669
Example 13.5demonstrates the use of this strategy in describing coupled equilibrium processes.
EXAMPLE 13.5
Equilibrium Constants for Coupled Reactions
A mixture containing nitrogen, hydrogen, and iodine established the following equilibrium at 400 °C:
Use the information below to calculate Kc for this reaction.
Solution
The equilibrium equation of interest and its K value may be derived from the equations for the two coupled
reactions as follows.
Reverse the first coupled reaction equation:
Multiply the second coupled reaction by 3:
Finally, add the two revised equations:
Check Your Learning
Use the provided information to calculate Kc for the following reaction at 550 °C:
Answer:
K = 0.14
c
13.3 Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the ways in which an equilibrium system can be stressed
• Predict the response of a stressed equilibrium using Le Châtelier’s principle
A system at equilibrium is in a state of dynamic balance, with forward and reverse reactions taking place at
equal rates. If an equilibrium system is subjected to a change in conditions that affects these reaction rates
differently (astress), then the rates are no longer equal and the system is not at equilibrium. The system will
subsequently experience a net reaction in the direction of greater rate (ashift) that will re-establish the
equilibrium. This phenomenon is summarized byLe Châtelier’s principle:if an equilibrium system is
stressed, the system will experience a shift in response to the stress that re-establishes equilibrium.
PAGE: 684
670 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
Reaction rates are affected primarily by concentrations, as described by the reaction’s rate law, and
temperature, as described by the Arrhenius equation. Consequently, changes in concentration and
temperature are the two stresses that can shift an equilibrium.
Effect of a Change in Concentration
If an equilibrium system is subjected to a change in the concentration of a reactant or product species, the rate
of either the forward or the reverse reaction will change. As an example, consider the equilibrium reaction
The rate laws for the forward and reverse reactions are
When this system is at equilibrium, the forward and reverse reaction rates are equal.
If the system is stressed by adding reactant, either H or I , the resulting increase in concentration causes the
2 2
rate of the forward reaction to increase, exceeding that of the reverse reaction:
The system will experience a temporary net reaction in the forward direction to re-establish equilibrium (the
equilibrium will shift right). This same shift will result if some product HI is removed from the system, which
decreases the rate of the reverse reaction, again resulting in the same imbalance in rates.
The same logic can be used to explain the left shift that results from either removing reactant or adding
product to an equilibrium system. These stresses both result in an increased rate for the reverse reaction
and a temporary net reaction in the reverse direction to re-establish equilibrium.
As an alternative to this kinetic interpretation, the effect of changes in concentration on equilibria can be
rationalized in terms of reaction quotients. When the system is at equilibrium,
If reactant is added (increasing the denominator of the reaction quotient) or product is removed (decreasing
the numerator), thenQ <K and the equilibrium will shift right. Note that the three different ways of inducing
c c
this stress result in three different changes in the composition of the equilibrium mixture. If H is added, the
2
right shift will consume I and produce HI as equilibrium is re-established, yielding a mixture with a greater
2
concentrations of H and HI and a lesser concentration of I than was present before. If I is added, the new
2 2 2
equilibrium mixture will have greater concentrations of I and HI and a lesser concentration of H . Finally, if HI
2 2
is removed, the concentrations of all three species will be lower when equilibrium is reestablished. Despite
these differences in composition,the value of the equilibrium constant will be the same after the stress as it
was before(per the law of mass action). The same logic may be applied for stresses involving removing
reactants or adding product, in which caseQ >K and the equilibrium will shift left.
c c
For gas-phase equilibria such as this one, some additional perspectives on changing the concentrations of
reactants and products are worthy of mention. The partial pressurePof an ideal gas is proportional to its
molar concentrationM,
and so changes in the partial pressures of any reactant or product are essentially changes in concentrations
and thus yield the same effects on equilibria. Aside from adding or removing reactant or product, the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 685
13.3 • Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle 671
pressures (concentrations) of species in a gas-phase equilibrium can also be changed bychanging the volume
occupied by the system. Since all species of a gas-phase equilibrium occupy the same volume, a given change
in volume will cause the same change in concentration for both reactants and products. In order to discern
what shift, if any, this type of stress will induce the stoichiometry of the reaction must be considered.
At equilibrium, the reaction H (g) + I (g) ⇌ 2HI(g) is described by the reaction quotient
2 2
If the volume occupied by an equilibrium mixture of these species is decreased by a factor of 3, the partial
pressures of all three species will be increased by a factor of 3:
And so, changing the volume of this gas-phase equilibrium mixture does not result in a shift of the
equilibrium.
A similar treatment of a different system, 2NO (g) ⇌ 2 NO(g) + O (g), however, yields a different result:
2 2
In this case, the change in volume results in a reaction quotient greater than the equilibrium constant, and so
the equilibrium will shift left.
These results illustrate the relationship between the stoichiometry of a gas-phase equilibrium and the effect of
a volume-induced pressure (concentration) change. If the total molar amounts of reactants and products are
equal, as in the first example, a change in volume does not shift the equilibrium. If the molar amounts of
reactants and products are different, a change in volume will shift the equilibrium in a direction that better
“accommodates” the volume change. In the second example, two moles of reactant (NO ) yield three moles of
2
product (2NO + O ), and so decreasing the system volume causes the equilibrium to shift left since the reverse
2
reaction produces less gas (2 mol) than the forward reaction (3 mol). Conversely, increasing the volume of this
equilibrium system would result in a shift towards products.
LINK TO LEARNING
Check out thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16equichange)to see a dramatic visual demonstration of how
equilibrium changes with pressure changes.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Equilibrium and Soft Drinks
The connection between chemistry and carbonated soft drinks goes back to 1767, when Joseph Priestley
(1733–1804) developed a method of infusing water with carbon dioxide to make carbonated water.
Priestley’s approach involved production of carbon dioxide by reacting oil of vitriol (sulfuric acid) with
PAGE: 686
672 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
chalk (calcium carbonate).
The carbon dioxide was then dissolved in water, reacting to produce hydrogen carbonate, a weak acid that
subsequently ionized to yield bicarbonate and hydrogen ions:
These same equilibrium reactions are the basis of today’s soft-drink carbonation process. Beverages are
exposed to a high pressure of gaseous carbon dioxide during the process to shift the first equilibrium above
to the right, resulting in desirably high concentrations of dissolved carbon dioxide and, per similar shifts in
the other two equilibria, its hydrolysis and ionization products. A bottle or can is then nearly filled with the
carbonated beverage, leaving a relatively small volume of air in the container above the beverage surface
(theheadspace) before it is sealed. The pressure of carbon dioxide in the container headspace is very low
immediately after sealing, but it rises as the dissolution equilibrium is re-established by shifting to the left.
Since the volume of the beverage is significantly greater than the volume of the headspace, only a relatively
small amount of dissolved carbon dioxide is lost to the headspace.
When a carbonated beverage container is opened, a hissing sound is heard as pressurized CO escapes
2
from the headspace. This causes the dissolution equilibrium to shift left, resulting in a decrease in the
concentration of dissolved CO and subsequent left-shifts of the hydrolysis and ionization equilibria.
2
Fortunately for the consumer, the dissolution equilibrium is usually re-established slowly, and so the
beverage may be enjoyed while its dissolved carbon dioxide concentration remains palatably high. Once
the equilibria are re-established, the CO (aq) concentration will be significantly lowered, and the beverage
2
acquires a characteristic taste referred to as “flat.”
FIGURE13.7 Opening a soft-drink bottle lowers the CO pressure above the beverage, shifting the dissolution
2
equilibrium and releasing dissolved CO from the beverage. (credit: modification of work by “D Coetzee”/Flickr)
2
Effect of a Change in Temperature
Consistent with the law of mass action, an equilibrium stressed by a change in concentration will shift to re-
establish equilibrium without any change in the value of the equilibrium constant,K. When an equilibrium
shifts in response to a temperature change, however, it is re-established with a different relative composition
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 687
13.3 • Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle 673
that exhibits a different value for the equilibrium constant.
To understand this phenomenon, consider the elementary reaction
Since this is an elementary reaction, the rates laws for the forward and reverse may be derived directly from
the balanced equation’s stoichiometry:
When the system is at equilibrium,
Substituting the rate laws into this equality and rearranging gives
The equilibrium constant is seen to be a mathematical function of the rate constants for the forward and
reverse reactions. Since the rate constants vary with temperature as described by the Arrhenius equation, is
stands to reason that the equilibrium constant will likewise vary with temperature (assuming the rate
constants are affected to different extents by the temperature change). For more complex reactions involving
multistep reaction mechanisms, a similar but more complex mathematical relation exists between the
equilibrium constant and the rate constants of the steps in the mechanism. Regardless of how complex the
reaction may be, the temperature-dependence of its equilibrium constant persists.
Predicting the shift an equilibrium will experience in response to a change in temperature is most
conveniently accomplished by considering the enthalpy change of the reaction. For example, the
decomposition of dinitrogen tetroxide is an endothermic (heat-consuming) process:
For purposes of applying Le Chatelier’s principle, heat (q) may be viewed as a reactant:
Raising the temperature of the system is akin to increasing the amount of a reactant, and so the equilibrium
will shift to the right. Lowering the system temperature will likewise cause the equilibrium to shift left. For
exothermic processes, heat is viewed as a product of the reaction and so the opposite temperature dependence
is observed.
Effect of a Catalyst
The kinetics chapter of this text identifies acatalystas a substance that enables a reaction to proceed via a
different mechanism with an accelerated rate. The catalyzed reaction mechanism involves a lower energy
transition state than the uncatalyzed reaction, resulting in a lower activation energy,E, and a correspondingly
a
greater rate constant.
To discern the effect of catalysis on an equilibrium system, consider the reaction diagram for a simple one-
step (elementary) reaction shown inFigure 13.8. The lowered transition state energy of the catalyzed reaction
results in lowered activation energies for both the forward and the reverse reactions. Consequently, both
forward and reverse reactions are accelerated, and equilibrium is achieved more quicklybut without a change
in the equilibrium constant.
PAGE: 688
674 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
FIGURE13.8 Reaction diagrams for an elementary process in the absence (red) and presence (blue) of a catalyst.
The presence of catalyst lowers the activation energies of both the forward and reverse reactions but does not affect
the value of the equilibrium constant.
An interesting case study highlighting these equilibrium concepts is the industrial production of ammonia,
NH . This substance is among the “top 10” industrial chemicals with regard to production, with roughly two
3
billion pounds produced annually in the US. Ammonia is used as a chemical feedstock to synthesize a wide
range of commercially useful compounds, including fertilizers, plastics, dyes, and explosives.
Most industrial production of ammonia uses theHaber-Bosch processbased on the following equilibrium
reaction:
The traits of this reaction present challenges to its use in an efficient industrial process. The equilibrium
constant is relatively small (K on the order of 10−5at 25 °C), meaning very little ammonia is present in an
p
equilibrium mixture. Also, the rate of this reaction is relatively slow at low temperatures. To raise the yield of
ammonia, the industrial process is designed to operate under conditions favoring product formation:
• High pressures (concentrations) of reactants are used, ~150−250 atm, to shift the equilibrium right,
favoring product formation.
• Ammonia is continually removed (collected) from the equilibrium mixture during the process, lowering its
concentration and also shifting the equilibrium right.
• Although low temperatures favor product formation for this exothermic process, the reaction rate at low
temperatures is inefficiently slow. A catalyst is used to accelerate the reaction to reasonable rates at
relatively moderate temperatures (400−500 °C).
A diagram illustrating a typical industrial setup for production of ammonia via the Haber-Bosch process is
shown inFigure 13.9.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 689
13.4 • Equilibrium Calculations 675
FIGURE13.9 The figure shows a typical industrial setup for the commercial production of ammonia by the Haber-
Bosch process. The process operates under conditions that stress the chemical equilibrium to favor product
formation.
13.4 Equilibrium Calculations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify the changes in concentration or pressure that occur for chemical species in equilibrium systems
• Calculate equilibrium concentrations or pressures and equilibrium constants, using various algebraic
approaches
Having covered the essential concepts of chemical equilibria in the preceding sections of this chapter, this final
section will demonstrate the more practical aspect of using these concepts and appropriate mathematical
strategies to perform various equilibrium calculations. These types of computations are essential to many
areas of science and technology—for example, in the formulation and dosing of pharmaceutical products. After
a drug is ingested or injected, it is typically involved in several chemical equilibria that affect its ultimate
concentration in the body system of interest. Knowledge of the quantitative aspects of these equilibria is
required to compute a dosage amount that will solicit the desired therapeutic effect.
Many of the useful equilibrium calculations that will be demonstrated here require terms representing
changes in reactant and product concentrations. These terms are derived from the stoichiometry of the
reaction, as illustrated by decomposition of ammonia:
As shown earlier in this chapter, this equilibrium may be established within a sealed container that initially
contains either NH only, or a mixture of any two of the three chemical species involved in the equilibrium.
3
Regardless of its initial composition, a reaction mixture will show the same relationships between changes in
the concentrations of the three species involved, as dictated by the reaction stoichiometry (see also the related
content on expressing reaction rates in the chapter on kinetics). For example, if the nitrogen concentration
increases by an amountx:
PAGE: 690
676 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
the corresponding changes in the other species concentrations are
where the negative sign indicates a decrease in concentration.
EXAMPLE 13.6
Determining Relative Changes in Concentration
Derive the missing terms representing concentration changes for each of the following reactions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
Check Your Learning
Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
Answer:
(a) 2x,x, −2x;(b)x, −2x;(c) 4x, 7x, −4x, −6xor −4x, −7x, 4x, 6x
Calculation of an Equilibrium Constant
The equilibrium constant for a reaction is calculated from the equilibrium concentrations (or pressures) of its
reactants and products. If these concentrations are known, the calculation simply involves their substitution
into the K expression, as was illustrated byExample 13.2. A slightly more challenging example is provided
next, in which the reaction stoichiometry is used to derive equilibrium concentrations from the information
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 691
13.4 • Equilibrium Calculations 677
provided. The basic strategy of this computation is helpful for many types of equilibrium computations and
relies on the use of terms for the reactant and product concentrationsinitiallypresent, for how theychangeas
the reaction proceeds, and for what they are when the system reachesequilibrium. The acronym ICE is
commonly used to refer to this mathematical approach, and the concentrations terms are usually gathered in a
tabular format called an ICE table.
EXAMPLE 13.7
Calculation of an Equilibrium Constant
Iodine molecules react reversibly with iodide ions to produce triiodide ions.
If a solution with the concentrations of I and I−both equal to 1.000 10−3Mbefore reaction gives an
2
equilibrium concentration of I of 6.61 10−4M, what is the equilibrium constant for the reaction?
2
Solution
To calculate the equilibrium constants, equilibrium concentrations are needed for all the reactants and
products:
Provided are the initial concentrations of the reactants and the equilibrium concentration of the product. Use
this information to derive terms for the equilibrium concentrations of the reactants, presenting all the
information in an ICE table.
At equilibrium the concentration of I is 6.61 10−4Mso that
2
The ICE table may now be updated with numerical values for all its concentrations:
Finally, substitute the equilibrium concentrations into theKexpression and solve:
PAGE: 692
678 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
Check Your Learning
Ethanol and acetic acid react and form water and ethyl acetate, the solvent responsible for the odor of some
nail polish removers.
When 1 mol each of C H OH and CH CO H are allowed to react in 1 L of the solvent dioxane, equilibrium is
2 5 3 2
established when mol of each of the reactants remains. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
(Note: Water is a solute in this reaction.)
Answer:
K = 4
c
Calculation of a Missing Equilibrium Concentration
When the equilibrium constant and all but one equilibrium concentration are provided, the other equilibrium
concentration(s) may be calculated. A computation of this sort is illustrated in the next example exercise.
EXAMPLE 13.8
Calculation of a Missing Equilibrium Concentration
Nitrogen oxides are air pollutants produced by the reaction of nitrogen and oxygen at high temperatures. At
2000 °C, the value of theK for the reaction, is 4.1 10−4. Calculate the equilibrium
c
concentration of NO(g) in air at 1 atm pressure and 2000 °C. The equilibrium concentrations of N and O at
2 2
this pressure and temperature are 0.036 M and 0.0089 M, respectively.
Solution
Substitute the provided quantities into the equilibrium constant expression and solve for [NO]:
Thus [NO] is 3.6 10−4mol/L at equilibrium under these conditions.
To confirm this result, it may be used along with the provided equilibrium concentrations to calculate a value
forK:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 693
13.4 • Equilibrium Calculations 679
This result is consistent with the provided value forKwithin nominal uncertainty, differing by just 1 in the
least significant digit’s place.
Check Your Learning
The equilibrium constantK for the reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen to produce ammonia at a certain
c
temperature is 6.00 10−2. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of ammonia if the equilibrium
concentrations of nitrogen and hydrogen are 4.26Mand 2.09M, respectively.
Answer:
1.53 mol/L
Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations from Initial Concentrations
Perhaps the most challenging type of equilibrium calculation can be one in which equilibrium concentrations
are derived from initial concentrations and an equilibrium constant. For these calculations, a four-step
approach is typically useful:
1. Identify the direction in which the reaction will proceed to reach equilibrium.
2. Develop an ICE table.
3. Calculate the concentration changes and, subsequently, the equilibrium concentrations.
4. Confirm the calculated equilibrium concentrations.
The last two example exercises of this chapter demonstrate the application of this strategy.
EXAMPLE 13.9
Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations
Under certain conditions, the equilibrium constantK for the decomposition of PCl (g) into PCl (g) and Cl (g) is
c 5 3 2
0.0211. What are the equilibrium concentrations of PCl , PCl , and Cl in a mixture that initially contained only
5 3 2
PCl at a concentration of 1.00M?
5
Solution
Use the stepwise process described earlier.
Step 1.
Determine the direction the reaction proceeds.
The balanced equation for the decomposition of PCl is
5
Because only the reactant is present initiallyQ = 0 and the reaction will proceed to the right.
c
Step 2.
Develop an ICE table.
Step 3.
Solve for the change and the equilibrium concentrations.
Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium constant equation gives
PAGE: 694
680 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
Appendix Bshows an equation of the formax2+bx+c= 0 can be rearranged to solve forx:
In this case,a= 1,b= 0.0211, andc= −0.0211. Substituting the appropriate values fora,b, andcyields:
The two roots of the quadratic are, therefore,
and
For this scenario, only the positive root is physically meaningful (concentrations are either zero or
positive), and sox= 0.135M.
The equilibrium concentrations are
Step 4.
Confirm the calculated equilibrium concentrations.
Substitution into the expression forK (to check the calculation) gives
c
The equilibrium constant calculated from the equilibrium concentrations is equal to the value ofK given
c
in the problem (when rounded to the proper number of significant figures).
Check Your Learning
Acetic acid, CH CO H, reacts with ethanol, C H OH, to form water and ethyl acetate, CH CO C H .
3 2 2 5 3 2 2 5
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 695
13.4 • Equilibrium Calculations 681
The equilibrium constant for this reaction with dioxane as a solvent is 4.0. What are the equilibrium
concentrations for a mixture that is initially 0.15Min CH CO H, 0.15Min C H OH, 0.40Min CH CO C H ,
3 2 2 5 3 2 2 5
and 0.40Min H O?
2
Answer:
[CH CO H] = 0.18M, [C H OH] = 0.18M, [CH CO C H ] = 0.37M, [H O] = 0.37M
3 2 2 5 3 2 2 5 2
Check Your Learning
A 1.00-L flask is filled with 1.00 mole of H and 2.00 moles of I . The value of the equilibrium constant for the
2 2
reaction of hydrogen and iodine reacting to form hydrogen iodide is 50.5 under the given conditions. What are
the equilibrium concentrations of H , I , and HI in moles/L?
2 2
Answer:
[H ] = 0.06M, [I ] = 1.06M, [HI] = 1.88M
2 2
EXAMPLE 13.10
Calculation of Equilibrium Concentrations Using an Algebra-Simplifying Assumption
What are the concentrations at equilibrium of a 0.15Msolution of HCN?
Solution
Using “x” to represent the concentration of each product at equilibrium gives this ICE table.
Substitute the equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression
c
rearrange to the quadratic form and solve forx
Thus [H+] = [CN–] =x= 8.6 10–6Mand [HCN] = 0.15 –x= 0.15M.
Note in this case that the change in concentration is significantly less than the initial concentration (a
consequence of the smallK), and so the initial concentration experiences a negligible change:
This approximation allows for a more expedient mathematical approach to the calculation that avoids the need
to solve for the roots of a quadratic equation:
PAGE: 696
682 13 • Fundamental Equilibrium Concepts
The value ofxcalculated is, indeed, much less than the initial concentration
and so the approximation was justified. If this simplified approach were to yield a value forxthat didnot
justify the approximation, the calculation would need to be repeated without making the approximation.
Check Your Learning
What are the equilibrium concentrations in a 0.25MNH solution?
3
Answer:
[NH ] = 0.25M
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 697
13 • Key Terms 683
Key Terms
equilibrium state of a reversible reaction in which attained equilibrium at a given temperature, the
the forward and reverse processes occur at equal reaction quotient remains constant
rates Le Châtelier’s principle an equilibrium subjected
equilibrium constant (K) value of the reaction to stress will shift in a way to counter the stress
quotient for a system at equilibrium; may be and re-establish equilibrium
expressed using concentrations (K) or partial reaction quotient (Q) mathematical function
c
pressures (K) describing the relative amounts of reactants and
p
heterogeneous equilibria equilibria in which products in a reaction mixture; may be expressed
reactants and products occupy two or more in terms of concentrations (Q) or pressures (Q)
c p
different phases reversible reaction chemical reaction that can
homogeneous equilibria equilibria in which all proceed in both the forward and reverse
reactants and products occupy the same phase directions under given conditions
law of mass action when a reversible reaction has
Key Equations
P=MRT
K =Q at equilibrium
c c
K =Q at equilibrium
p p
K =K (RT)Δn
P c
Summary
13.1Chemical Equilibria to temperature, concentration, and, in some cases,
volume and pressure. The system’s response to
A reversible reaction is at equilibrium when the
these disturbances is described by Le Châtelier’s
forward and reverse processes occur at equal rates.
principle: An equilibrium system subjected to a
Chemical equilibria are dynamic processes
disturbance will shift in a way that counters the
characterized by constant amounts of reactant and
disturbance and re-establishes equilibrium. A
product species.
catalyst will increase the rate of both the forward
13.2Equilibrium Constants and reverse reactions of a reversible process,
increasing the rate at which equilibrium is reached
The composition of a reaction mixture may be
but not altering the equilibrium mixture’s
represented by a mathematical function known as
composition (Kdoes not change).
the reaction quotient,Q. For a reaction at
equilibrium, the composition is constant, andQis 13.4Equilibrium Calculations
called the equilibrium constant,K.
Calculating values for equilibrium constants and/or
A homogeneous equilibrium is an equilibrium in equilibrium concentrations is of practical benefit to
which all components are in the same phase. A many applications. A mathematical strategy that
heterogeneous equilibrium is an equilibrium in uses initial concentrations, changes in
which components are in two or more phases. concentrations, and equilibrium concentrations
(and goes by the acronym ICE) is useful for several
13.3Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s
types of equilibrium calculations.
Principle
Systems at equilibrium can be disturbed by changes
PAGE: 698
684 13 • Exercises
Exercises
13.1Chemical Equilibria
1. What does it mean to describe a reaction as “reversible”?
2. When writing an equation, how is a reversible reaction distinguished from a nonreversible reaction?
3. If a reaction is reversible, when can it be said to have reached equilibrium?
4. Is a system at equilibrium if the rate constants of the forward and reverse reactions are equal?
5. If the concentrations of products and reactants are equal, is the system at equilibrium?
13.2Equilibrium Constants
6. Explain why there may be an infinite number of values for the reaction quotient of a reaction at a given
temperature but there can be only one value for the equilibrium constant at that temperature.
7. Explain why an equilibrium between Br (l) and Br (g) would not be established if the container were not a
2 2
closed vessel shown inFigure 13.4.
8. If you observe the following reaction at equilibrium, is it possible to tell whether the reaction started with
pure NO or with pure N O ?
2 2 4
9. Among the solubility rules previously discussed is the statement: All chlorides are soluble except Hg Cl ,
2 2
AgCl, PbCl , and CuCl.
2
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation
IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1? Explain your answer.
c
(b) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation
IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1? Explain your answer.
c
10. Among the solubility rules previously discussed is the statement: Carbonates, phosphates, borates, and
arsenates—except those of the ammonium ion and the alkali metals—are insoluble.
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation
IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1? Explain your answer.
c
(b) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reaction represented by the equation
IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1? Explain your answer.
c
11. Benzene is one of the compounds used as octane enhancers in unleaded gasoline. It is manufactured by
the catalytic conversion of acetylene to benzene: Which value ofK would make
c
this reaction most useful commercially?K ≈ 0.01,K ≈ 1, orK ≈ 10. Explain your answer.
c c c
12. Show that the complete chemical equation, the total ionic equation, and the net ionic equation for the
reaction represented by the equation give the same expression for the
reaction quotient. KI is composed of the ions K+and
3
13. For a titration to be effective, the reaction must be rapid and the yield of the reaction must essentially be
100%. IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1 for a titration reaction?
c
14. For a precipitation reaction to be useful in a gravimetric analysis, the product of the reaction must be
insoluble. IsK > 1, < 1, or ≈ 1 for a useful precipitation reaction?
c
15. Write the mathematical expression for the reaction quotient,Q, for each of the following reactions:
c
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 699
13 • Exercises 685
16. Write the mathematical expression for the reaction quotient,Q, for each of the following reactions:
c
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
17. The initial concentrations or pressures of reactants and products are given for each of the following
systems. Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each system will proceed to
reach equilibrium.
(a) [NH ] = 0.20M, [N ] = 1.00M, [H ] = 1.00M
3 2 2
(b) NH = 3.0 atm, N = 2.0 atm, H = 1.0 atm
3 2 2
(c) [SO ] = 0.00M, [SO ] = 1.00M, [O ] = 1.00M
3 2 2
(d) SO = 1.00 atm, SO = 1.00 atm, O = 1.00 atm
3 2 2
(e) [NO] = 1.00M, [Cl ] = 1.00M, [NOCl] = 0M
2
(f) NO = 10.0 atm, N = O = 5 atm
2 2
18. The initial concentrations or pressures of reactants and products are given for each of the following
systems. Calculate the reaction quotient and determine the direction in which each system will proceed to
reach equilibrium.
(a) [NH ] = 0.50M, [N ] = 0.15M, [H ] = 0.12M
3 2 2
(b) NH = 2.00 atm, N = 10.00 atm, H = 10.00
3 2 2
atm
(c) [SO ] = 2.00M, [SO ] = 2.00M, [O ] = 2.00M
3 2 2
(d) SO = 1.00 atm, O = 1.130 atm, SO = 0 atm
2 2 3
(e) NO = 1.00 atm, Cl = 1.00 atm, NOCl = 0
2
atm
(f) [N ] = 0.100M, [O ] = 0.200M, [NO] = 1.00M
2 2
19. The following reaction hasK = 4.50 10−5at 720 K.
P
If a reaction vessel is filled with each gas to the partial pressures listed, in which direction will it shift to
reach equilibrium?P(NH ) = 93 atm,P(N ) = 48 atm, andP(H ) = 52 atm
3 2 2
20. Determine if the following system is at equilibrium. If not, in which direction will the system need to shift
to reach equilibrium?
[SO Cl ] = 0.12M, [Cl ] = 0.16Mand [SO ] = 0.050M.K for the reaction is 0.078.
2 2 2 2 c
21. Which of the systems described inExercise 13.15are homogeneous equilibria? Which are heterogeneous
equilibria?
22. Which of the systems described inExercise 13.16are homogeneous equilibria? Which are heterogeneous
equilibria?
23. For which of the reactions inExercise 13.15doesK (calculated using concentrations) equalK (calculated
c P
using pressures)?
24. For which of the reactions inExercise 13.16doesK (calculated using concentrations) equalK (calculated
c P
using pressures)?
25. Convert the values ofK to values ofK or the values ofK to values ofK.
c P P c
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
PAGE: 700
686 13 • Exercises
26. Convert the values ofK to values ofK or the values ofK to values ofK.
c P P c
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
27. What is the value of the equilibrium constant expression for the change at 30 °C? (See
Appendix E.)
28. Write the expression of the reaction quotient for the ionization of HOCN in water.
29. Write the reaction quotient expression for the ionization of NH in water.
3
30. What is the approximate value of the equilibrium constantK for the change
P
at 25 °C. (The equilibrium vapor pressure for this substance is 570
torr at 25 °C.)
13.3Shifting Equilibria: Le Châtelier’s Principle
31. The following equation represents a reversible decomposition:
Under what conditions will decomposition in a closed container proceed to completion so that no CaCO
3
remains?
32. Explain how to recognize the conditions under which changes in volume will affect gas-phase systems at
equilibrium.
33. What property of a reaction can we use to predict the effect of a change in temperature on the value of an
equilibrium constant?
34. The following reaction occurs when a burner on a gas stove is lit:
Is an equilibrium among CH , O , CO , and H O established under these conditions? Explain your answer.
4 2 2 2
35. A necessary step in the manufacture of sulfuric acid is the formation of sulfur trioxide, SO , from sulfur
3
dioxide, SO , and oxygen, O , shown here. At high temperatures, the rate of formation of SO is higher, but
2 2 3
the equilibrium amount (concentration or partial pressure) of SO is lower than it would be at lower
3
temperatures.
(a) Does the equilibrium constant for the reaction increase, decrease, or remain about the same as the
temperature increases?
(b) Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic?
36. Suggest four ways in which the concentration of hydrazine, N H , could be increased in an equilibrium
2 4
described by the following equation:
37. Suggest four ways in which the concentration of PH could be increased in an equilibrium described by
3
the following equation:
38. How will an increase in temperature affect each of the following equilibria? How will a decrease in the
volume of the reaction vessel affect each?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
39. How will an increase in temperature affect each of the following equilibria? How will a decrease in the
volume of the reaction vessel affect each?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 701
13 • Exercises 687
40. Methanol can be prepared from carbon monoxide and hydrogen at high temperature and pressure in the
presence of a suitable catalyst.
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant (K) for the reversible reaction
c
(b) What will happen to the concentrations of H , CO, and CH OH at equilibrium if more H is added?
2 3 2
(c) What will happen to the concentrations of H , CO, and CH OH at equilibrium if CO is removed?
2 3
(d) What will happen to the concentrations of H , CO, and CH OH at equilibrium if CH OH is added?
2 3 3
(e) What will happen to the concentrations of H , CO, and CH OH at equilibrium if the temperature of the
2 3
system is increased?
(f) What will happen to the concentrations of H , CO, and CH OH at equilibrium if more catalyst is added?
2 3
41. Nitrogen and oxygen react at high temperatures.
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant (K) for the reversible reaction
c
(b) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if more O is added?
2 2 2
(c) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if N is removed?
2 2 2
(d) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if NO is added?
2 2
(e) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if the volume of the reaction
2 2
vessel is decreased?
(f) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if the temperature of the
2 2
system is increased?
(g) What will happen to the concentrations of N , O , and NO at equilibrium if a catalyst is added?
2 2
42. Water gas, a mixture of H and CO, is an important industrial fuel produced by the reaction of steam with
2
red hot coke, essentially pure carbon.
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant for the reversible reaction
(b) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if more C is added?
(c) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if H O is removed?
2
(d) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if CO is added?
(e) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the temperature
of the system is increased?
43. Pure iron metal can be produced by the reduction of iron(III) oxide with hydrogen gas.
(a) Write the expression for the equilibrium constant (K) for the reversible reaction
c
(b) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if more Fe is added?
(c) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if H O is removed?
2
(d) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if H is added?
2
(e) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the volume of the
reaction vessel is decreased?
(f) What will happen to the concentration of each reactant and product at equilibrium if the temperature
of the system is increased?
44. Ammonia is a weak base that reacts with water according to this equation:
Will any of the following increase the percent of ammonia that is converted to the ammonium ion in
water?
(a) Addition of NaOH
(b) Addition of HCl
(c) Addition of NH Cl
4
45. Acetic acid is a weak acid that reacts with water according to this equation:
Will any of the following increase the percent of acetic acid that reacts and produces ion?
(a) Addition of HCl
(b) Addition of NaOH
(c) Addition of NaCH CO
3 2
PAGE: 702
688 13 • Exercises
46. Suggest two ways in which the equilibrium concentration of Ag+can be reduced in a solution of Na+, Cl−,
Ag+, and in contact with solid AgCl.
47. How can the pressure of water vapor be increased in the following equilibrium?
48. A solution is saturated with silver sulfate and contains excess solid silver sulfate:
A small amount of solid silver sulfate containing a radioactive isotope of silver is added to this solution.
Within a few minutes, a portion of the solution phase is sampled and tests positive for radioactive Ag+
ions. Explain this observation.
49. When equal molar amounts of HCl and HOCl are dissolved separately in equal amounts of water, the
solution of HCl freezes at a lower temperature. Which compound has the larger equilibrium constant for
acid ionization?
(a) HCl
(b) H++ Cl–
(c) HOCl
(d) H++ OCl–
13.4Equilibrium Calculations
50. A reaction is represented by this equation:
(a) Write the mathematical expression for the equilibrium constant.
(b) Using concentrations ≤1M, identify two sets of concentrations that describe a mixture of A, B, and C at
equilibrium.
51. A reaction is represented by this equation:
(a) Write the mathematical expression for the equilibrium constant.
(b) Using concentrations of ≤1M, identify two sets of concentrations that describe a mixture of W, X, and Y
at equilibrium.
52. What is the value of the equilibrium constant at 500 °C for the formation of NH according to the following
3
equation?
An equilibrium mixture of NH (g), H (g), and N (g) at 500 °C was found to contain 1.35MH , 1.15MN ,
3 2 2 2 2
and 4.12 10−1MNH .
3
53. Hydrogen is prepared commercially by the reaction of methane and water vapor at elevated temperatures.
What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction if a mixture at equilibrium contains gases with the
following concentrations: CH , 0.126M; H O, 0.242M; CO, 0.126M; H 1.15M, at a temperature of 760 °C?
4 2 2
54. A 0.72-mol sample of PCl is put into a 1.00-L vessel and heated. At equilibrium, the vessel contains 0.40
5
mol of PCl (g) and 0.40 mol of Cl (g). Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for the decomposition
3 2
of PCl to PCl and Cl at this temperature.
5 3 2
55. At 1 atm and 25 °C, NO with an initial concentration of 1.00Mis 0.0033% decomposed into NO and O .
2 2
Calculate the value of the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
56. Calculate the value of the equilibrium constantK for the reaction from
P
these equilibrium pressures: NO, 0.050 atm; Cl , 0.30 atm; NOCl, 1.2 atm.
2
57. When heated, iodine vapor dissociates according to this equation:
At 1274 K, a sample exhibits a partial pressure of I of 0.1122 atm and a partial pressure due to I atoms of
2
0.1378 atm. Determine the value of the equilibrium constant,K, for the decomposition at 1274 K.
P
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 703
13 • Exercises 689
58. A sample of ammonium chloride was heated in a closed container.
At equilibrium, the pressure of NH (g) was found to be 1.75 atm. What is the value of the equilibrium
3
constantK for the decomposition at this temperature?
P
59. At a temperature of 60 °C, the vapor pressure of water is 0.196 atm. What is the value of the equilibrium
constantK for the vaporization equilibrium at 60 °C?
P
60. Complete the following partial ICE tables.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
61. Complete the following partial ICE tables.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
62. Why are there no changes specified for Ni inExercise 13.60, part (f)? What property of Ni does change?
63. Why are there no changes specified for NH HS inExercise 13.61, part (e)? What property of NH HS does
4 4
change?
PAGE: 704
690 13 • Exercises
64. Analysis of the gases in a sealed reaction vessel containing NH , N , and H at equilibrium at 400 °C
3 2 2
established the concentration of N to be 1.2Mand the concentration of H to be 0.24M.
2 2
Calculate the equilibrium molar concentration of NH .
3
65. Calculate the number of moles of HI that are at equilibrium with 1.25 mol of H and 1.25 mol of I in a
2 2
5.00−L flask at 448 °C.
66. What is the pressure of BrCl in an equilibrium mixture of Cl , Br , and BrCl if the pressure of Cl in the
2 2 2
mixture is 0.115 atm and the pressure of Br in the mixture is 0.450 atm?
2
67. What is the pressure of CO in a mixture at equilibrium that contains 0.50 atm H , 2.0 atm of H O, and 1.0
2 2 2
atm of CO at 990 °C?
68. Cobalt metal can be prepared by reducing cobalt(II) oxide with carbon monoxide.
What concentration of CO remains in an equilibrium mixture with [CO ] = 0.100M?
2
69. Carbon reacts with water vapor at elevated temperatures.
Assuming a reaction mixture initially contains only reactants, what is the concentration of CO in an
equilibrium mixture with [H O] = 0.500Mat 1000 °C?
2
70. Sodium sulfate 10−hydrate, Na SO ·10H O, dehydrates according to the equation
2 4 2
What is the pressure of water vapor at equilibrium with a mixture of Na SO ·10H O and NaSO ?
2 4 2 4
71. Calcium chloride 6−hydrate, CaCl ·6H O, dehydrates according to the equation
2 2
What is the pressure of water vapor at equilibrium with a mixture of CaCl ·6H O and CaCl at 25 °C?
2 2 2
72. A student solved the following problem and found the equilibrium concentrations to be [SO ] = 0.590M,
2
[O ] = 0.0450M, and [SO ] = 0.260M. How could this student check the work without reworking the
2 3
problem? The problem was: For the following reaction at 600 °C:
73. A student solved the following problem and found [N O ] = 0.16Mat equilibrium. How could this student
2 4
recognize that the answer was wrong without reworking the problem? The problem was: What is the
equilibrium concentration of N O in a mixture formed from a sample of NO with a concentration of 0.10
2 4 2
M?
74. Assume that the change in concentration of N O is small enough to be neglected in the following
2 4
problem.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of both species in 1.00 L of a solution prepared from 0.129 mol
of N O with chloroform as the solvent.
2 4
in chloroform
(b) Confirm that the change is small enough to be neglected.
75. Assume that the change in concentration of COCl is small enough to be neglected in the following
2
problem.
(a) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of all species in an equilibrium mixture that results from the
decomposition of COCl with an initial concentration of 0.3166M.
2
(b) Confirm that the change is small enough to be neglected.
76. Assume that the change in pressure of H S is small enough to be neglected in the following problem.
2
(a) Calculate the equilibrium pressures of all species in an equilibrium mixture that results from the
decomposition of H S with an initial pressure of 0.824 atm.
2
(b) Confirm that the change is small enough to be neglected.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 705
13 • Exercises 691
77. What are all concentrations after a mixture that contains [H O] = 1.00Mand [Cl O] = 1.00Mcomes to
2 2
equilibrium at 25 °C?
78. What are the concentrations of PCl , PCl , and Cl in an equilibrium mixture produced by the
5 3 2
decomposition of a sample of pure PCl with [PCl ] = 2.00M?
5 5
79. Calculate the number of grams of HI that are at equilibrium with 1.25 mol of H and 63.5 g of iodine at 448
2
°C.
80. Butane exists as two isomers,n−butane and isobutane.
K = 2.5 at 25 °C
P
What is the pressure of isobutane in a container of the two isomers at equilibrium with a total pressure of
1.22 atm?
81. What is the minimum mass of CaCO required to establish equilibrium at a certain temperature in a
3
6.50-L container if the equilibrium constant (K) is 0.50 for the decomposition reaction of CaCO at that
c 3
temperature?
82. The equilibrium constant (K) for this reaction is 1.60 at 990 °C:
c
Calculate the number of moles of each component in the final equilibrium mixture obtained from adding
1.00 mol of H , 2.00 mol of CO , 0.750 mol of H O, and 1.00 mol of CO to a 5.00-L container at 990 °C.
2 2 2
83. In a 3.0-L vessel, the following equilibrium partial pressures are measured: N , 190 torr; H , 317 torr;
2 2
NH , 1.00 103torr.
3
(a) How will the partial pressures of H , N , and NH change if H is removed from the system? Will they
2 2 3 2
increase, decrease, or remain the same?
(b) Hydrogen is removed from the vessel until the partial pressure of nitrogen, at equilibrium, is 250 torr.
Calculate the partial pressures of the other substances under the new conditions.
84. The equilibrium constant (K) for this reaction is 5.0 at a given temperature.
c
(a) On analysis, an equilibrium mixture of the substances present at the given temperature was found to
contain 0.20 mol of CO, 0.30 mol of water vapor, and 0.90 mol of H in a liter. How many moles of CO were
2 2
there in the equilibrium mixture?
(b) Maintaining the same temperature, additional H was added to the system, and some water vapor was
2
removed by drying. A new equilibrium mixture was thereby established containing 0.40 mol of CO, 0.30
mol of water vapor, and 1.2 mol of H in a liter. How many moles of CO were in the new equilibrium
2 2
mixture? Compare this with the quantity in part (a), and discuss whether the second value is reasonable.
Explain how it is possible for the water vapor concentration to be the same in the two equilibrium
solutions even though some vapor was removed before the second equilibrium was established.
85. Antimony pentachloride decomposes according to this equation:
An equilibrium mixture in a 5.00-L flask at 448 °C contains 3.85 g of SbCl , 9.14 g of SbCl , and 2.84 g of
5 3
Cl . How many grams of each will be found if the mixture is transferred into a 2.00-L flask at the same
2
temperature?
PAGE: 706
692 13 • Exercises
86. Consider the equilibrium
(a) What is the expression for the equilibrium constant (K) of the reaction?
c
(b) How must the concentration of NH change to reach equilibrium if the reaction quotient is less than
3
the equilibrium constant?
(c) If the reaction were at equilibrium, how would an increase in the volume of the reaction vessel affect
the pressure of NO ?
2
(d) If the change in the pressure of NO is 28 torr as a mixture of the four gases reaches equilibrium, how
2
much will the pressure of O change?
2
87. The binding of oxygen by hemoglobin (Hb), giving oxyhemoglobin (HbO ), is partially regulated by the
2
concentration of H O+and dissolved CO in the blood. Although the equilibrium is complicated, it can be
3 2
summarized as
(a) Write the equilibrium constant expression for this reaction.
(b) Explain why the production of lactic acid and CO in a muscle during exertion stimulates release of O
2 2
from the oxyhemoglobin in the blood passing through the muscle.
88. Liquid N O is dark blue at low temperatures, but the color fades and becomes greenish at higher
2 3
temperatures as the compound decomposes to NO and NO . At 25 °C, a value ofK = 1.91 has been
2 P
established for this decomposition. If 0.236 moles of N O are placed in a 1.52-L vessel at 25 °C, calculate
2 3
the equilibrium partial pressures of N O (g), NO (g), and NO(g).
2 3 2
89. A 1.00-L vessel at 400 °C contains the following equilibrium concentrations: N , 1.00M; H , 0.50M; and
2 2
NH , 0.25M. How many moles of hydrogen must be removed from the vessel to increase the
3
concentration of nitrogen to 1.1M? The equilibrium reaction is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 707
CHAPTER 14
Acid-Base Equilibria
Figure14.1 Sinkholes such as this are the result of reactions between acidic groundwaters and basic rock
formations, like limestone. (credit: modification of work by Emil Kehnel)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
14.2pH and pOH
14.3Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
14.4Hydrolysis of Salts
14.5Polyprotic Acids
14.6Buffers
14.7Acid-Base Titrations
INTRODUCTION Liquid water is essential to life on our planet, and chemistry involving the characteristic
ions of water, H+and OH–, is widely encountered in nature and society. As introduced in another chapter of this
text, acid-base chemistry involves the transfer of hydrogen ions from donors (acids) to acceptors (bases).
These H+ transfer reactions are reversible, and the equilibria established by acid-base systems are essential
aspects of phenomena ranging from sinkhole formation (Figure 14.1) to oxygen transport in the human body.
This chapter will further explore acid-base chemistry with an emphasis on the equilibrium aspects of this
important reaction class.
14.1 Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify acids, bases, and conjugate acid-base pairs according to the Brønsted-Lowry definition
• Write equations for acid and base ionization reactions
• Use the ion-product constant for water to calculate hydronium and hydroxide ion concentrations
• Describe the acid-base behavior of amphiprotic substances
PAGE: 708
694 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
The acid-base reaction class has been studied for quite some time. In 1680, RobertBoylereported traits of acid
solutions that included their ability to dissolve many substances, to change the colors of certain natural dyes,
and to lose these traits after coming in contact with alkali (base) solutions. In the eighteenth century, it was
recognized that acids have a sour taste, react with limestone to liberate a gaseous substance (now known to be
CO ), and interact with alkalis to form neutral substances. In 1815, HumphryDavycontributed greatly to the
2
development of the modern acid-base concept by demonstrating that hydrogen is the essential constituent of
acids. Around that same time, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac concluded that acids are substances that can
neutralize bases and that these two classes of substances can be defined only in terms of each other. The
significance of hydrogen was reemphasized in 1884 when SvanteArrheniusdefined an acid as a compound
that dissolves in water to yield hydrogen cations (now recognized to be hydronium ions) and a base as a
compound that dissolves in water to yield hydroxide anions.
Johannes Brønsted and Thomas Lowry proposed a more general description in 1923 in which acids and bases
were defined in terms of the transfer of hydrogen ions, H+. (Note that these hydrogen ions are often referred to
simply asprotons, since that subatomic particle is the only component of cations derived from the most
abundant hydrogen isotope,1H.) A compound that donates a proton to another compound is called a
Brønsted-Lowry acid, and a compound that accepts a proton is called aBrønsted-Lowry base. An acid-base
reaction is, thus, the transfer of a proton from a donor (acid) to an acceptor (base).
The concept ofconjugate pairsis useful in describing Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reactions (and other
reversible reactions, as well). When an acid donates H+, the species that remains is called theconjugate base
of the acid because it reacts as a proton acceptor in the reverse reaction. Likewise, when a base accepts H+, it is
converted to itsconjugate acid. The reaction between water and ammonia illustrates this idea. In the forward
direction, water acts as an acid by donating a proton to ammonia and subsequently becoming a hydroxide ion,
OH−, the conjugate base of water. The ammonia acts as a base in accepting this proton, becoming an
ammonium ion, the conjugate acid of ammonia. In the reverse direction, a hydroxide ion acts as a base
in accepting a proton from ammonium ion, which acts as an acid.
The reaction between a Brønsted-Lowry acid and water is calledacid ionization. For example, when hydrogen
fluoride dissolves in water and ionizes, protons are transferred from hydrogen fluoride molecules to water
molecules, yielding hydronium ions and fluoride ions:
Base ionizationof a species occurs when it accepts protons from water molecules. In the example below,
pyridine molecules, C NH , undergo base ionization when dissolved in water, yielding hydroxide and
5 5
pyridinium ions:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 709
14.1 • Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases 695
The preceding ionization reactions suggest that water may function as both a base (as in its reaction with
hydrogen fluoride) and an acid (as in its reaction with ammonia). Species capable of either donating or
accepting protons are calledamphiprotic, or more generally,amphoteric, a term that may be used for acids
and bases per definitions other than the Brønsted-Lowry one. The equations below show the two possible acid-
base reactions for two amphiprotic species, bicarbonate ion and water:
The first equation represents the reaction of bicarbonate as an acid with water as a base, whereas the second
represents reaction of bicarbonate as a base with water as an acid. When bicarbonate is added to water, both
these equilibria are established simultaneously and the composition of the resulting solution may be
determined through appropriate equilibrium calculations, as described later in this chapter.
In the liquid state, molecules of an amphiprotic substance can react with one another as illustrated for water in
the equations below:
The process in which like molecules react to yield ions is calledautoionization. Liquid water undergoes
autoionization to a very slight extent; at 25 °C, approximately two out of every billion water molecules are
ionized. The extent of the water autoionization process is reflected in the value of its equilibrium constant, the
ion-product constant for water,K :
w
The slight ionization of pure water is reflected in the small value of the equilibrium constant; at 25 °C,K has a
w
value of 1.0 10−14. The process is endothermic, and so the extent of ionization and the resulting
concentrations of hydronium ion and hydroxide ion increase with temperature. For example, at 100 °C, the
value forK is about 5.6 10−13, roughly 50 times larger than the value at 25 °C.
w
EXAMPLE 14.1
Ion Concentrations in Pure Water
What are the hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration in pure water at 25 °C?
Solution
The autoionization of water yields the same number of hydronium and hydroxide ions. Therefore, in pure
water, [H O+] = [OH−] =x. At 25 °C:
3
PAGE: 710
696 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
So:
The hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration are the same, 1.0 10−7M.
Check Your Learning
The ion product of water at 80 °C is 2.4 10−13. What are the concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions
in pure water at 80 °C?
Answer:
[H O+] = [OH−] = 4.9 10−7M
3
EXAMPLE 14.2
The Inverse Relation between [H O+] and [OH−]
3
A solution of an acid in water has a hydronium ion concentration of 2.0 10−6M. What is the concentration of
hydroxide ion at 25 °C?
Solution
Use the value of the ion-product constant for water at 25 °C
to calculate the missing equilibrium concentration.
Rearrangement of theK expression shows that [OH−] is inversely proportional to [H O+]:
w 3
Compared with pure water, a solution of acid exhibits a higher concentration of hydronium ions (due to
ionization of the acid) and a proportionally lower concentration of hydroxide ions. This may be explained via
Le Châtelier’s principle as a left shift in the water autoionization equilibrium resulting from the stress of
increased hydronium ion concentration.
Substituting the ion concentrations into theK expression confirms this calculation, resulting in the expected
w
value:
Check Your Learning
What is the hydronium ion concentration in an aqueous solution with a hydroxide ion concentration of 0.001
Mat 25 °C?
Answer:
[H O+] = 1 10−11M
3
EXAMPLE 14.3
Representing the Acid-Base Behavior of an Amphoteric Substance
Write separate equations representing the reaction of
(a) as an acid with OH−
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 711
14.2 • pH and pOH 697
(b) as a base with HI
Solution
(a)
(b)
Check Your Learning
Write separate equations representing the reaction of
(a) as a base with HBr
(b) as an acid with OH−
Answer:
(a) (b)
14.2 pH and pOH
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the characterization of aqueous solutions as acidic, basic, or neutral
• Express hydronium and hydroxide ion concentrations on the pH and pOH scales
• Perform calculations relating pH and pOH
As discussed earlier, hydronium and hydroxide ions are present both in pure water and in all aqueous
solutions, and their concentrations are inversely proportional as determined by the ion product of water (K ).
w
The concentrations of these ions in a solution are often critical determinants of the solution’s properties and
the chemical behaviors of its other solutes, and specific vocabulary has been developed to describe these
concentrations in relative terms. A solution isneutralif it contains equal concentrations of hydronium and
hydroxide ions;acidicif it contains a greater concentration of hydronium ions than hydroxide ions; andbasic
if it contains a lesser concentration of hydronium ions than hydroxide ions.
A common means of expressing quantities that may span many orders of magnitude is to use a logarithmic
scale. One such scale that is very popular for chemical concentrations and equilibrium constants is based on
the p-function, defined as shown where “X” is the quantity of interest and “log” is the base-10 logarithm:
ThepHof a solution is therefore defined as shown here, where [H O+] is the molar concentration of hydronium
3
ion in the solution:
Rearranging this equation to isolate the hydronium ion molarity yields the equivalent expression:
Likewise, the hydroxide ion molarity may be expressed as a p-function, orpOH:
or
Finally, the relation between these two ion concentration expressed as p-functions is easily derived from the
K expression:
w
PAGE: 712
698 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
At 25 °C, the value ofK is 1.0 10−14, and so:
w
As was shown inExample 14.1, the hydronium ion molarity in pure water (or any neutral solution) is 1.0
10−7Mat 25 °C. The pH and pOH of a neutral solution at this temperature are therefore:
And so,at this temperature, acidic solutions are those with hydronium ion molarities greater than 1.0 10−7M
and hydroxide ion molarities less than 1.0 10−7M(corresponding to pH values less than 7.00 and pOH values
greater than 7.00). Basic solutions are those with hydronium ion molarities less than 1.0 10−7Mand
hydroxide ion molarities greater than 1.0 10−7M(corresponding to pH values greater than 7.00 and pOH
values less than 7.00).
Since the autoionization constantK is temperature dependent, these correlations between pH values and the
w
acidic/neutral/basic adjectives will be different at temperatures other than 25 °C. For example, the “Check
Your Learning” exercise accompanyingExample 14.1showed the hydronium molarity of pure water at 80 °C is
4.9 10−7M, which corresponds to pH and pOH values of:
At this temperature, then, neutral solutions exhibit pH = pOH = 6.31, acidic solutions exhibit pH less than 6.31
and pOH greater than 6.31, whereas basic solutions exhibit pH greater than 6.31 and pOH less than 6.31. This
distinction can be important when studying certain processes that occur at other temperatures, such as
enzyme reactions in warm-blooded organisms at a temperature around 36–40 °C. Unless otherwise noted,
references to pH values are presumed to be those at 25 °C (Table 14.1).
Summary of Relations for Acidic, Basic and Neutral Solutions
Classification Relative Ion Concentrations pH at 25 °C
acidic [H O+] > [OH−] pH < 7
3
neutral [H O+] = [OH−] pH = 7
3
basic [H O+] < [OH−] pH > 7
3
TABLE14.1
Figure 14.2shows the relationships between [H O+], [OH−], pH, and pOH for solutions classified as acidic,
3
basic, and neutral.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 713
14.2 • pH and pOH 699
FIGURE14.2 The pH and pOH scales represent concentrations of H O+and OH−, respectively. The pH and pOH
3
values of some common substances at 25 °C are shown in this chart.
EXAMPLE 14.4
Calculation of pH from [H O+]
3
What is the pH of stomach acid, a solution of HCl with a hydronium ion concentration of 1.2 10−3M?
Solution
(The use of logarithms is explained inAppendix B. When taking the log of a value, keep as many decimal places
in the result as there are significant figures in the value.)
Check Your Learning
Water exposed to air contains carbonic acid, H CO , due to the reaction between carbon dioxide and water:
2 3
PAGE: 714
700 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Air-saturated water has a hydronium ion concentration caused by the dissolved CO of 2.0 10−6M, about
2
20-times larger than that of pure water. Calculate the pH of the solution at 25 °C.
Answer:
5.70
EXAMPLE 14.5
Calculation of Hydronium Ion Concentration from pH
Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of blood, the pH of which is 7.3.
Solution
(On a calculator take the antilog, or the “inverse” log, of −7.3, or calculate 10−7.3.)
Check Your Learning
Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of a solution with a pH of −1.07.
Answer:
12M
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Environmental Science
Normal rainwater has a pH between 5 and 6 due to the presence of dissolved CO which forms carbonic acid:
2
Acid rain is rainwater that has a pH of less than 5, due to a variety of nonmetal oxides, including CO , SO , SO ,
2 2 3
NO, and NO being dissolved in the water and reacting with it to form not only carbonic acid, but sulfuric acid
2
and nitric acid. The formation and subsequent ionization of sulfuric acid are shown here:
Carbon dioxide is naturally present in the atmosphere because most organisms produce it as a waste product
of metabolism. Carbon dioxide is also formed when fires release carbon stored in vegetation or fossil fuels.
Sulfur trioxide in the atmosphere is naturally produced by volcanic activity, but it also originates from burning
fossil fuels, which have traces of sulfur, and from the process of “roasting” ores of metal sulfides in metal-
refining processes. Oxides of nitrogen are formed in internal combustion engines where the high
temperatures make it possible for the nitrogen and oxygen in air to chemically combine.
Acid rain is a particular problem in industrial areas where the products of combustion and smelting are
released into the air without being stripped of sulfur and nitrogen oxides. In North America and Europe until
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 715
14.2 • pH and pOH 701
the 1980s, it was responsible for the destruction of forests and freshwater lakes, when the acidity of the rain
actually killed trees, damaged soil, and made lakes uninhabitable for all but the most acid-tolerant species.
Acid rain also corrodes statuary and building facades that are made of marble and limestone (Figure 14.3).
Regulations limiting the amount of sulfur and nitrogen oxides that can be released into the atmosphere by
industry and automobiles have reduced the severity of acid damage to both natural and manmade
environments in North America and Europe. It is now a growing problem in industrial areas of China and
India.
For further information on acid rain, visit thiswebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16EPA)hosted by the US
Environmental Protection Agency.
FIGURE14.3 (a) Acid rain makes trees more susceptible to drought and insect infestation, and depletes nutrients
in the soil. (b) It also is corrodes statues that are carved from marble or limestone. (credit a: modification of work by
Chris M Morris; credit b: modification of work by “Eden, Janine and Jim”/Flickr)
EXAMPLE 14.6
Calculation of pOH
What are the pOH and the pH of a 0.0125-Msolution of potassium hydroxide, KOH?
Solution
Potassium hydroxide is a highly soluble ionic compound and completely dissociates when dissolved in dilute
solution, yielding [OH−] = 0.0125M:
The pH can be found from the pOH:
Check Your Learning
The hydronium ion concentration of vinegar is approximately 4 10−3M. What are the corresponding values
of pOH and pH?
Answer:
pOH = 11.6, pH = 2.4
The acidity of a solution is typically assessed experimentally by measurement of its pH. The pOH of a solution
is not usually measured, as it is easily calculated from an experimentally determined pH value. The pH of a
solution can be directly measured using a pH meter (Figure 14.4).
PAGE: 716
702 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
FIGURE14.4 (a) A research-grade pH meter used in a laboratory can have a resolution of 0.001 pH units, an
accuracy of ± 0.002 pH units, and may cost in excess of $1000. (b) A portable pH meter has lower resolution (0.01
pH units), lower accuracy (± 0.2 pH units), and a far lower price tag. (credit b: modification of work by Jacopo
Werther)
The pH of a solution may also be visually estimated using colored indicators (Figure 14.5). The acid-base
equilibria that enable use of these indicator dyes for pH measurements are described in a later section of this
chapter.
FIGURE14.5 (a) A solution containing a dye mixture, called universal indicator, takes on different colors
depending upon its pH. (b) Convenient test strips, called pH paper, contain embedded indicator dyes that yield pH-
dependent color changes on contact with aqueous solutions.(credit: modification of work by Sahar Atwa)
14.3 Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Assess the relative strengths of acids and bases according to their ionization constants
• Rationalize trends in acid–base strength in relation to molecular structure
• Carry out equilibrium calculations for weak acid–base systems
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 717
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 703
Acid and Base Ionization Constants
The relative strength of an acid or base is the extent to which it ionizes when dissolved in water. If the
ionization reaction is essentially complete, the acid or base is termedstrong; if relatively little ionization
occurs, the acid or base is weak. As will be evident throughout the remainder of this chapter, there are many
more weak acids and bases than strong ones. The most common strong acids and bases are listed inFigure
14.6.
FIGURE14.6 Some of the common strong acids and bases are listed here.
The relative strengths of acids may be quantified by measuring their equilibrium constants in aqueous
solutions. In solutions of the same concentration, stronger acids ionize to a greater extent, and so yield higher
concentrations of hydronium ions than do weaker acids. The equilibrium constant for an acid is called the
acid-ionization constant,K. For the reaction of an acid HA:
a
the acid ionization constant is written
where the concentrations are those at equilibrium. Although water is a reactant in the reaction, it is the solvent
as well, so we do not include [H O] in the equation. The larger theK of an acid, the larger the concentration of
2 a
and A−relative to the concentration of the nonionized acid, HA, in an equilibrium mixture, and the
stronger the acid. An acid is classified as “strong” when it undergoes complete ionization, in which case the
concentration of HA is zero and the acid ionization constant is immeasurably large (K ≈ ∞). Acids that are
a
partially ionized are called “weak,” and their acid ionization constants may be experimentally measured. A
table of ionization constants for weak acids is provided inAppendix H.
To illustrate this idea, three acid ionization equations andK values are shown below. The ionization constants
a
increase from first to last of the listed equations, indicating the relative acid strength increases in the order
CH CO H < HNO <
3 2 2
Another measure of the strength of an acid is its percent ionization. Thepercent ionizationof a weak acid is
defined in terms of the composition of an equilibrium mixture:
where the numerator is equivalent to the concentration of the acid's conjugate base (per stoichiometry, [A−] =
PAGE: 718
704 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
[H O+]). Unlike theK value, the percent ionization of a weak acid varies with the initial concentration of acid,
3 a
typically decreasing as concentration increases. Equilibrium calculations of the sort described later in this
chapter can be used to confirm this behavior.
EXAMPLE 14.7
Calculation of Percent Ionization from pH
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.125-Msolution of nitrous acid (a weak acid), with a pH of 2.09.
Solution
The percent ionization for an acid is:
Converting the provided pH to hydronium ion molarity yields
Substituting this value and the provided initial acid concentration into the percent ionization equation gives
(Recall the provided pH value of 2.09 is logarithmic, and so it contains just two significant digits, limiting the
certainty of the computed percent ionization.)
Check Your Learning
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.10-Msolution of acetic acid with a pH of 2.89.
Answer:
1.3% ionized
LINK TO LEARNING
View thesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16AcidBase)of strong and weak acids and bases at the molecular
level.
Just as for acids, the relative strength of a base is reflected in the magnitude of itsbase-ionization constant
(K)in aqueous solutions. In solutions of the same concentration, stronger bases ionize to a greater extent, and
b
so yield higher hydroxide ion concentrations than do weaker bases. A stronger base has a larger ionization
constant than does a weaker base. For the reaction of a base, B:
the ionization constant is written as
Inspection of the data for three weak bases presented below shows the base strength increases in the order
A table of ionization constants for weak bases appears inAppendix I. As for acids, the relative strength of a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 719
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 705
base is also reflected in its percent ionization, computed as
but will vary depending on the base ionization constant and the initial concentration of the solution.
Relative Strengths of Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Brønsted-Lowry acid-base chemistry is the transfer of protons; thus, logic suggests a relation between the
relative strengths of conjugate acid-base pairs. The strength of an acid or base is quantified in its ionization
constant,K orK, which represents the extent of the acid or base ionization reaction. For the conjugate acid-
a b
base pair HA / A−, ionization equilibrium equations and ionization constant expressions are
Adding these two chemical equations yields the equation for the autoionization for water:
As discussed in another chapter on equilibrium, the equilibrium constant for a summed reaction is equal to
the mathematical product of the equilibrium constants for the added reactions, and so
This equation states the relation between ionization constants for any conjugate acid-base pair, namely, their
mathematical product is equal to the ion product of water,K . By rearranging this equation, a reciprocal
w
relation between the strengths of a conjugate acid-base pair becomes evident:
The inverse proportional relation betweenK andK meansthe stronger the acid or base, the weaker its
a b
conjugate partner.Figure 14.7illustrates this relation for several conjugate acid-base pairs.
FIGURE14.7 Relative strengths of several conjugate acid-base pairs are shown.
PAGE: 720
706 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
FIGURE14.8 This figure shows strengths of conjugate acid-base pairs relative to the strength of water as the
reference substance.
The listing of conjugate acid–base pairs shown inFigure 14.8is arranged to show the relative strength of each
species as compared with water, whose entries are highlighted in each of the table’s columns. In the acid
column, those species listed below water are weaker acids than water. These species do not undergo acid
ionization in water; they are not Bronsted-Lowry acids. All the species listed above water are stronger acids,
transferring protons to water to some extent when dissolved in an aqueous solution to generate hydronium
ions. Species above water but below hydronium ion areweak acids, undergoing partial acid ionization, wheres
those above hydronium ion arestrong acidsthat are completely ionized in aqueous solution.
If all these strong acids are completely ionized in water, why does the column indicate they vary in strength,
with nitric acid being the weakest and perchloric acid the strongest? Notice that the sole acid species present
in an aqueous solution of any strong acid is H O+(aq), meaning that hydronium ion is the strongest acid that
3
may exist in water; any stronger acid will react completely with water to generate hydronium ions. This limit
on the acid strength of solutes in a solution is called aleveling effect. To measure the differences in acid
strength for “strong” acids, the acids must be dissolved in a solvent that isless basicthan water. In such
solvents, the acids will be “weak,” and so any differences in the extent of their ionization can be determined.
For example, the binary hydrogen halides HCl, HBr, and HI are strong acids in water but weak acids in ethanol
(strength increasing HCl < HBr < HI).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 721
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 707
The right column ofFigure 14.8lists a number of substances in order of increasing base strength from top to
bottom. Following the same logic as for the left column, species listed above water are weaker bases and so
they don’t undergo base ionization when dissolved in water. Species listed between water and its conjugate
base, hydroxide ion, are weak bases that partially ionize. Species listed below hydroxide ion are strong bases
that completely ionize in water to yield hydroxide ions (i.e., they areleveledto hydroxide). A comparison of the
acid and base columns in this table supports the reciprocal relation between the strengths of conjugate acid-
base pairs. For example, the conjugate bases of the strong acids (top of table) are all of negligible strength. A
strong acid exhibits an immeasurably largeK, and so its conjugate base will exhibit aK that is essentially
a b
zero:
∞
∞
A similar approach can be used to support the observation that conjugate acids of strong bases (K ≈ ∞) are of
b
negligible strength (K ≈ 0).
a
EXAMPLE 14.8
Calculating Ionization Constants for Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Use theK for the nitrite ion, to calculate theK for its conjugate acid.
b a
Solution
K for is given in this section as 2.17 10−11. The conjugate acid of is HNO ;K for HNO can be
b 2 a 2
calculated using the relationship:
Solving forK yields
a
This answer can be verified by finding theK for HNO inAppendix H.
a 2
Check Your Learning
Determine the relative acid strengths of and HCN by comparing their ionization constants. The
ionization constant of HCN is given inAppendix Has 4.9 10−10. The ionization constant of is not
listed, but the ionization constant of its conjugate base, NH , is listed as 1.8 10−5.
3
Answer:
is the slightly stronger acid (K for = 5.6 10−10).
a
Acid-Base Equilibrium Calculations
The chapter on chemical equilibria introduced several types of equilibrium calculations and the various
mathematical strategies that are helpful in performing them. These strategies are generally useful for
equilibrium systems regardless of chemical reaction class, and so they may be effectively applied to acid-base
equilibrium problems. This section presents several example exercises involving equilibrium calculations for
acid-base systems.
PAGE: 722
708 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
EXAMPLE 14.9
Determination ofK from Equilibrium Concentrations
a
Acetic acid is the principal ingredient in vinegar (Figure 14.9) that provides its sour taste. At equilibrium, a
solution contains [CH CO H] = 0.0787Mand What is the value ofK for
3 2 a
acetic acid?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 723
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 709
FIGURE14.9 Vinegar contains acetic acid, a weak acid. (credit: modification of work by “HomeSpot HQ”/Flickr)
Solution
The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below. Substitution of
the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of theK for acetic acid.
a
Check Your Learning
The ion, weak acid used in some household cleansers:
What is the acid ionization constant for this weak acid if an equilibrium mixture has the following
composition: = 0.027M; and
Answer:
K for = 1.2 10−2
a
EXAMPLE 14.10
Determination ofK from Equilibrium Concentrations
b
Caffeine, C H N O is a weak base. What is the value ofK for caffeine if a solution at equilibrium has
8 10 4 2 b
[C H N O ] = 0.050M, = 5.0 10−3M, and [OH−] = 2.5 10−3M?
8 10 4 2
Solution
The relevant equilibrium equation and its equilibrium constant expression are shown below. Substitution of
the provided equilibrium concentrations permits a straightforward calculation of theK for caffeine.
b
PAGE: 724
710 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Check Your Learning
What is the equilibrium constant for the ionization of the ion, a weak base
if the composition of an equilibrium mixture is as follows: [OH−] = 1.3 10−6M; and
Answer:
K for
b
EXAMPLE 14.11
Determination ofK orK from pH
a b
The pH of a 0.0516-Msolution of nitrous acid, HNO , is 2.34. What is itsK?
2 a
Solution
The nitrous acid concentration provided is aformalconcentration, one that does not account for any chemical
equilibria that may be established in solution. Such concentrations are treated as “initial” values for
equilibrium calculations using the ICE table approach. Notice the initial value of hydronium ion is listed as
approximatelyzero because a small concentration of H O+is present (1 × 10−7M) due to the autoprotolysis of
3
water. In many cases, such as all the ones presented in this chapter, this concentration is much less than that
generated by ionization of the acid (or base) in question and may be neglected.
The pH provided is a logarithmic measure of the hydronium ion concentration resulting from the acid
ionization of the nitrous acid, and so it represents an “equilibrium” value for the ICE table:
The ICE table for this system is then
Finally, calculate the value of the equilibrium constant using the data in the table:
Check Your Learning.
The pH of a solution of household ammonia, a 0.950-Msolution of NH is 11.612. What isK for NH .
3, b 3
Answer:
K = 1.8 10−5
b
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 725
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 711
EXAMPLE 14.12
Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations in a Weak Acid Solution
Formic acid, HCO H, is one irritant that causes the body’s reaction to some ant bites and stings (Figure 14.10).
2
FIGURE14.10 The pain of some ant bites and stings is caused by formic acid. (credit: John Tann)
What is the concentration of hydronium ion and the pH of a 0.534-Msolution of formic acid?
Solution
The ICE table for this system is
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression gives
a
The relatively large initial concentration and small equilibrium constant permits the simplifying assumption
thatxwill be much lesser than 0.534, and so the equation becomes
Solving the equation forxyields
PAGE: 726
712 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
To check the assumption thatxis small compared to 0.534, its relative magnitude can be estimated:
Becausexis less than 5% of the initial concentration, the assumption is valid.
As defined in the ICE table,xis equal to the equilibrium concentration of hydronium ion:
Finally, the pH is calculated to be
Check Your Learning
Only a small fraction of a weak acid ionizes in aqueous solution. What is the percent ionization of a 0.100-M
solution of acetic acid, CH CO H?
3 2
Answer:
percent ionization = 1.3%
EXAMPLE 14.13
Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations in a Weak Base Solution
Find the concentration of hydroxide ion, the pOH, and the pH of a 0.25-Msolution of trimethylamine, a weak
base:
Solution
The ICE table for this system is
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression gives
b
Assumingx<< 0.25 and solving forxyields
This value is less than 5% of the initial concentration (0.25), so the assumption is justified.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 727
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 713
As defined in the ICE table,xis equal to the equilibrium concentration of hydroxide ion:
The pOH is calculated to be
Using the relation introduced in the previous section of this chapter:
permits the computation of pH:
Check Your Learning
Calculate the hydroxide ion concentration and the percent ionization of a 0.0325-Msolution of ammonia, a
weak base with aK of 1.76 10−5.
b
Answer:
7.56 10−4M, 2.33%
In some cases, the strength of the weak acid or base and its formal (initial) concentration result in an
appreciable ionization. Though the ICE strategy remains effective for these systems, the algebra is a bit more
involved because the simplifying assumption thatxis negligible cannot be made. Calculations of this sort are
demonstrated inExample 14.14below.
EXAMPLE 14.14
Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations without Simplifying Assumptions
Sodium bisulfate, NaHSO , is used in some household cleansers as a source of the ion, a weak acid.
4
What is the pH of a 0.50-Msolution of
Solution
The ICE table for this system is
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression gives
a
PAGE: 728
714 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
If the assumption thatx<< 0.5 is made, simplifying and solving the above equation yields
This value ofxis clearly not significantly less than 0.50M; rather, it is approximately 15% of the initial
concentration:
When we check the assumption, we calculate:
Because the simplifying assumption is not valid for this system, the equilibrium constant expression is solved
as follows:
Rearranging this equation yields
Writing the equation in quadratic form gives
Solving for the two roots of this quadratic equation results in a negative value that may be discarded as
physically irrelevant and a positive value equal tox. As defined in the ICE table,xis equal to the hydronium
concentration.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the pH in a 0.010-Msolution of caffeine, a weak base:
Answer:
pH 11.16
Effect of Molecular Structure on Acid-Base Strength
Binary Acids and Bases
In the absence of any leveling effect, the acid strength of binary compounds of hydrogen with nonmetals (A)
increases as the H-A bond strength decreases down a group in the periodic table. For group 17, the order of
increasing acidity is HF < HCl < HBr < HI. Likewise, for group 16, the order of increasing acid strength is H O <
2
H S < H Se < H Te.
2 2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 729
14.3 • Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases 715
Across a row in the periodic table, the acid strength of binary hydrogen compounds increases with increasing
electronegativity of the nonmetal atom because the polarity of the H-A bond increases. Thus, the order of
increasing acidity (for removal of one proton) across the second row is CH < NH < H O < HF; across the third
4 3 2
row, it is SiH < PH < H S < HCl (seeFigure 14.11).
4 3 2
FIGURE14.11 The figure shows trends in the strengths of binary acids and bases.
Ternary Acids and Bases
Ternary compounds composed of hydrogen, oxygen, and some third element (“E”) may be structured as
depicted in the image below. In these compounds, the central E atom is bonded to one or more O atoms, and at
least one of the O atoms is also bonded to an H atom, corresponding to the general molecular formula
O E(OH) . These compounds may be acidic, basic, or amphoteric depending on the properties of the central E
m n
atom. Examples of such compounds include sulfuric acid, O S(OH) , sulfurous acid, OS(OH) , nitric acid,
2 2 2
O NOH, perchloric acid, O ClOH, aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) , calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , and potassium
2 3 3 2
hydroxide, KOH:
If the central atom, E, has a low electronegativity, its attraction for electrons is low. Little tendency exists for the
central atom to form a strong covalent bond with the oxygen atom, and bondabetween the element and
oxygen is more readily broken than bondbbetween oxygen and hydrogen. Hence bondais ionic, hydroxide
ions are released to the solution, and the material behaves as a base—this is the case with Ca(OH) and KOH.
2
Lower electronegativity is characteristic of the more metallic elements; hence, the metallic elements form
ionic hydroxides that are by definition basic compounds.
If, on the other hand, the atom E has a relatively high electronegativity, it strongly attracts the electrons it
shares with the oxygen atom, making bondarelatively strongly covalent. The oxygen-hydrogen bond, bondb,
is thereby weakened because electrons are displaced toward E. Bondbis polar and readily releases hydrogen
ions to the solution, so the material behaves as an acid. High electronegativities are characteristic of the more
nonmetallic elements. Thus, nonmetallic elements form covalent compounds containing acidic −OH groups
that are calledoxyacids.
Increasing the oxidation number of the central atom E also increases the acidity of an oxyacid because this
increases the attraction of E for the electrons it shares with oxygen and thereby weakens the O-H bond.
Sulfuric acid, H SO , or O S(OH) (with a sulfur oxidation number of +6), is more acidic than sulfurous acid,
2 4 2 2
PAGE: 730
716 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
H SO , or OS(OH) (with a sulfur oxidation number of +4). Likewise nitric acid, HNO , or O NOH (N oxidation
2 3 2 3 2
number = +5), is more acidic than nitrous acid, HNO , or ONOH (N oxidation number = +3). In each of these
2
pairs, the oxidation number of the central atom is larger for the stronger acid (Figure 14.12).
FIGURE14.12 As the oxidation number of the central atom E increases, the acidity also increases.
Hydroxy compounds of elements with intermediate electronegativities and relatively high oxidation numbers
(for example, elements near the diagonal line separating the metals from the nonmetals in the periodic table)
are usually amphoteric. This means that the hydroxy compounds act as acids when they react with strong
bases and as bases when they react with strong acids. The amphoterism of aluminum hydroxide, which
commonly exists as the hydrate Al(H O) (OH) , is reflected in its solubility in both strong acids and strong
2 3 3
bases. In strong bases, the relatively insoluble hydrated aluminum hydroxide, Al(H O) (OH) , is converted into
2 3 3
the soluble ion, by reaction with hydroxide ion:
In this reaction, a proton is transferred from one of the aluminum-bound H O molecules to a hydroxide ion in
2
solution. The Al(H O) (OH) compound thus acts as an acid under these conditions. On the other hand, when
2 3 3
dissolved in strong acids, it is converted to the soluble ion by reaction with hydronium ion:
In this case, protons are transferred from hydronium ions in solution to Al(H O) (OH) , and the compound
2 3 3
functions as a base.
14.4 Hydrolysis of Salts
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Predict whether a salt solution will be acidic, basic, or neutral
• Calculate the concentrations of the various species in a salt solution
• Describe the acid ionization of hydrated metal ions
Salts with Acidic Ions
Salts are ionic compounds composed of cations and anions, either of which may be capable of undergoing an
acid or base ionization reaction with water. Aqueous salt solutions, therefore, may be acidic, basic, or neutral,
depending on the relative acid-base strengths of the salt's constituent ions. For example, dissolving
ammonium chloride in water results in its dissociation, as described by the equation
The ammonium ion is the conjugate acid of the base ammonia, NH ; its acid ionization (or acid hydrolysis)
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 731
14.4 • Hydrolysis of Salts 717
reaction is represented by
Since ammonia is a weak base,K is measurable andK > 0 (ammonium ion is a weak acid).
b a
The chloride ion is the conjugate base of hydrochloric acid, and so its base ionization (orbase hydrolysis)
reaction is represented by
Since HCl is a strong acid,K is immeasurably large andK ≈ 0 (chloride ions don’t undergo appreciable
a b
hydrolysis).
Thus, dissolving ammonium chloride in water yields a solution of weak acid cations ( ) and inert anions
(Cl−), resulting in an acidic solution.
EXAMPLE 14.15
Calculating the pH of an Acidic Salt Solution
Aniline is an amine that is used to manufacture dyes. It is isolated as anilinium chloride, a salt
prepared by the reaction of the weak base aniline and hydrochloric acid. What is the pH of a 0.233Msolution
of anilinium chloride
Solution
TheK for anilinium ion is derived from theK for its conjugate base, aniline (seeAppendix H):
a b
Using the provided information, an ICE table for this system is prepared:
Substituting these equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression gives
a
Assumingx<< 0.233, the equation is simplified and solved forx:
The ICE table defines x as the hydronium ion molarity, and so the pH is computed as
Check Your Learning
What is the hydronium ion concentration in a 0.100-Msolution of ammonium nitrate, NH NO , a salt
4 3
PAGE: 732
718 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
composed of the ions and Which is the stronger acid or
Answer:
[H O+] = 7.5 10−6M; is the stronger acid.
3
Salts with Basic Ions
As another example, consider dissolving sodium acetate in water:
The sodium ion does not undergo appreciable acid or base ionization and has no effect on the solution pH.
This may seem obvious from the ion's formula, which indicates no hydrogen or oxygen atoms, but some
dissolved metal ions function as weak acids, as addressed later in this section.
The acetate ion, is the conjugate base of acetic acid, CH CO H, and so its base ionization (orbase
3 2
hydrolysis) reaction is represented by
Because acetic acid is a weak acid, itsK is measurable andK > 0 (acetate ion is a weak base).
a b
Dissolving sodium acetate in water yields a solution of inert cations (Na+) and weak base anions
resulting in a basic solution.
EXAMPLE 14.16
Equilibrium in a Solution of a Salt of a Weak Acid and a Strong Base
Determine the acetic acid concentration in a solution with and [OH−] = 2.5 10−6Mat
equilibrium. The reaction is:
Solution
The provided equilibrium concentrations and a value for the equilibrium constant will permit calculation of
the missing equilibrium concentration. The process in question is the base ionization of acetate ion, for which
Substituting the available values into theK expression gives
b
Solving the above equation for the acetic acid molarity yields [CH CO H] = 1.1 10−5M.
3 2
Check Your Learning
What is the pH of a 0.083-Msolution of NaCN?
Answer:
11.11
Salts with Acidic and Basic Ions
Some salts are composed of both acidic and basic ions, and so the pH of their solutions will depend on the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 733
14.4 • Hydrolysis of Salts 719
relative strengths of these two species. Likewise, some salts contain a single ion that is amphiprotic, and so the
relative strengths of this ion’s acid and base character will determine its effect on solution pH. For both types
of salts, a comparison of theK andK values allows prediction of the solution’s acid-base status, as illustrated
a b
in the following example exercise.
EXAMPLE 14.17
Determining the Acidic or Basic Nature of Salts
Determine whether aqueous solutions of the following salts are acidic, basic, or neutral:
(a) KBr
(b) NaHCO
3
(c) Na HPO
2 4
(d) NH F
4
Solution
Consider each of the ions separately in terms of its effect on the pH of the solution, as shown here:
(a) The K+cation is inert and will not affect pH. The bromide ion is the conjugate base of a strong acid, and so it
is of negligible base strength (no appreciable base ionization). The solution is neutral.
(b) The Na+cation is inert and will not affect the pH of the solution; while the anion is amphiprotic.
TheK of is 4.7 10−11,and itsK is
a b
SinceK >>K, the solution is basic.
b a
(c) The Na+cation is inert and will not affect the pH of the solution, while the anion is amphiprotic.
TheK of is 4.2 10−13,
a
and itsK is BecauseK >>K, the solution is basic.
b b a
(d) The ion is acidic (see above discussion) and the F−ion is basic (conjugate base of the weak acid HF).
Comparing the two ionization constants:K of is 5.6 10−10and theK of F−is 1.6 10−11, so the
a b
solution is acidic, sinceK >K.
a b
Check Your Learning
Determine whether aqueous solutions of the following salts are acidic, basic, or neutral:
(a) K CO
2 3
(b) CaCl
2
(c) KH PO
2 4
(d) (NH ) CO
42 3
Answer:
(a) basic; (b) neutral; (c) acidic; (d) basic
The Ionization of Hydrated Metal Ions
Unlike the group 1 and 2 metal ions of the preceding examples (Na+, Ca2+, etc.), some metal ions function as
acids in aqueous solutions. These ions are not just loosely solvated by water molecules when dissolved, instead
they are covalently bonded to a fixed number of water molecules to yield a complex ion (see chapter on
coordination chemistry). As an example, the dissolution of aluminum nitrate in water is typically represented
as
PAGE: 734
720 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
However, the aluminum(III) ion actually reacts with six water molecules to form a stable complex ion, and so
the more explicit representation of the dissolution process is
As shown inFigure 14.13, the ions involve bonds between a central Al atom and the O atoms of
the six water molecules. Consequently, the bonded water molecules' O–H bonds are more polar than in
nonbonded water molecules, making the bonded molecules more prone to donation of a hydrogen ion:
The conjugate base produced by this process contains five other bonded water molecules capable of acting as
acids, and so the sequential or step-wise transfer of protons is possible as depicted in few equations below:
This is an example of a polyprotic acid, the topic of discussion in a later section of this chapter.
FIGURE14.13 When an aluminum ion reacts with water, the hydrated aluminum ion becomes a weak acid.
Aside from the alkali metals (group 1) and some alkaline earth metals (group 2), most other metal ions will
undergo acid ionization to some extent when dissolved in water. The acid strength of these complex ions
typically increases with increasing charge and decreasing size of the metal ions. The first-step acid ionization
equations for a few other acidic metal ions are shown below:
EXAMPLE 14.18
Hydrolysis of [Al(H O) ]3+
2 6
Calculate the pH of a 0.10-Msolution of aluminum chloride, which dissolves completely to give the hydrated
aluminum ion in solution.
Solution
The equation for the reaction andK are:
a
An ICE table with the provided information is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 735
14.5 • Polyprotic Acids 721
Substituting the expressions for the equilibrium concentrations into the equation for the ionization constant
yields:
Assumingx<< 0.10 and solving the simplified equation gives:
The ICE table definedxas equal to the hydronium ion concentration, and so the pH is calculated to be
Check Your Learning
What is in a 0.15-Msolution of Al(NO ) that contains enough of the strong acid HNO to
33 3
bring [H O+] to 0.10M?
3
Answer:
2.1 10−5M
14.5 Polyprotic Acids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Extend previously introduced equilibrium concepts to acids and bases that may donate or accept more than one
proton
Acids are classified by the number of protons per molecule that they can give up in a reaction. Acids such as
HCl, HNO , and HCN that contain one ionizable hydrogen atom in each molecule are calledmonoprotic acids.
3
Their reactions with water are:
Even though it contains four hydrogen atoms, acetic acid, CH CO H, is also monoprotic because only the
3 2
hydrogen atom from the carboxyl group (COOH) reacts with bases:
PAGE: 736
722 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Similarly, monoprotic bases are bases that will accept a single proton.
Diprotic acidscontain two ionizable hydrogen atoms per molecule; ionization of such acids occurs in two
steps. The first ionization always takes place to a greater extent than the second ionization. For example,
sulfuric acid, a strong acid, ionizes as follows:
Thisstepwise ionizationprocess occurs for all polyprotic acids. Carbonic acid, H CO , is an example of a weak
2 3
diprotic acid. The first ionization of carbonic acid yields hydronium ions and bicarbonate ions in small
amounts.
The bicarbonate ion can also act as an acid. It ionizes and forms hydronium ions and carbonate ions in even
smaller quantities.
is larger than by a factor of 104, so H CO is the dominant producer of hydronium ion in the
2 3
solution. This means that little of the formed by the ionization of H CO ionizes to give hydronium
2 3
ions (and carbonate ions), and the concentrations of H O+and are practically equal in a pure aqueous
3
solution of H CO .
2 3
If the first ionization constant of a weak diprotic acid is larger than the second by a factor of at least 20, it is
appropriate to treat the first ionization separately and calculate concentrations resulting from it before
calculating concentrations of species resulting from subsequent ionization. This approach is demonstrated in
the following example exercise.
EXAMPLE 14.19
Ionization of a Diprotic Acid
“Carbonated water” contains a palatable amount of dissolved carbon dioxide. The solution is acidic because
CO reacts with water to form carbonic acid, H CO . What are and in a saturated
2 2 3
solution of CO with an initial [H CO ] = 0.033M?
2 2 3
Solution
As indicated by the ionization constants, H CO is a much stronger acid than so the stepwise
2 3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 737
14.5 • Polyprotic Acids 723
ionization reactions may be treated separately.
The first ionization reaction is
Using provided information, an ICE table for this first step is prepared:
Substituting the equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium equation gives
Assumingx<< 0.033 and solving the simplified equation yields
The ICE table definedxas equal to the bicarbonate ion molarity and the hydronium ion molarity:
Using the bicarbonate ion concentration computed above, the second ionization is subjected to a similar
equilibrium calculation:
To summarize: at equilibrium [H CO ] = 0.033M; = 1.2 10−4;
2 3
Check Your Learning
The concentration of H S in a saturated aqueous solution at room temperature is approximately 0.1M.
2
Calculate [HS−], and [S2−] in the solution:
Answer:
[H S] = 0.1M; = [HS−] = 0.000094M; [S2−] = 1 10−19M
2
PAGE: 738
724 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Atriprotic acidis an acid that has three ionizable H atoms. Phosphoric acid is one example:
As for the diprotic acid examples, each successive ionization reaction is less extensive than the former,
reflected in decreasing values for the stepwise acid ionization constants. This is a general characteristic of
polyprotic acids and successive ionization constants often differ by a factor of about 105to 106.
This set of three dissociation reactions may appear to make calculations of equilibrium concentrations in a
solution of H PO complicated. However, because the successive ionization constants differ by a factor of 105
3 4
to 106, large differences exist in the small changes in concentration accompanying the ionization reactions.
This allows the use of math-simplifying assumptions and processes, as demonstrated in the examples above.
Polyprotic bases are capable of accepting more than one hydrogen ion. The carbonate ion is an example of a
diprotic base, because it can accept two protons, as shown below. Similar to the case for polyprotic acids, note
the ionization constants decrease with ionization step. Likewise, equilibrium calculations involving polyprotic
bases follow the same approaches as those for polyprotic acids.
14.6 Buffers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the composition and function of acid–base buffers
• Calculate the pH of a buffer before and after the addition of added acid or base
A solution containing appreciable amounts of a weak conjugate acid-base pair is called a buffer solution, or a
buffer. Buffer solutions resist a change in pH when small amounts of a strong acid or a strong base are added
(Figure 14.14). A solution of acetic acid and sodium acetate (CH COOH + CH COONa) is an example of a buffer
3 3
that consists of a weak acid and its salt. An example of a buffer that consists of a weak base and its salt is a
solution of ammonia and ammonium chloride (NH (aq) + NH Cl(aq)).
3 4
FIGURE14.14 (a) The unbuffered solution on the left and the buffered solution on the right have the same pH (pH
8); they are basic, showing the yellow color of the indicator methyl orange at this pH. (b) After the addition of 1 mL of
a 0.01-MHCl solution, the buffered solution has not detectably changed its pH but the unbuffered solution has
become acidic, as indicated by the change in color of the methyl orange, which turns red at a pH of about 4. (credit:
modification of work by Mark Ott)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 739
14.6 • Buffers 725
How Buffers Work
To illustrate the function of a buffer solution, consider a mixture of roughly equal amounts of acetic acid and
sodium acetate. The presence of a weak conjugate acid-base pair in the solution imparts the ability to
neutralize modest amounts of added strong acid or base. For example, strong base added to this solution will
neutralize hydronium ion, causing the acetic acid ionization equilibrium to shift to the right and generate
additional amounts of the weak conjugate base (acetate ion):
Likewise, strong acid added to this buffer solution will shift the above ionization equilibrium left, producing
additional amounts of the weak conjugate acid (acetic acid).Figure 14.15provides a graphical illustration of
the changes in conjugate-partner concentration that occur in this buffer solution when strong acid and base
are added. The buffering action of the solution is essentially a result of the added strong acid and base being
converted to the weak acid and base that make up the buffer's conjugate pair. The weaker acid and base
undergo only slight ionization, as compared with the complete ionization of the strong acid and base, and the
solution pH, therefore, changes much less drastically than it would in an unbuffered solution.
FIGURE14.15 Buffering action in a mixture of acetic acid and acetate salt.
EXAMPLE 14.20
pH Changes in Buffered and Unbuffered Solutions
Acetate buffers are used in biochemical studies of enzymes and other chemical components of cells to prevent
pH changes that might affect the biochemical activity of these compounds.
(a) Calculate the pH of an acetate buffer that is a mixture with 0.10Macetic acid and 0.10Msodium acetate.
(b) Calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10 NaOH is added to 100 mL of this buffer.
(c) For comparison, calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10MNaOH is added to 100 mL of a solution of an
unbuffered solution with a pH of 4.74.
Solution
(a) Following the ICE approach to this equilibrium calculation yields the following:
PAGE: 740
726 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression, assumingx<< 0.10, and solving the
a
simplified equation forxyields
(b) Calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10MNaOH is added to 100 mL of this buffer.
Adding strong base will neutralize some of the acetic acid, yielding the conjugate base acetate ion. Compute
the new concentrations of these two buffer components, then repeat the equilibrium calculation of part (a)
using these new concentrations.
The initial molar amount of acetic acid is
The amount of acetic acid remaining after some is neutralized by the added base is
The newly formed acetate ion, along with the initially present acetate, gives a final acetate concentration of
Compute molar concentrations for the two buffer components:
Using these concentrations, the pH of the solution may be computed as in part (a) above, yielding pH = 4.75
(only slightly different from that prior to adding the strong base).
(c) For comparison, calculate the pH after 1.0 mL of 0.10MNaOH is added to 100 mL of a solution of an
unbuffered solution with a pH of 4.74.
The amount of hydronium ion initially present in the solution is
The amount of hydroxide ion added to the solution is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 741
14.6 • Buffers 727
The added hydroxide will neutralize hydronium ion via the reaction
The 1:1 stoichiometry of this reaction shows that an excess of hydroxide has been added (greater molar
amount than the initially present hydronium ion).
The amount of hydroxide ion remaining is
corresponding to a hydroxide molarity of
The pH of the solution is then calculated to be
In this unbuffered solution, addition of the base results in a significant rise in pH (from 4.74 to 10.99)
compared with the very slight increase observed for the buffer solution in part (b) (from 4.74 to 4.75).
Check Your Learning
Show that adding 1.0 mL of 0.10MHCl changes the pH of 100 mL of a 1.8 10−5MHCl solution from 4.74 to
3.00.
Answer:
Initial pH of 1.8 10−5MHCl; pH = −log[H O+] = −log[1.8 10−5] = 4.74
3
Moles of H O+in 100 mL 1.8 10−5MHCl; 1.8 10−5moles/L 0.100 L = 1.8 10−6
3
Moles of H O+added by addition of 1.0 mL of 0.10MHCl: 0.10 moles/L 0.0010 L = 1.0 10−4moles; final pH
3
after addition of 1.0 mL of 0.10MHCl:
Buffer Capacity
Buffer solutions do not have an unlimited capacity to keep the pH relatively constant (Figure 14.16). Instead,
the ability of a buffer solution to resist changes in pH relies on the presence of appreciable amounts of its
conjugate weak acid-base pair. When enough strong acid or base is added to substantially lower the
concentration of either member of the buffer pair, the buffering action within the solution is compromised.
FIGURE14.16 The indicator color (methyl orange) shows that a small amount of acid added to a buffered solution
of pH 8 (beaker on the left) has little affect on the buffered system (middle beaker). However, a large amount of acid
exhausts the buffering capacity of the solution and the pH changes dramatically (beaker on the right). (credit:
modification of work by Mark Ott)
Thebuffer capacityis the amount of acid or base that can be added to a given volume of a buffer solution
before the pH changes significantly, usually by one unit. Buffer capacity depends on the amounts of the weak
PAGE: 742
728 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
acid and its conjugate base that are in a buffer mixture. For example, 1 L of a solution that is 1.0Min acetic
acid and 1.0Min sodium acetate has a greater buffer capacity than 1 L of a solution that is 0.10Min acetic acid
and 0.10Min sodium acetate even though both solutions have the same pH. The first solution has more buffer
capacity because it contains more acetic acid and acetate ion.
Selection of Suitable Buffer Mixtures
There are two useful rules of thumb for selecting buffer mixtures:
1. A good buffer mixture should have about equal concentrations of both of its components. A buffer solution
has generally lost its usefulness when one component of the buffer pair is less than about 10% of the other.
Figure 14.17shows how pH changes for an acetic acid-acetate ion buffer as base is added. The initial pH is
4.74. A change of 1 pH unit occurs when the acetic acid concentration is reduced to 11% of the acetate ion
concentration.
FIGURE14.17 Change in pH as an increasing amount of a 0.10-MNaOH solution is added to 100 mL of a
buffer solution in which, initially, [CH CO H] = 0.10Mand Note the greatly diminished
3 2
buffering action occurring after the buffer capacity has been reached, resulting in drastic rises in pH on adding
more strong base.
2. Weak acids and their salts are better as buffers for pHs less than 7; weak bases and their salts are better as
buffers for pHs greater than 7.
Blood is an important example of a buffered solution, with the principal acid and ion responsible for the
buffering action being carbonic acid, H CO , and the bicarbonate ion, When a hydronium ion is
2 3
introduced to the blood stream, it is removed primarily by the reaction:
An added hydroxide ion is removed by the reaction:
The added strong acid or base is thus effectively converted to the much weaker acid or base of the buffer pair
(H O+is converted to H CO and OH-is converted to HCO -). The pH of human blood thus remains very near
3 2 3 3
the value determined by the buffer pairs pKa, in this case, 7.35. Normal variations in blood pH are usually less
than 0.1, and pH changes of 0.4 or greater are likely to be fatal.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 743
14.6 • Buffers 729
The Henderson-Hasselbalch Equation
The ionization-constant expression for a solution of a weak acid can be written as:
Rearranging to solve for [H O+] yields:
3
Taking the negative logarithm of both sides of this equation gives
which can be written as
where pK is the negative of the logarithm of the ionization constant of the weak acid (pK = −logK). This
a a a
equation relates the pH, the ionization constant of a weak acid, and the concentrations of the weak conjugate
acid-base pair in a buffered solution. Scientists often use this expression, called theHenderson-Hasselbalch
equation, to calculate the pH of buffer solutions. It is important to note that the “xis small” assumption must
be valid to use this equation.
Portrait of a Chemist
Lawrence Joseph Henderson and Karl Albert Hasselbalch
Lawrence JosephHenderson(1878–1942) was an American physician, biochemist and physiologist, to
name only a few of his many pursuits. He obtained a medical degree from Harvard and then spent 2 years
studying in Strasbourg, then a part of Germany, before returning to take a lecturer position at Harvard. He
eventually became a professor at Harvard and worked there his entire life. He discovered that the acid-base
balance in human blood is regulated by a buffer system formed by the dissolved carbon dioxide in blood.
He wrote an equation in 1908 to describe the carbonic acid-carbonate buffer system in blood. Henderson
was broadly knowledgeable; in addition to his important research on the physiology of blood, he also wrote
on the adaptations of organisms and their fit with their environments, on sociology and on university
education. He also founded the Fatigue Laboratory, at the Harvard Business School, which examined
human physiology with specific focus on work in industry, exercise, and nutrition.
In 1916, Karl AlbertHasselbalch(1874–1962), a Danish physician and chemist, shared authorship in a
paper with Christian Bohr in 1904 that described the Bohr effect, which showed that the ability of
hemoglobin in the blood to bind with oxygen was inversely related to the acidity of the blood and the
concentration of carbon dioxide. The pH scale was introduced in 1909 by another Dane, Sørensen, and in
1912, Hasselbalch published measurements of the pH of blood. In 1916, Hasselbalch expressed
Henderson’s equation in logarithmic terms, consistent with the logarithmic scale of pH, and thus the
Henderson-Hasselbalch equation was born.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Medicine: The Buffer System in Blood
The normal pH of human blood is about 7.4. The carbonate buffer system in the blood uses the following
equilibrium reaction:
PAGE: 744
730 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
The concentration of carbonic acid, H CO is approximately 0.0012M, and the concentration of the hydrogen
2 3
carbonate ion, is around 0.024M. Using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation and the pK of carbonic
a
acid at body temperature, we can calculate the pH of blood:
The fact that the H CO concentration is significantly lower than that of the ion may seem unusual, but
2 3
this imbalance is due to the fact that most of the by-products of our metabolism that enter our bloodstream are
acidic. Therefore, there must be a larger proportion of base than acid, so that the capacity of the buffer will not
be exceeded.
Lactic acid is produced in our muscles when we exercise. As the lactic acid enters the bloodstream, it is
neutralized by the ion, producing H CO . An enzyme then accelerates the breakdown of the excess
2 3
carbonic acid to carbon dioxide and water, which can be eliminated by breathing. In fact, in addition to the
regulating effects of the carbonate buffering system on the pH of blood, the body uses breathing to regulate
blood pH. If the pH of the blood decreases too far, an increase in breathing removes CO from the blood
2
through the lungs driving the equilibrium reaction such that [H O+] is lowered. If the blood is too alkaline, a
3
lower breath rate increases CO concentration in the blood, driving the equilibrium reaction the other way,
2
increasing [H+] and restoring an appropriate pH.
LINK TO LEARNING
Viewinformation(http://openstax.org/l/16BufferSystem)on the buffer system encountered in natural waters.
14.7 Acid-Base Titrations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Interpret titration curves for strong and weak acid-base systems
• Compute sample pH at important stages of a titration
• Explain the function of acid-base indicators
As seen in the chapter on the stoichiometry of chemical reactions, titrations can be used to quantitatively
analyze solutions for their acid or base concentrations. In this section, we will explore the underlying chemical
equilibria that make acid-base titrimetry a useful analytical technique.
Titration Curves
Atitration curveis a plot of some solution property versus the amount of added titrant. For acid-base
titrations, solution pH is a useful property to monitor because it varies predictably with the solution
composition and, therefore, may be used to monitor the titration’s progress and detect its end point. The
following example exercise demonstrates the computation of pH for a titration solution after additions of
several specified titrant volumes. The first example involves a strong acid titration that requires only
stoichiometric calculations to derive the solution pH. The second example addresses a weak acid titration
requiring equilibrium calculations.
EXAMPLE 14.21
Calculating pH for Titration Solutions: Strong Acid/Strong Base
A titration is carried out for 25.00 mL of 0.100MHCl (strong acid) with 0.100Mof a strong base NaOH (the
titration curve is shown inFigure 14.18). Calculate the pH at these volumes of added base solution:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 745
14.7 • Acid-Base Titrations 731
(a) 0.00 mL
(b) 12.50 mL
(c) 25.00 mL
(d) 37.50 mL
Solution
(a) Titrant volume = 0 mL. The solution pH is due to the acid ionization of HCl. Because this is a strong acid, the
ionization is complete and the hydronium ion molarity is 0.100M. The pH of the solution is then
(b) Titrant volume = 12.50 mL. Since the acid sample and the base titrant are both monoprotic and equally
concentrated, this titrant addition involves less than a stoichiometric amount of base, and so it is completely
consumed by reaction with the excess acid in the sample. The concentration of acid remaining is computed by
subtracting the consumed amount from the intial amount and then dividing by the solution volume:
(c) Titrant volume = 25.00 mL. This titrant addition involves a stoichiometric amount of base (theequivalence
point), and so only products of the neutralization reaction are in solution (water and NaCl). Neither the cation
nor the anion of this salt undergo acid-base ionization; the only process generating hydronium ions is the
autoprotolysis of water. The solution is neutral, having a pH = 7.00.
(d) Titrant volume = 37.50 mL. This involves the addition of titrant in excess of the equivalence point. The
solution pH is then calculated using the concentration of hydroxide ion:
pH = 14 − pOH = 14 + log([OH−]) = 14 + log(0.0200) = 12.30
Check Your Learning
Calculate the pH for the strong acid/strong base titration between 50.0 mL of 0.100MHNO (aq) and 0.200M
3
NaOH (titrant) at the listed volumes of added base: 0.00 mL, 15.0 mL, 25.0 mL, and 40.0 mL.
Answer:
0.00: 1.000; 15.0: 1.5111; 25.0: 7; 40.0: 12.523
EXAMPLE 14.22
Titration of a Weak Acid with a Strong Base
Consider the titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100MCH CO H with 0.100MNaOH. The reaction can be represented
3 2
as:
Calculate the pH of the titration solution after the addition of the following volumes of NaOH titrant:
(a) 0.00 mL
(b) 25.00 mL
(c) 12.50 mL
PAGE: 746
732 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
(d) 37.50 mL
Solution
(a) The initial pH is computed for the acetic acid solution in the usual ICE approach:
and
(b) The acid and titrant are both monoprotic and the sample and titrant solutions are equally concentrated;
thus, this volume of titrant represents the equivalence point. Unlike the strong-acid example above, however,
the reaction mixture in this case contains a weak conjugate base (acetate ion). The solution pH is computed
considering the base ionization of acetate, which is present at a concentration of
Base ionization of acetate is represented by the equation
Assumingx<< 0.0500, the pH may be calculated via the usual ICE approach:
Note that the pH at the equivalence point of this titration is significantly greater than 7, as expected when
titrating a weak acid with a strong base.
(c) Titrant volume = 12.50 mL. This volume represents one-half of the stoichiometric amount of titrant, and so
one-half of the acetic acid has been neutralized to yield an equivalent amount of acetate ion. The
concentrations of these conjugate acid-base partners, therefore, are equal. A convenient approach to
computing the pH is use of the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:
(pH = pK at the half-equivalence point in a titration of a weak acid)
a
(d) Titrant volume = 37.50 mL. This volume represents a stoichiometric excess of titrant, and a reaction
solution containing both the titration product, acetate ion, and the excess strong titrant. In such solutions, the
solution pH is determined primarily by the amount of excess strong base:
Check Your Learning
Calculate the pH for the weak acid/strong base titration between 50.0 mL of 0.100MHCOOH(aq) (formic acid)
and 0.200MNaOH (titrant) at the listed volumes of added base: 0.00 mL, 15.0 mL, 25.0 mL, and 30.0 mL.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 747
14.7 • Acid-Base Titrations 733
Answer:
0.00 mL: 2.37; 15.0 mL: 3.92; 25.00 mL: 8.29; 30.0 mL: 12.097
Performing additional calculations similar to those in the preceding example permits a more full assessment
of titration curves. A summary of pH/volume data pairs for the strong and weak acid titrations is provided in
Table 14.2and plotted as titration curves inFigure 14.18. A comparison of these two curves illustrates several
important concepts that are best addressed by identifying the four stages of a titration:
initial state (added titrant volume = 0 mL): pH is determined by the acid being titrated; because the two acid
samples are equally concentrated, the weak acid will exhibit a greater initial pH
pre-equivalence point (0 mL <V< 25 mL): solution pH increases gradually and the acid is consumed by
reaction with added titrant; composition includes unreacted acid and the reaction product, its conjugate base
equivalence point (V= 25 mL): a drastic rise in pH is observed as the solution composition transitions from
acidic to either neutral (for the strong acid sample) or basic (for the weak acid sample), with pH determined by
ionization of the conjugate base of the acid
postequivalence point (V> 25 mL): pH is determined by the amount of excess strong base titrant added; since
both samples are titrated with the same titrant, both titration curves appear similar at this stage.
pH Values in the Titrations of a Strong Acid and of a Weak Acid
Volume of 0.100MNaOH Moles of NaOH pH Values 0.100M pH Values 0.100M
Added (mL) Added HCl1 CH CO H2
3 2
0.0 0.0 1.00 2.87
5.0 0.00050 1.18 4.14
10.0 0.00100 1.37 4.57
15.0 0.00150 1.60 4.92
20.0 0.00200 1.95 5.35
22.0 0.00220 2.20 5.61
24.0 0.00240 2.69 6.13
24.5 0.00245 3.00 6.44
24.9 0.00249 3.70 7.14
25.0 0.00250 7.00 8.72
25.1 0.00251 10.30 10.30
25.5 0.00255 11.00 11.00
26.0 0.00260 11.29 11.29
1 Titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100MHCl (0.00250 mol of HCI) with 0.100MNaOH.
2 Titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100MCH3CO2H (0.00250 mol of CH3CO2H) with 0.100MNaOH.
PAGE: 748
734 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
Volume of 0.100MNaOH Moles of NaOH pH Values 0.100M pH Values 0.100M
Added (mL) Added HCl1 CH CO H2
3 2
28.0 0.00280 11.75 11.75
30.0 0.00300 11.96 11.96
35.0 0.00350 12.22 12.22
40.0 0.00400 12.36 12.36
45.0 0.00450 12.46 12.46
50.0 0.00500 12.52 12.52
TABLE14.2
FIGURE14.18 (a) The titration curve for the titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100MHCl (strong acid) with 0.100MNaOH
(strong base) has an equivalence point of 7.00 pH. (b) The titration curve for the titration of 25.00 mL of 0.100M
acetic acid (weak acid) with 0.100MNaOH (strong base) has an equivalence point of 8.72 pH.
Acid-Base Indicators
Certain organic substances change color in dilute solution when the hydronium ion concentration reaches a
particular value. For example, phenolphthalein is a colorless substance in any aqueous solution with a
hydronium ion concentration greater than 5.0 10−9M(pH < 8.3). In more basic solutions where the
hydronium ion concentration is less than 5.0 10−9M(pH > 8.3), it is red or pink. Substances such as
phenolphthalein, which can be used to determine the pH of a solution, are calledacid-base indicators. Acid-
base indicators are either weak organic acids or weak organic bases.
The equilibrium in a solution of the acid-base indicator methyl orange, a weak acid, can be represented by an
equation in which we use HIn as a simple representation for the complex methyl orange molecule:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 749
14.7 • Acid-Base Titrations 735
The anion of methyl orange, In−, is yellow, and the nonionized form, HIn, is red. When we add acid to a solution
of methyl orange, the increased hydronium ion concentration shifts the equilibrium toward the nonionized red
form, in accordance with Le Châtelier’s principle. If we add base, we shift the equilibrium towards the yellow
form. This behavior is completely analogous to the action of buffers.
The perceived color of an indicator solution is determined by the ratio of the concentrations of the two species
In−and HIn. If most of the indicator (typically about 60−90% or more) is present as In−, the perceived color of
the solution is yellow. If most is present as HIn, then the solution color appears red. The Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation is useful for understanding the relationship between the pH of an indicator solution and
its composition (thus, perceived color):
In solutions where pH > pK, the logarithmic term must be positive, indicating an excess of the conjugate base
a
form of the indicator (yellow solution). When pH < pK, the log term must be negative, indicating an excess of
a
the conjugate acid (red solution). When the solution pH is close to the indicator pKa, appreciable amounts of
both conjugate partners are present, and the solution color is that of an additive combination of each (yellow
and red, yielding orange). Thecolor change interval(orpH interval) for an acid-base indicator is defined as
the range of pH values over which a change in color is observed, and for most indicators this range is
approximately pK ± 1.
a
There are many different acid-base indicators that cover a wide range of pH values and can be used to
determine the approximate pH of an unknown solution by a process of elimination. Universal indicators and
pH paper contain a mixture of indicators and exhibit different colors at different pHs.Figure 14.19presents
several indicators, their colors, and their color-change intervals.
PAGE: 750
736 14 • Acid-Base Equilibria
FIGURE14.19 This chart illustrates the color change intervals for several acid-base indicators.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 751
14.7 • Acid-Base Titrations 737
FIGURE14.20 Titration curves for strong and weak acids illustrating the proper choice of acid-base indicator. Any
of the three indicators will exhibit a reasonably sharp color change at the equivalence point of the strong acid
titration, but only phenolphthalein is suitable for use in the weak acid titration.
The titration curves shown inFigure 14.20illustrate the choice of a suitable indicator for specific titrations. In
the strong acid titration, use of any of the three indicators should yield reasonably sharp color changes and
accurate end point determinations. For this titration, the solution pH reaches the lower limit of the methyl
orange color change interval after addition of ~24 mL of titrant, at which point the initially red solution would
begin to appear orange. When 25 mL of titrant has been added (the equivalence point), the pH is well above the
upper limit and the solution will appear yellow. The titration's end point may then be estimated as the volume
of titrant that yields a distinct orange-to-yellow color change. This color change would be challenging for most
human eyes to precisely discern. More-accurate estimates of the titration end point are possible using either
litmus or phenolphthalein, both of which exhibit color change intervals that are encompassed by the steep rise
in pH that occurs around the 25.00 mL equivalence point.
The weak acid titration curve inFigure 14.20shows that only one of the three indicators is suitable for end
point detection. If methyl orange is used in this titration, the solution will undergo a gradual red-to-orange-to-
yellow color change over a relatively large volume interval (0–6 mL), completing the color change well before
the equivalence point (25 mL) has been reached. Use of litmus would show a color change that begins after
adding 7–8 mL of titrant and ends just before the equivalence point. Phenolphthalein, on the other hand,
exhibits a color change interval that nicely brackets the abrupt change in pH occurring at the titration's
equivalence point. A sharp color change from colorless to pink will be observed within a very small volume
interval around the equivalence point.
PAGE: 752
738 14 • Key Terms
Key Terms
acid ionization reaction involving the transfer of a loses a proton
proton from an acid to water, yielding hydronium diprotic acid acid containing two ionizable
ions and the conjugate base of the acid hydrogen atoms per molecule
acid ionization constant (K) equilibrium constant diprotic base base capable of accepting two
a
for an acid ionization reaction protons
acid-base indicator weak acid or base whose Henderson-Hasselbalch equation logarithmic
conjugate partner imparts a different solution version of the acid ionization constant
color; used in visual assessments of solution pH expression, conveniently formatted for
acidic a solution in which [H O+] > [OH−] calculating the pH of buffer solutions
3
amphiprotic species that may either donate or ion-product constant for water (K ) equilibrium
w
accept a proton in a Bronsted-Lowry acid-base constant for the autoionization of water
reaction leveling effect observation that acid-base strength
amphoteric species that can act as either an acid of solutes in a given solvent is limited to that of
or a base the solvent’s characteristic acid and base species
autoionization reaction between identical species (in water, hydronium and hydroxide ions,
yielding ionic products; for water, this reaction respectively)
involves transfer of protons to yield hydronium monoprotic acid acid containing one ionizable
and hydroxide ions hydrogen atom per molecule
base ionization reaction involving the transfer of a neutral describes a solution in which [H O+] =
3
proton from water to a base, yielding hydroxide [OH−]
ions and the conjugate acid of the base oxyacid ternary compound with acidic properties,
base ionization constant (K) equilibrium molecules of which contain a central nonmetallic
b
constant for a base ionization reaction atom bonded to one or more O atoms, at least one
basic a solution in which [H O+] < [OH−] of which is bonded to an ionizable H atom
3
Brønsted-Lowry acid proton donor percent ionization ratio of the concentration of
Brønsted-Lowry base proton acceptor ionized acid to initial acid concentration
buffer mixture of appreciable amounts of a weak expressed as a percentage
acid-base pair the pH of a buffer resists change pH logarithmic measure of the concentration of
when small amounts of acid or base are added hydronium ions in a solution
buffer capacity amount of an acid or base that can pOH logarithmic measure of the concentration of
be added to a volume of a buffer solution before hydroxide ions in a solution
its pH changes significantly (usually by one pH stepwise ionization process in which a polyprotic
unit) acid is ionized by losing protons sequentially
color-change interval range in pH over which the titration curve plot of some sample property (such
color change of an indicator is observed as pH) versus volume of added titrant
conjugate acid substance formed when a base triprotic acid acid that contains three ionizable
gains a proton hydrogen atoms per molecule
conjugate base substance formed when an acid
Key Equations
K = [H O+][OH−] = 1.0 10−14(at 25 °C)
w 3
pOH = −log[OH−]
[H O+] = 10−pH
3
[OH−] = 10−pOH
pH + pOH = pK = 14.00 at 25 °C
w
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 753
14 • Summary 739
K K = 1.0 10−14=K
a b w
pK = −logK
a a
pK = −logK
b b
Summary
14.1Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases between the strengths of a conjugate acid-base pair:
the stronger the acid, the weaker its conjugate base.
A compound that can donate a proton (a hydrogen
Water exerts a leveling effect on dissolved acids or
ion) to another compound is called a Brønsted-
bases, reacting completely to generate its
Lowry acid. The compound that accepts the proton
characteristic hydronium and hydroxide ions (the
is called a Brønsted-Lowry base. The species
strongest acid and base that may exist in water). The
remaining after a Brønsted-Lowry acid has lost a
strengths of the binary acids increase from left to
proton is the conjugate base of the acid. The species
right across a period of the periodic table (CH < NH
4 3
formed when a Brønsted-Lowry base gains a proton
< H O < HF), and they increase down a group (HF <
2
is the conjugate acid of the base. Thus, an acid-base
HCl < HBr < HI). The strengths of oxyacids that
reaction occurs when a proton is transferred from
contain the same central element increase as the
an acid to a base, with formation of the conjugate
oxidation number of the element increases (H SO <
2 3
base of the reactant acid and formation of the
H SO ). The strengths of oxyacids also increase as
2 4
conjugate acid of the reactant base. Amphiprotic
the electronegativity of the central element
species can act as both proton donors and proton
increases [H SeO < H SO ].
2 4 2 4
acceptors. Water is the most important amphiprotic
species. It can form both the hydronium ion, H O+, 14.4Hydrolysis of Salts
3
and the hydroxide ion, OH−when it undergoes
The ions composing salts may possess acidic or
autoionization:
basic character, ionizing when dissolved in water to
yield acidic or basic solutions. Acidic cations are
typically the conjugate partners of weak bases, and
The ion product of water,K is the equilibrium
w
basic anions are the conjugate partners of weak
constant for the autoionization reaction:
acids. Many metal ions bond to water molecules
when dissolved to yield complex ions that may
function as acids.
14.2pH and pOH
14.5Polyprotic Acids
Concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions in
aqueous media are often represented as logarithmic An acid that contains more than one ionizable
pH and pOH values, respectively. At 25 °C, the proton is a polyprotic acid. These acids undergo
autoprotolysis equilibrium for water requires the stepwise ionization reactions involving the transfer
sum of pH and pOH to equal 14 for any aqueous of single protons. The ionization constants for
solution. The relative concentrations of hydronium polyprotic acids decrease with each subsequent
and hydroxide ion in a solution define its status as step; these decreases typically are large enough to
acidic ([H O+] > [OH−]), basic ([H O+] < [OH−]), or permit simple equilibrium calculations that treat
3 3
neutral ([H O+] = [OH−]). At 25 °C, a pH < 7 indicates each step separately.
3
an acidic solution, a pH > 7 a basic solution, and a
14.6Buffers
pH = 7 a neutral solution.
Solutions that contain appreciable amounts of a
14.3Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
weak conjugate acid-base pair are called buffers. A
The relative strengths of acids and bases are buffered solution will experience only slight changes
reflected in the magnitudes of their ionization in pH when small amounts of acid or base are added.
constants; the stronger the acid or base, the larger Addition of large amounts of acid or base can exceed
its ionization constant. A reciprocal relation exists the buffer capacity, consuming most of one
PAGE: 754
740 14 • Exercises
conjugate partner and preventing further buffering typically a plot of pH versus volume of added titrant.
action. These curves are useful in selecting appropriate
acid-base indicators that will permit accurate
14.7Acid-Base Titrations
determinations of titration end points.
The titration curve for an acid-base titration is
Exercises
14.1Brønsted-Lowry Acids and Bases
1. Write equations that show NH as both a conjugate acid and a conjugate base.
3
2. Write equations that show acting both as an acid and as a base.
3. Show by suitable net ionic equations that each of the following species can act as a Brønsted-Lowry acid:
(a)
(b) HCl
(c) NH
3
(d) CH CO H
3 2
(e)
(f)
4. Show by suitable net ionic equations that each of the following species can act as a Brønsted-Lowry acid:
(a) HNO
3
(b)
(c) H S
2
(d) CH CH COOH
3 2
(e)
(f) HS−
5. Show by suitable net ionic equations that each of the following species can act as a Brønsted-Lowry base:
(a) H O
2
(b) OH−
(c) NH
3
(d) CN−
(e) S2−
(f)
6. Show by suitable net ionic equations that each of the following species can act as a Brønsted-Lowry base:
(a) HS−
(b)
(c)
(d) C H OH
2 5
(e) O2−
(f)
7. What is the conjugate acid of each of the following? What is the conjugate base of each?
(a) OH−
(b) H O
2
(c)
(d) NH
3
(e)
(f) H O
2 2
(g) HS−
(h)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 755
14 • Exercises 741
8. What is the conjugate acid of each of the following? What is the conjugate base of each?
(a) H S
2
(b)
(c) PH
3
(d) HS−
(e)
(f)
(g) H N
4 2
(h) CH OH
3
9. Identify and label the Brønsted-Lowry acid, its conjugate base, the Brønsted-Lowry base, and its conjugate
acid in each of the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
10. Identify and label the Brønsted-Lowry acid, its conjugate base, the Brønsted-Lowry base, and its conjugate
acid in each of the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
11. What are amphiprotic species? Illustrate with suitable equations.
12. State which of the following species are amphiprotic and write chemical equations illustrating the
amphiprotic character of these species:
(a) H O
2
(b)
(c) S2−
(d)
(e)
13. State which of the following species are amphiprotic and write chemical equations illustrating the
amphiprotic character of these species.
(a) NH
3
(b)
(c) Br−
(d)
(e)
14. Is the self-ionization of water endothermic or exothermic? The ionization constant for water (K ) is 2.9
w
10−14at 40 °C and 9.3 10−14at 60 °C.
14.2pH and pOH
15. Explain why a sample of pure water at 40 °C is neutral even though [H O+] = 1.7 10−7M.K is 2.9 10−14
3 w
at 40 °C.
16. The ionization constant for water (K ) is 2.9 10−14at 40 °C. Calculate [H O+], [OH−], pH, and pOH for pure
w 3
water at 40 °C.
17. The ionization constant for water (K ) is 9.311 10−14at 60 °C. Calculate [H O+], [OH−], pH, and pOH for
w 3
pure water at 60 °C.
PAGE: 756
742 14 • Exercises
18. Calculate the pH and the pOH of each of the following solutions at 25 °C for which the substances ionize
completely:
(a) 0.200MHCl
(b) 0.0143MNaOH
(c) 3.0MHNO
3
(d) 0.0031MCa(OH)
2
19. Calculate the pH and the pOH of each of the following solutions at 25 °C for which the substances ionize
completely:
(a) 0.000259MHClO
4
(b) 0.21MNaOH
(c) 0.000071MBa(OH)
2
(d) 2.5MKOH
20. What are the pH and pOH of a solution of 2.0 M HCl, which ionizes completely?
21. What are the hydronium and hydroxide ion concentrations in a solution whose pH is 6.52?
22. Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration in wine from its pH. See
Figure 14.2for useful information.
23. Calculate the hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide ion concentration in lime juice from its pH.
SeeFigure 14.2for useful information.
24. The hydronium ion concentration in a sample of rainwater is found to be 1.7 10−6Mat 25 °C. What is the
concentration of hydroxide ions in the rainwater?
25. The hydroxide ion concentration in household ammonia is 3.2 10−3Mat 25 °C. What is the
concentration of hydronium ions in the solution?
14.3Relative Strengths of Acids and Bases
26. Explain why the neutralization reaction of a strong acid and a weak base gives a weakly acidic solution.
27. Explain why the neutralization reaction of a weak acid and a strong base gives a weakly basic solution.
28. Use this list of important industrial compounds (andFigure 14.8) to answer the following questions
regarding: Ca(OH) , CH CO H, HCl, H CO , HF, HNO , HNO , H PO , H SO , NH , NaOH, Na CO .
2 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 4 2 4 3 2 3
(a) Identify the strong Brønsted-Lowry acids and strong Brønsted-Lowry bases.
(b) Identify the compounds that can behave as Brønsted-Lowry acids with strengths lying between those
of H O+and H O.
3 2
(c) Identify the compounds that can behave as Brønsted-Lowry bases with strengths lying between those
of H O and OH−.
2
29. The odor of vinegar is due to the presence of acetic acid, CH CO H, a weak acid. List, in order of
3 2
descending concentration, all of the ionic and molecular species present in a 1-Maqueous solution of this
acid.
30. Household ammonia is a solution of the weak base NH in water. List, in order of descending
3
concentration, all of the ionic and molecular species present in a 1-Maqueous solution of this base.
31. Explain why the ionization constant,K, for H SO is larger than the ionization constant for H SO .
a 2 4 2 3
32. Explain why the ionization constant,K, for HI is larger than the ionization constant for HF.
a
33. Gastric juice, the digestive fluid produced in the stomach, contains hydrochloric acid, HCl. Milk of
Magnesia, a suspension of solid Mg(OH) in an aqueous medium, is sometimes used to neutralize excess
2
stomach acid. Write a complete balanced equation for the neutralization reaction, and identify the
conjugate acid-base pairs.
34. Nitric acid reacts with insoluble copper(II) oxide to form soluble copper(II) nitrate, Cu(NO ) , a compound
32
that has been used to prevent the growth of algae in swimming pools. Write the balanced chemical
equation for the reaction of an aqueous solution of HNO with CuO.
3
35. What is the ionization constant at 25 °C for the weak acid the conjugate acid of the weak base
CH NH ,K = 4.4 10−4.
3 2 b
36. What is the ionization constant at 25 °C for the weak acid the conjugate acid of the weak
base (CH ) NH,K = 5.9 10−4?
32 b
37. Which base, CH NH or (CH ) NH, is the stronger base? Which conjugate acid, or
3 2 32
, is the stronger acid?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 757
14 • Exercises 743
38. Which is the stronger acid, or HBrO?
39. Which is the stronger base, (CH ) N or
33
40. Predict which acid in each of the following pairs is the stronger and explain your reasoning for each.
(a) H O or HF
2
(b) B(OH) or Al(OH)
3 3
(c) or
(d) NH or H S
3 2
(e) H O or H Te
2 2
41. Predict which compound in each of the following pairs of compounds is more acidic and explain your
reasoning for each.
(a) or
(b) NH or H O
3 2
(c) PH or HI
3
(d) NH or PH
3 3
(e) H S or HBr
2
42. Rank the compounds in each of the following groups in order of increasing acidity or basicity, as
indicated, and explain the order you assign.
(a) acidity: HCl, HBr, HI
(b) basicity: H O, OH−, H−, Cl−
2
(c) basicity: Mg(OH) , Si(OH) , ClO (OH) (Hint: Formula could also be written as HClO .)
2 4 3 4
(d) acidity: HF, H O, NH , CH
2 3 4
43. Rank the compounds in each of the following groups in order of increasing acidity or basicity, as
indicated, and explain the order you assign.
(a) acidity: NaHSO , NaHSeO , NaHSO
3 3 4
(b) basicity:
(c) acidity: HOCl, HOBr, HOI
(d) acidity: HOCl, HOClO, HOClO , HOClO
2 3
(e) basicity: HS−, HTe−,
(f) basicity: BrO−,
44. Both HF and HCN ionize in water to a limited extent. Which of the conjugate bases, F−or CN−, is the
stronger base?
45. The active ingredient formed by aspirin in the body is salicylic acid, C H OH(CO H). The carboxyl group
6 4 2
(−CO H) acts as a weak acid. The phenol group (an OH group bonded to an aromatic ring) also acts as an
2
acid but a much weaker acid. List, in order of descending concentration, all of the ionic and molecular
species present in a 0.001-Maqueous solution of C H OH(CO H).
6 4 2
46. Are the concentrations of hydronium ion and hydroxide ion in a solution of an acid or a base in water
directly proportional or inversely proportional? Explain your answer.
47. What two common assumptions can simplify calculation of equilibrium concentrations in a solution of a
weak acid or base?
48. Which of the following will increase the percent of NH that is converted to the ammonium ion in water?
3
(a) addition of NaOH
(b) addition of HCl
(c) addition of NH Cl
4
49. Which of the following will increase the percentage of HF that is converted to the fluoride ion in water?
(a) addition of NaOH
(b) addition of HCl
(c) addition of NaF
PAGE: 758
744 14 • Exercises
50. What is the effect on the concentrations of HNO , and OH−when the following are added to a
2
solution of KNO in water:
2
(a) HCl
(b) HNO
2
(c) NaOH
(d) NaCl
(e) KNO
51. What is the effect on the concentration of hydrofluoric acid, hydronium ion, and fluoride ion when the
following are added to separate solutions of hydrofluoric acid?
(a) HCl
(b) KF
(c) NaCl
(d) KOH
(e) HF
52. Why is the hydronium ion concentration in a solution that is 0.10Min HCl and 0.10Min HCOOH
determined by the concentration of HCl?
53. From the equilibrium concentrations given, calculateK for each of the weak acids andK for each of the
a b
weak bases.
(a) CH CO H: = 1.34 10−3M;
3 2
= 1.34 10−3M;
[CH CO H] = 9.866 10−2M;
3 2
(b) ClO−: [OH−] = 4.0 10−4M;
[HClO] = 2.38 10−4M;
[ClO−] = 0.273M;
(c) HCO H: [HCO H] = 0.524M;
2 2
= 9.8 10−3M;
= 9.8 10−3M;
(d) = 0.233M;
[C H NH ] = 2.3 10−3M;
6 5 2
= 2.3 10−3M
54. From the equilibrium concentrations given, calculateK for each of the weak acids andK for each of the
a b
weak bases.
(a) NH : [OH−] = 3.1 10−3M;
3
= 3.1 10−3M;
[NH ] = 0.533M;
3
(b) HNO : = 0.011M;
2
= 0.0438M;
[HNO ] = 1.07M;
2
(c) (CH ) N: [(CH ) N] = 0.25M;
33 33
[(CH ) NH+] = 4.3 10−3M;
33
[OH−] = 3.7 10−3M;
(d) = 0.100M;
[NH ] = 7.5 10−6M;
3
[H O+] = 7.5 10−6M
3
55. DetermineK for the nitrite ion, In a 0.10-Msolution this base is 0.0015% ionized.
b
56. DetermineK for hydrogen sulfate ion, In a 0.10-Msolution the acid is 29% ionized.
a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 759
14 • Exercises 745
57. Calculate the ionization constant for each of the following acids or bases from the ionization constant of its
conjugate base or conjugate acid:
(a) F−
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f) (as a base)
58. Calculate the ionization constant for each of the following acids or bases from the ionization constant of its
conjugate base or conjugate acid:
(a) HTe−(as a base)
(b)
(c) (as a base)
(d) (as a base)
(e)
(f) (as a base)
59. Using theK value of 1.4 10−5, place in the correct location inFigure 14.7.
a
60. Calculate the concentration of all solute species in each of the following solutions of acids or bases.
Assume that the ionization of water can be neglected, and show that the change in the initial
concentrations can be neglected.
(a) 0.0092MHClO, a weak acid
(b) 0.0784MC H NH , a weak base
6 5 2
(c) 0.0810MHCN, a weak acid
(d) 0.11M(CH ) N, a weak base
33
(e) 0.120M a weak acid,K = 1.6 10−7
a
61. Propionic acid, C H CO H (K = 1.34 10−5), is used in the manufacture of calcium propionate, a food
2 5 2 a
preservative. What is the pH of a 0.698-Msolution of C H CO H?
2 5 2
62. White vinegar is a 5.0% by mass solution of acetic acid in water. If the density of white vinegar is 1.007 g/
cm3, what is the pH?
63. The ionization constant of lactic acid, CH CH(OH)CO H, an acid found in the blood after strenuous
3 2
exercise, is 1.36 10−4. If 20.0 g of lactic acid is used to make a solution with a volume of 1.00 L, what is
the concentration of hydronium ion in the solution?
64. Nicotine, C H N , is a base that will accept two protons (K = 7 10−7,K = 1.4 10−11). What is the
10 14 2 b1 b2
concentration of each species present in a 0.050-Msolution of nicotine?
65. The pH of a 0.23-Msolution of HF is 1.92. DetermineK for HF from these data.
a
66. The pH of a 0.15-Msolution of is 1.43. DetermineK for from these data.
a
67. The pH of a 0.10-Msolution of caffeine is 11.70. DetermineK for caffeine from these data:
b
68. The pH of a solution of household ammonia, a 0.950 M solution of NH is 11.612. DetermineK for NH
3, b 3
from these data.
14.4Hydrolysis of Salts
69. Determine whether aqueous solutions of the following salts are acidic, basic, or neutral:
(a) Al(NO )
33
(b) RbI
(c) KHCO
2
(d) CH NH Br
3 3
70. Determine whether aqueous solutions of the following salts are acidic, basic, or neutral:
(a) FeCl
3
(b) K CO
2 3
(c) NH Br
4
(d) KClO
4
PAGE: 760
746 14 • Exercises
71. Novocaine, C H O N Cl, is the salt of the base procaine and hydrochloric acid. The ionization constant
13 21 2 2
for procaine is 7 10−6. Is a solution of novocaine acidic or basic? What are [H O+], [OH−], and pH of a
3
2.0% solution by mass of novocaine, assuming that the density of the solution is 1.0 g/mL.
14.5Polyprotic Acids
72. Which of the following concentrations would be practically equal in a calculation of the equilibrium
concentrations in a 0.134-Msolution of H CO , a diprotic acid: [OH−], [H CO ],
2 3 2 3
No calculations are needed to answer this question.
73. Calculate the concentration of each species present in a 0.050-Msolution of H S.
2
74. Calculate the concentration of each species present in a 0.010-Msolution of phthalic acid, C H (CO H) .
6 4 2 2
75. Salicylic acid, HOC H CO H, and its derivatives have been used as pain relievers for a long time. Salicylic
6 4 2
acid occurs in small amounts in the leaves, bark, and roots of some vegetation (most notably historically
in the bark of the willow tree). Extracts of these plants have been used as medications for centuries. The
acid was first isolated in the laboratory in 1838.
(a) Both functional groups of salicylic acid ionize in water, withK = 1.0 10−3for the—CO H group and
a 2
4.2 10−13for the −OH group. What is the pH of a saturated solution of the acid (solubility = 1.8 g/L).
(b) Aspirin was discovered as a result of efforts to produce a derivative of salicylic acid that would not be
irritating to the stomach lining. Aspirin is acetylsalicylic acid, CH CO C H CO H. The −CO H functional
3 2 6 4 2 2
group is still present, but its acidity is reduced,K = 3.0 10−4. What is the pH of a solution of aspirin
a
with the same concentration as a saturated solution of salicylic acid (See Part a).
76. The ion HTe−is an amphiprotic species; it can act as either an acid or a base.
(a) What isK for the acid reaction of HTe−with H O?
a 2
(b) What isK for the reaction in which HTe−functions as a base in water?
b
(c) Demonstrate whether or not the second ionization of H Te can be neglected in the calculation of [HTe−]
2
in a 0.10 M solution of H Te.
2
14.6Buffers
77. Explain why a buffer can be prepared from a mixture of NH Cl and NaOH but not from NH and NaOH.
4 3
78. Explain why the pH does not change significantly when a small amount of an acid or a base is added to a
solution that contains equal amounts of the acid H PO and a salt of its conjugate base NaH PO .
3 4 2 4
79. Explain why the pH does not change significantly when a small amount of an acid or a base is added to a
solution that contains equal amounts of the base NH and a salt of its conjugate acid NH Cl.
3 4
80. What is [H O+] in a solution of 0.25MCH CO H and 0.030MNaCH CO ?
3 3 2 3 2
81. What is [H O+] in a solution of 0.075MHNO and 0.030MNaNO ?
3 2 2
82. What is [OH−] in a solution of 0.125MCH NH and 0.130MCH NH Cl?
3 2 3 3
83. What is [OH−] in a solution of 1.25MNH and 0.78MNH NO ?
3 4 3
84. What is the effect on the concentration of acetic acid, hydronium ion, and acetate ion when the following
are added to an acidic buffer solution of equal concentrations of acetic acid and sodium acetate:
(a) HCl
(b) KCH CO
3 2
(c) NaCl
(d) KOH
(e) CH CO H
3 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 761
14 • Exercises 747
85. What is the effect on the concentration of ammonia, hydroxide ion, and ammonium ion when the
following are added to a basic buffer solution of equal concentrations of ammonia and ammonium nitrate:
(a) KI
(b) NH
3
(c) HI
(d) NaOH
(e) NH Cl
4
86. What will be the pH of a buffer solution prepared from 0.20 mol NH , 0.40 mol NH NO , and just enough
3 4 3
water to give 1.00 L of solution?
87. Calculate the pH of a buffer solution prepared from 0.155 mol of phosphoric acid, 0.250 mole of KH PO ,
2 4
and enough water to make 0.500 L of solution.
88. How much solid NaCH CO •3H O must be added to 0.300 L of a 0.50-Macetic acid solution to give a buffer
3 2 2
with a pH of 5.00? (Hint: Assume a negligible change in volume as the solid is added.)
89. What mass of NH Cl must be added to 0.750 L of a 0.100-Msolution of NH to give a buffer solution with a
4 3
pH of 9.26? (Hint: Assume a negligible change in volume as the solid is added.)
90. A buffer solution is prepared from equal volumes of 0.200Macetic acid and 0.600Msodium acetate. Use
1.80 10−5asK for acetic acid.
a
(a) What is the pH of the solution?
(b) Is the solution acidic or basic?
(c) What is the pH of a solution that results when 3.00 mL of 0.034MHCl is added to 0.200 L of the original
buffer?
91. A 5.36–g sample of NH Cl was added to 25.0 mL of 1.00MNaOH and the resulting solution
4
diluted to 0.100 L.
(a) What is the pH of this buffer solution?
(b) Is the solution acidic or basic?
(c) What is the pH of a solution that results when 3.00 mL of 0.034MHCl is added to the solution?
14.7Acid-Base Titrations
92. Explain how to choose the appropriate acid-base indicator for the titration of a weak base with a strong
acid.
93. Explain why an acid-base indicator changes color over a range of pH values rather than at a specific pH.
94. Calculate the pH at the following points in a titration of 40 mL (0.040 L) of 0.100Mbarbituric acid (K = 9.8
a
10−5) with 0.100MKOH.
(a) no KOH added
(b) 20 mL of KOH solution added
(c) 39 mL of KOH solution added
(d) 40 mL of KOH solution added
(e) 41 mL of KOH solution added
95. The indicator dinitrophenol is an acid with aK of 1.1 10−4. In a 1.0 10−4-Msolution, it is colorless in
a
acid and yellow in base. Calculate the pH range over which it goes from 10% ionized (colorless) to 90%
ionized (yellow).
PAGE: 762
748 14 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 763
CHAPTER 15
Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Figure15.1 The mineral fluorite (CaF ) is formed when dissolved calcium and fluoride ions precipitate from
2
groundwater within the Earth’s crust. Note that pure fluorite is colorless, and that the color in this sample is due to
the presence of other metal ions in the crystal.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1Precipitation and Dissolution
15.2Lewis Acids and Bases
15.3Coupled Equilibria
INTRODUCTION The mineral fluorite, CaF Figure 15.1, is commonly used as a semiprecious stone in many
2
types of jewelry because of its striking appearance. Deposits of fluorite are formed through a process called
hydrothermal precipitation in which calcium and fluoride ions dissolved in groundwater combine to produce
insoluble CaF in response to some change in solution conditions. For example, a decrease in temperature
2
may trigger fluorite precipitation if its solubility is exceeded at the lower temperature. Because fluoride ion is a
weak base, its solubility is also affected by solution pH, and so geologic or other processes that change
groundwater pH will also affect the precipitation of fluorite. This chapter extends the equilibrium discussion of
other chapters by addressing some additional reaction classes (including precipitation) and systems involving
coupled equilibrium reactions.
15.1 Precipitation and Dissolution
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Write chemical equations and equilibrium expressions representing solubility equilibria
• Carry out equilibrium computations involving solubility, equilibrium expressions, and solute concentrations
Solubility equilibria are established when the dissolution and precipitation of a solute species occur at equal
PAGE: 764
750 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
rates. These equilibria underlie many natural and technological processes, ranging from tooth decay to water
purification. An understanding of the factors affecting compound solubility is, therefore, essential to the
effective management of these processes. This section applies previously introduced equilibrium concepts
and tools to systems involving dissolution and precipitation.
The Solubility Product
Recall from the chapter on solutions that the solubility of a substance can vary from essentially zero (insoluble
orsparingly soluble) to infinity (miscible). A solute with finite solubility can yield asaturatedsolution when it
is added to a solvent in an amount exceeding its solubility, resulting in a heterogeneous mixture of the
saturated solution and the excess, undissolved solute. For example, a saturated solution of silver chloride is
one in which the equilibrium shown below has been established.
In this solution, an excess of solid AgCl dissolves and dissociates to produce aqueous Ag+and Cl–ions at the
same rate that these aqueous ions combine and precipitate to form solid AgCl (Figure 15.2). Because silver
chloride is a sparingly soluble salt, the equilibrium concentration of its dissolved ions in the solution is
relatively low.
FIGURE15.2 Silver chloride is a sparingly soluble ionic solid. When it is added to water, it dissolves slightly and
produces a mixture consisting of a very dilute solution of Ag+and Cl–ions in equilibrium with undissolved silver
chloride.
The equilibrium constant for solubility equilibria such as this one is called thesolubility product constant,
K , in this case
sp
Recall that only gases and solutes are represented in equilibrium constant expressions, so theK does not
sp
include a term for the undissolved AgCl. A listing of solubility product constants for several sparingly soluble
compounds is provided inAppendix J.
EXAMPLE 15.1
Writing Equations and Solubility Products
Write the dissolution equation and the solubility product expression for each of the following slightly soluble
ionic compounds:
(a) AgI, silver iodide, a solid with antiseptic properties
(b) CaCO , calcium carbonate, the active ingredient in many over-the-counter chewable antacids
3
(c) Mg(OH) , magnesium hydroxide, the active ingredient in Milk of Magnesia
2
(d) Mg(NH )PO , magnesium ammonium phosphate, an essentially insoluble substance used in tests for
4 4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 765
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 751
magnesium
(e) Ca (PO ) OH, the mineral apatite, a source of phosphate for fertilizers
5 43
Solution
Check Your Learning
Write the dissolution equation and the solubility product for each of the following slightly soluble compounds:
(a) BaSO
4
(b) Ag SO
2 4
(c) Al(OH)
3
(d) Pb(OH)Cl
Answer:
K and Solubility
sp
TheK of a slightly soluble ionic compound may be simply related to its measured solubility provided the
sp
dissolution process involves only dissociation and solvation, for example:
For cases such as these, one may deriveK values from provided solubilities, or vice-versa. Calculations of
sp
this sort are most conveniently performed using a compound’s molar solubility, measured as moles of
dissolved solute per liter of saturated solution.
EXAMPLE 15.2
Calculation ofK from Equilibrium Concentrations
sp
Fluorite, CaF , is a slightly soluble solid that dissolves according to the equation:
2
The concentration of Ca2+in a saturated solution of CaF is 2.15 10–4M. What is the solubility product of
2
fluorite?
Solution
According to the stoichiometry of the dissolution equation, the fluoride ion molarity of a CaF solution is equal
2
to twice its calcium ion molarity:
PAGE: 766
752 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Substituting the ion concentrations into theK expression gives
sp
Check Your Learning
In a saturated solution of Mg(OH) , the concentration of Mg2+is 1.31 10–4M. What is the solubility product
2
for Mg(OH) ?
2
Answer:
8.99 10–12
EXAMPLE 15.3
Determination of Molar Solubility fromK
sp
TheK of copper(I) bromide, CuBr, is 6.3 10–9. Calculate the molar solubility of copper bromide.
sp
Solution
The dissolution equation and solubility product expression are
Following the ICE approach to this calculation yields the table
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into the solubility product expression and solving forx
yields
Since the dissolution stoichiometry shows one mole of copper(I) ion and one mole of bromide ion are produced
for each moles of Br dissolved, the molar solubility of CuBr is 7.9 10–5M.
Check Your Learning
TheK of AgI is 1.5 10–16. Calculate the molar solubility of silver iodide.
sp
Answer:
1.2 10–8M
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 767
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 753
EXAMPLE 15.4
Determination of Molar Solubility fromK
sp
TheK of calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) , is 1.3 10–6. Calculate the molar solubility of calcium hydroxide.
sp 2
Solution
The dissolution equation and solubility product expression are
The ICE table for this system is
Substituting terms for the equilibrium concentrations into the solubility product expression and solving forx
gives
As defined in the ICE table,xis the molarity of calcium ion in the saturated solution. The dissolution
stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between moles of calcium ion in solution and moles of compound
dissolved, and so, the molar solubility of Ca(OH) is 6.9 10–3M.
2
Check Your Learning
TheK of PbI is 1.4 10–8. Calculate the molar solubility of lead(II) iodide.
sp 2
Answer:
1.5 10–3M
EXAMPLE 15.5
Determination ofK from Gram Solubility
sp
Many of the pigments used by artists in oil-based paints (Figure 15.3) are sparingly soluble in water. For
example, the solubility of the artist’s pigment chrome yellow, PbCrO , is 4.6 10–6g/L. Determine the
4
solubility product for PbCrO .
4
PAGE: 768
754 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
FIGURE15.3 Oil paints contain pigments that are very slightly soluble in water. In addition to chrome yellow
(PbCrO ), examples include Prussian blue (Fe (CN) ), the reddish-orange color vermilion (HgS), and green color
4 7 18
veridian (Cr O ). (credit: Sonny Abesamis)
2 3
Solution
Before calculating the solubility product, the provided solubility must be converted to molarity:
The dissolution equation for this compound is
The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between the molar amounts of compound and its two ions,
and so both [Pb2+] and are equal to the molar solubility of PbCrO :
4
K = [Pb2+] = (1.4 10–8)(1.4 10–8) = 2.0 10–16
sp
Check Your Learning
The solubility of TlCl [thallium(I) chloride], an intermediate formed when thallium is being isolated from ores,
is 3.12 grams per liter at 20 °C. What is its solubility product?
Answer:
1.69 10–4
EXAMPLE 15.6
Calculating the Solubility of Hg Cl
2 2
Calomel, Hg Cl , is a compound composed of the diatomic ion of mercury(I), and chloride ions, Cl–.
2 2
Although most mercury compounds are now known to be poisonous, eighteenth-century physicians used
calomel as a medication. Their patients rarely suffered any mercury poisoning from the treatments because
calomel has a very low solubility, as suggested by its very smallK :
sp
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 769
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 755
Calculate the molar solubility of Hg Cl .
2 2
Solution
The dissolution stoichiometry shows a 1:1 relation between the amount of compound dissolved and the
amount of mercury(I) ions, and so the molar solubility of Hg Cl is equal to the concentration of ions
2 2
Following the ICE approach results in
Substituting the equilibrium concentration terms into the solubility product expression and solving forxgives
The dissolution stoichiometry shows the molar solubility of Hg Cl is equal to or 6.5 10–7M.
2 2
Check Your Learning
Determine the molar solubility of MgF from its solubility product:K = 6.4 10–9.
2 sp
Answer:
1.2 10–3M
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Using Barium Sulfate for Medical Imaging
Various types of medical imaging techniques are used to aid diagnoses of illnesses in a noninvasive manner.
One such technique utilizes the ingestion of a barium compound before taking an X-ray image. A suspension of
barium sulfate, a chalky powder, is ingested by the patient. Since theK of barium sulfate is 2.3 10–8, very
sp
little of it dissolves as it coats the lining of the patient’s intestinal tract. Barium-coated areas of the digestive
tract then appear on an X-ray as white, allowing for greater visual detail than a traditional X-ray (Figure 15.4).
PAGE: 770
756 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
FIGURE15.4 A suspension of barium sulfate coats the intestinal tract, permitting greater visual detail than a
traditional X-ray. (credit modification of work by “glitzy queen00”/Wikimedia Commons)
Medical imaging using barium sulfate can be used to diagnose acid reflux disease, Crohn’s disease, and ulcers
in addition to other conditions.
Visit thiswebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16barium)for more information on how barium is used in medical
diagnoses and which conditions it is used to diagnose.
Predicting Precipitation
The equation that describes the equilibrium between solid calcium carbonate and its solvated ions is:
It is important to realize that this equilibrium is established in any aqueous solution containing Ca2+and CO 2–
3
ions, not just in a solution formed by saturating water with calcium carbonate. Consider, for example, mixing
aqueous solutions of the soluble compounds sodium carbonate and calcium nitrate. If the concentrations of
calcium and carbonate ions in the mixture do not yield a reaction quotient,Q , that exceeds the solubility
sp
product,K , then no precipitation will occur. If the ion concentrations yield a reaction quotient greater than
sp
the solubility product, then precipitation will occur, lowering those concentrations until equilibrium is
established (Q =K ). The comparison ofQ toK to predict precipitation is an example of the general
sp sp sp sp
approach to predicting the direction of a reaction first introduced in the chapter on equilibrium. For the
specific case of solubility equilibria:
Q <K : the reaction proceeds in the forward direction (solution is not saturated; no precipitation observed)
sp sp
Q >K : the reaction proceeds in the reverse direction (solution is supersaturated; precipitation will occur)
sp sp
This predictive strategy and related calculations are demonstrated in the next few example exercises.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 771
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 757
EXAMPLE 15.7
Precipitation of Mg(OH)
2
The first step in the preparation of magnesium metal is the precipitation of Mg(OH) from sea water by the
2
addition of lime, Ca(OH) , a readily available inexpensive source of OH–ion:
2
The concentration of Mg2+(aq) in sea water is 0.0537M. Will Mg(OH) precipitate when enough Ca(OH) is
2 2
added to give a [OH–] of 0.0010M?
Solution
Calculation of the reaction quotient under these conditions is shown here:
BecauseQis greater thanK (Q= 5.4 10–8is larger thanK = 8.9 10–12), the reverse reaction will proceed,
sp sp
precipitating magnesium hydroxide until the dissolved ion concentrations have been sufficiently lowered, so
thatQ =K .
sp sp
Check Your Learning
Predict whether CaHPO will precipitate from a solution with [Ca2+] = 0.0001Mand = 0.001M.
4
Answer:
No precipitation of CaHPO ;Q= 1 10–7, which is less thanK (7 × 10–7)
4 sp
EXAMPLE 15.8
Precipitation of AgCl
Does silver chloride precipitate when equal volumes of a 2.0 10–4-Msolution of AgNO and a 2.0 10–4-M
3
solution of NaCl are mixed?
Solution
The equation for the equilibrium between solid silver chloride, silver ion, and chloride ion is:
The solubility product is 1.6 10–10(seeAppendix J).
AgCl will precipitate if the reaction quotient calculated from the concentrations in the mixture of AgNO and
3
NaCl is greater thanK . Because the volume doubles when equal volumes of AgNO and NaCl solutions are
sp 3
mixed, each concentration is reduced to half its initial value
The reaction quotient,Q, is greater thanK for AgCl, so a supersaturated solution is formed:
sp
AgCl will precipitate from the mixture until the dissolution equilibrium is established, withQequal toK .
sp
Check Your Learning
Will KClO precipitate when 20 mL of a 0.050-Msolution of K+is added to 80 mL of a 0.50-Msolution of
4
(Hint: Use the dilution equation to calculate the concentrations of potassium and perchlorate ions in
the mixture.)
PAGE: 772
758 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Answer:
No,Q= 4.0 10–3, which is less thanK = 1.05 10–2
sp
EXAMPLE 15.9
Precipitation of Calcium Oxalate
Blood will not clot if calcium ions are removed from its plasma. Some blood collection tubes contain salts of
the oxalate ion, for this purpose (Figure 15.5). At sufficiently high concentrations, the calcium and
oxalate ions form solid, CaC O ·H O (calcium oxalate monohydrate). The concentration of Ca2+in a sample of
2 4 2
blood serum is 2.2 10–3M. What concentration of ion must be established before CaC O ·H O
2 4 2
begins to precipitate?
FIGURE15.5 Anticoagulants can be added to blood that will combine with the Ca2+ions in blood serum and
prevent the blood from clotting. (credit: modification of work by Neeta Lind)
Solution
The equilibrium expression is:
For this reaction:
(seeAppendix J)
Substitute the provided calcium ion concentration into the solubility product expression and solve for oxalate
concentration:
A concentration of = 8.9 10–6Mis necessary to initiate the precipitation of CaC O under these
2 4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 773
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 759
conditions.
Check Your Learning
If a solution contains 0.0020 mol of per liter, what concentration of Ag+ion must be reached by adding
solid AgNO before Ag CrO begins to precipitate? Neglect any increase in volume upon adding the solid silver
3 2 4
nitrate.
Answer:
6.7 10–5M
EXAMPLE 15.10
Concentrations Following Precipitation
Clothing washed in water that has a manganese [Mn2+(aq)] concentration exceeding 0.1 mg/L (1.8 10–6M)
may be stained by the manganese upon oxidation, but the amount of Mn2+in the water can be decreased by
adding a base to precipitate Mn(OH) . What pH is required to keep [Mn2+] equal to 1.8 10–6M?
2
Solution
The dissolution of Mn(OH) is described by the equation:
2
At equilibrium:
or
so
Calculate the pH from the pOH:
(final result rounded to one significant digit, limited by the certainty of theK )
sp
Check Your Learning
The first step in the preparation of magnesium metal is the precipitation of Mg(OH) from sea water by the
2
addition of Ca(OH) . The concentration of Mg2+(aq) in sea water is 5.37 10–2M. Calculate the pH at which
2
[Mg2+] is decreased to 1.0 10–5M
Answer:
10.97
In solutions containing two or more ions that may form insoluble compounds with the same counter ion, an
experimental strategy calledselective precipitationmay be used to remove individual ions from solution. By
increasing the counter ion concentration in a controlled manner, ions in solution may be precipitated
individually, assuming their compound solubilities are adequately different. In solutions with equal
concentrations of target ions, the ion forming the least soluble compound will precipitate first (at the lowest
concentration of counter ion), with the other ions subsequently precipitating as their compound’s solubilities
are reached. As an illustration of this technique, the next example exercise describes separation of a two halide
ions via precipitation of one as a silver salt.
PAGE: 774
760 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Chemistry in Everyday Life
The Role of Precipitation in Wastewater Treatment
Solubility equilibria are useful tools in the treatment of wastewater carried out in facilities that may treat
the municipal water in your city or town (Figure 15.6). Specifically, selective precipitation is used to remove
contaminants from wastewater before it is released back into natural bodies of water. For example,
phosphate ions are often present in the water discharged from manufacturing facilities. An
abundance of phosphate causes excess algae to grow, which impacts the amount of oxygen available for
marine life as well as making water unsuitable for human consumption.
FIGURE15.6 Wastewater treatment facilities, such as this one, remove contaminants from wastewater before
the water is released back into the natural environment. (credit: “eutrophication&hypoxia”/Wikimedia
Commons)
One common way to remove phosphates from water is by the addition of calcium hydroxide, or lime,
Ca(OH) . As the water is made more basic, the calcium ions react with phosphate ions to produce
2
hydroxylapatite, Ca (PO4) OH, which then precipitates out of the solution:
5 3
Because the amount of calcium ion added does not result in exceeding the solubility products for other
calcium salts, the anions of those salts remain behind in the wastewater. The precipitate is then removed
by filtration and the water is brought back to a neutral pH by the addition of CO in a recarbonation
2
process. Other chemicals can also be used for the removal of phosphates by precipitation, including
iron(III) chloride and aluminum sulfate.
View thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16Wastewater)for more information on how phosphorus is removed
from wastewater.
EXAMPLE 15.11
Precipitation of Silver Halides
A solution contains 0.00010 mol of KBr and 0.10 mol of KCl per liter. AgNO is gradually added to this solution.
3
Which forms first, solid AgBr or solid AgCl?
Solution
The two equilibria involved are:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 775
15.1 • Precipitation and Dissolution 761
If the solution contained aboutequalconcentrations of Cl–and Br–, then the silver salt with the smallerK
sp
(AgBr) would precipitate first. The concentrations are not equal, however, so the [Ag+] at which AgCl begins to
precipitate and the [Ag+] at which AgBr begins to precipitate must be calculated. The salt that forms at the
lower [Ag+] precipitates first.
AgBr precipitates whenQequalsK for AgBr
sp
AgBr begins to precipitate when [Ag+] is 5.0 10–9M.
For AgCl: AgCl precipitates whenQequalsK for AgCl (1.6 10–10). When [Cl–] = 0.10M:
sp
AgCl begins to precipitate when [Ag+] is 1.6 10–9M.
AgCl begins to precipitate at a lower [Ag+] than AgBr, so AgCl begins to precipitate first. Note the chloride ion
concentration of the initial mixture was significantly greater than the bromide ion concentration, and so silver
chloride precipitated first despite having aK greater than that of silver bromide.
sp
Check Your Learning
If silver nitrate solution is added to a solution which is 0.050Min both Cl–and Br–ions, at what [Ag+] would
precipitation begin, and what would be the formula of the precipitate?
Answer:
[Ag+] = 1.0 10–11M; AgBr precipitates first
Common Ion Effect
Compared with pure water, the solubility of an ionic compound is less in aqueous solutions containing a
common ion(one also produced by dissolution of the ionic compound). This is an example of a phenomenon
known as thecommon ion effect, which is a consequence of the law of mass action that may be explained
using Le ChÂtelier’s principle. Consider the dissolution of silver iodide:
This solubility equilibrium may be shifted left by the addition of either silver(I) or iodide ions, resulting in the
precipitation of AgI and lowered concentrations of dissolved Ag+and I–. In solutions that already contain either
of these ions, less AgI may be dissolved than in solutions without these ions.
This effect may also be explained in terms of mass action as represented in the solubility product expression:
The mathematical product of silver(I) and iodide ion molarities is constant in an equilibrium mixture
regardless of the source of the ions, and so an increase in one ion’s concentration must be balanced by a
proportional decrease in the other.
LINK TO LEARNING
View thissimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16solublesalts)to explore various aspects of the common ion effect.
PAGE: 776
762 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
EXAMPLE 15.12
Common Ion Effect on Solubility
What is the effect on the amount of solid Mg(OH) and the concentrations of Mg2+and OH–when each of the
2
following are added to a saturated solution of Mg(OH) ?
2
(a) MgCl
2
(b) KOH
(c) NaNO
3
(d) Mg(OH)
2
Solution
The solubility equilibrium is
(a) Adding a common ion, Mg2+, will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium
to the left, decreasing the concentration of hydroxide ion and increasing the amount of undissolved
magnesium hydroxide.
(b) Adding a common ion, OH–, will increase the concentration of this ion and shift the solubility equilibrium to
the left, decreasing the concentration of magnesium ion and increasing the amount of undissolved
magnesium hydroxide.
(c) The added compound does not contain a common ion, and no effect on the magnesium hydroxide solubility
equilibrium is expected.
(d) Adding more solid magnesium hydroxide will increase the amount of undissolved compound in the
mixture. The solution is already saturated, though, so the concentrations of dissolved magnesium and
hydroxide ions will remain the same.
Thus, changing the amount of solid magnesium hydroxide in the mixture has no effect on the value ofQ, and
no shift is required to restoreQto the value of the equilibrium constant.
Check Your Learning
What is the effect on the amount of solid NiCO and the concentrations of Ni2+and when each of the
3
following are added to a saturated solution of NiCO
3
(a) Ni(NO )
32
(b) KClO
4
(c) NiCO
3
(d) K CO
2 3
Answer:
(a) mass of NiCO (s) increases, [Ni2+] increases, decreases; (b) no appreciable effect; (c) no effect
3
except to increase the amount of solid NiCO ; (d) mass of NiCO (s) increases, [Ni2+] decreases,
3 3
increases;
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 777
15.2 • Lewis Acids and Bases 763
EXAMPLE 15.13
Common Ion Effect
Calculate the molar solubility of cadmium sulfide (CdS) in a 0.010-Msolution of cadmium bromide (CdBr ).
2
TheK of CdS is 1.0 10–28.
sp
Solution
This calculation can be performed using the ICE approach:
BecauseK is very small, assumex<< 0.010 and solve the simplified equation forx:
sp
The molar solubility of CdS in this solution is 1.0 10–26M.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the molar solubility of aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) , in a 0.015-Msolution of aluminum nitrate,
3
Al(NO ) . TheK of Al(OH) is 2 10–32.
33 sp 3
Answer:
4 10–11M
15.2 Lewis Acids and Bases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the Lewis model of acid-base chemistry
• Write equations for the formation of adducts and complex ions
• Perform equilibrium calculations involving formation constants
In 1923, G. N.Lewisproposed a generalized definition of acid-base behavior in which acids and bases are
identified by their ability to accept or to donate a pair of electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond.
Acoordinate covalent bond(or dative bond) occurs when one of the atoms in the bond provides both bonding
electrons. For example, a coordinate covalent bond occurs when a water molecule combines with a hydrogen
ion to form a hydronium ion. A coordinate covalent bond also results when an ammonia molecule combines
with a hydrogen ion to form an ammonium ion. Both of these equations are shown here.
PAGE: 778
764 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Reactions involving the formation of coordinate covalent bonds are classified asLewis acid-base chemistry.
The species donating the electron pair that compose the bond is aLewis base, the species accepting the
electron pair is aLewis acid, and the product of the reaction is aLewis acid-base adduct. As the two examples
above illustrate, Brønsted-Lowry acid-base reactions represent a subcategory of Lewis acid reactions,
specifically, those in which the acid species is H+. A few examples involving other Lewis acids and bases are
described below.
The boron atom in boron trifluoride, BF , has only six electrons in its valence shell. Being short of the
3
preferred octet, BF is a very good Lewis acid and reacts with many Lewis bases; a fluoride ion is the Lewis
3
base in this reaction, donating one of its lone pairs:
In the following reaction, each of two ammonia molecules, Lewis bases, donates a pair of electrons to a silver
ion, the Lewis acid:
Nonmetal oxides act as Lewis acids and react with oxide ions, Lewis bases, to form oxyanions:
Many Lewis acid-base reactions are displacement reactions in which one Lewis base displaces another Lewis
base from an acid-base adduct, or in which one Lewis acid displaces another Lewis acid:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 779
15.2 • Lewis Acids and Bases 765
Another type of Lewis acid-base chemistry involves the formation of a complex ion (or a coordination complex)
comprising a central atom, typically a transition metal cation, surrounded by ions or molecules calledligands.
These ligands can be neutral molecules like H O or NH , or ions such as CN–or OH–. Often, the ligands act as
2 3
Lewis bases, donating a pair of electrons to the central atom. These types of Lewis acid-base reactions are
examples of a broad subdiscipline calledcoordination chemistry—the topic of another chapter in this text.
The equilibrium constant for the reaction of a metal ion with one or more ligands to form a coordination
complex is called aformation constant (K)(sometimes called a stability constant). For example, the complex
f
ion
is produced by the reaction
The formation constant for this reaction is
Alternatively, the reverse reaction (decomposition of the complex ion) can be considered, in which case the
equilibrium constant is adissociation constant (K). Per the relation between equilibrium constants for
d
reciprocal reactions described, the dissociation constant is the mathematical inverse of the formation
constant,K = K–1. A tabulation of formation constants is provided inAppendix K.
d f
As an example of dissolution by complex ion formation, let us consider what happens when we add aqueous
ammonia to a mixture of silver chloride and water. Silver chloride dissolves slightly in water, giving a small
concentration of Ag+([Ag+] = 1.3 10–5M):
However, if NH is present in the water, the complex ion, can form according to the equation:
3
with
The large size of this formation constant indicates that most of the free silver ions produced by the dissolution
of AgCl combine with NH to form As a consequence, the concentration of silver ions, [Ag+], is
3
reduced, and the reaction quotient for the dissolution of silver chloride, [Ag+][Cl–], falls below the solubility
PAGE: 780
766 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
product of AgCl:
More silver chloride then dissolves. If the concentration of ammonia is great enough, all of the silver chloride
dissolves.
EXAMPLE 15.14
Dissociation of a Complex Ion
Calculate the concentration of the silver ion in a solution that initially is 0.10Mwith respect to
Solution
Applying the standard ICE approach to this reaction yields the following:
Substituting these equilibrium concentration terms into theK expression gives
f
The very large equilibrium constant means the amount of the complex ion that will dissociate,x, will be very
small. Assumingx<< 0.1 permits simplifying the above equation:
Because only 1.1% of the dissociates into Ag+and NH , the assumption thatxis small is justified.
3
Using this value ofxand the relations in the above ICE table allows calculation of all species’ equilibrium
concentrations:
The concentration of free silver ion in the solution is 0.0011M.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the silver ion concentration, [Ag+], of a solution prepared by dissolving 1.00 g of AgNO and 10.0 g of
3
KCN in sufficient water to make 1.00 L of solution. (Hint: BecauseK is very large, assume the reaction goes to
f
completion then calculate the [Ag+] produced by dissociation of the complex.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 781
15.3 • Coupled Equilibria 767
Answer:
2.9 10–22M
15.3 Coupled Equilibria
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe examples of systems involving two (or more) coupled chemical equilibria
• Calculate reactant and product concentrations for coupled equilibrium systems
As discussed in preceding chapters on equilibrium,coupled equilibriainvolve two or more separate chemical
reactions that share one or more reactants or products. This section of this chapter will address solubility
equilibria coupled with acid-base and complex-formation reactions.
An environmentally relevant example illustrating the coupling of solubility and acid-base equilibria is the
impact of ocean acidification on the health of the ocean’s coral reefs. These reefs are built upon skeletons of
sparingly soluble calcium carbonate excreted by colonies of corals (small marine invertebrates). The relevant
dissolution equilibrium is
Rising concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide contribute to an increased acidity of ocean waters due to
the dissolution, hydrolysis, and acid ionization of carbon dioxide:
Inspection of these equilibria shows the carbonate ion is involved in the calcium carbonate dissolution and the
acid hydrolysis of bicarbonate ion. Combining the dissolution equation with the reverse of the acid hydrolysis
equation yields
The equilibrium constant for this net reaction is much greater than theK for calcium carbonate, indicating
sp
its solubility is markedly increased in acidic solutions. As rising carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
increase the acidity of ocean waters, the calcium carbonate skeletons of coral reefs become more prone to
dissolution and subsequently less healthy (Figure 15.7).
FIGURE15.7 Healthy coral reefs (a) support a dense and diverse array of sea life across the ocean food chain. But
when coral are unable to adequately build and maintain their calcium carbonate skeletons because of excess ocean
acidification, the unhealthy reef (b) is only capable of hosting a small fraction of the species as before, and the local
food chain starts to collapse. (credit a: modification of work by NOAA Photo Library; credit b: modification of work by
PAGE: 782
768 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
“prilfish”/Flickr)
LINK TO LEARNING
Learn more about oceanacidification(http://openstax.org/l/16acidicocean)and how it affects other marine
creatures.
Thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16coralreef)has detailed information about how ocean acidification specifically
affects coral reefs.
The dramatic increase in solubility with increasing acidity described above for calcium carbonate is typical of
salts containing basic anions (e.g., carbonate, fluoride, hydroxide, sulfide). Another familiar example is the
formation of dental cavities in tooth enamel. The major mineral component of enamel is calcium
hydroxyapatite (Figure 15.8), a sparingly soluble ionic compound whose dissolution equilibrium is
FIGURE15.8 Crystal of the mineral hydroxyapatite, Ca (PO ) OH, is shown here. The pure compound is white, but
5 4 3
like many other minerals, this sample is colored because of the presence of impurities.
This compound dissolved to yield two different basic ions: triprotic phosphate ions
and monoprotic hydroxide ions:
Of the two basic productions, the hydroxide is, of course, by far the stronger base (it’s the strongest base that
can exist in aqueous solution), and so it is the dominant factor providing the compound an acid-dependent
solubility. Dental cavities form when the acid waste of bacteria growing on the surface of teeth hastens the
dissolution of tooth enamel by reacting completely with the strong base hydroxide, shifting the hydroxyapatite
solubility equilibrium to the right. Some toothpastes and mouth rinses contain added NaF or SnF that make
2
enamel more acid resistant by replacing the strong base hydroxide with the weak base fluoride:
The weak base fluoride ion reacts only partially with the bacterial acid waste, resulting in a less extensive shift
in the solubility equilibrium and an increased resistance to acid dissolution. See the Chemistry in Everyday
Life feature on the role of fluoride in preventing tooth decay for more information.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 783
15.3 • Coupled Equilibria 769
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Role of Fluoride in Preventing Tooth Decay
As we saw previously, fluoride ions help protect our teeth by reacting with hydroxylapatite to form
fluorapatite, Ca (PO ) F. Since it lacks a hydroxide ion, fluorapatite is more resistant to attacks by acids in
5 43
our mouths and is thus less soluble, protecting our teeth. Scientists discovered that naturally fluorinated
water could be beneficial to your teeth, and so it became common practice to add fluoride to drinking
water. Toothpastes and mouthwashes also contain amounts of fluoride (Figure 15.9).
FIGURE15.9 Fluoride, found in many toothpastes, helps prevent tooth decay (credit: Kerry Ceszyk).
Unfortunately, excess fluoride can negate its advantages. Natural sources of drinking water in various parts
of the world have varying concentrations of fluoride, and places where that concentration is high are prone
to certain health risks when there is no other source of drinking water. The most serious side effect of
excess fluoride is the bone disease, skeletal fluorosis. When excess fluoride is in the body, it can cause the
joints to stiffen and the bones to thicken. It can severely impact mobility and can negatively affect the
thyroid gland. Skeletal fluorosis is a condition that over 2.7 million people suffer from across the world. So
while fluoride can protect our teeth from decay, the US Environmental Protection Agency sets a maximum
level of 4 ppm(4 mg/L)of fluoride in drinking water in the US. Fluoride levels in water are not regulated in
all countries, so fluorosis is a problem in areas with high levels of fluoride in the groundwater.
The solubility of ionic compounds may also be increased when dissolution is coupled to the formation of a
complex ion. For example, aluminum hydroxide dissolves in a solution of sodium hydroxide or another strong
base because of the formation of the complex ion
The equations for the dissolution of aluminum hydroxide, the formation of the complex ion, and the combined
(net) equation are shown below. As indicated by the relatively large value of K for the net reaction, coupling
complex formation with dissolution drastically increases the solubility of Al(OH) .
3
EXAMPLE 15.15
Increased Solubility in Acidic Solutions
Compute and compare the molar solublities for aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) , dissolved in (a) pure water and
3
(b) a buffer containing 0.100Macetic acid and 0.100Msodium acetate.
PAGE: 784
770 15 • Equilibria of Other Reaction Classes
Solution
(a) The molar solubility of aluminum hydroxide in water is computed considering the dissolution equilibrium
only as demonstrated in several previous examples:
(b) The concentration of hydroxide ion of the buffered solution is conveniently calculated by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation:
At this pH, the concentration of hydroxide ion is
The solubility of Al(OH) in this buffer is then calculated from its solubility product expressions:
3
Compared to pure water, the solubility of aluminum hydroxide in this mildly acidic buffer is approximately ten
million times greater (though still relatively low).
Check Your Learning
What is the solubility of aluminum hydroxide in a buffer comprised of 0.100Mformic acid and 0.100M
sodium formate?
Answer:
0.1M
EXAMPLE 15.16
Multiple Equilibria
Unexposed silver halides are removed from photographic film when they react with sodium thiosulfate
(Na S O , called hypo) to form the complex ion (K = 4.7 1013).
2 2 3 f
What mass of Na S O is required to prepare 1.00 L of a solution that will dissolve 1.00 g of AgBr by the
2 2 3
formation of
Solution
Two equilibria are involved when silver bromide dissolves in an aqueous thiosulfate solution containing the
ion:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 785
15.3 • Coupled Equilibria 771
dissolution:
complexation:
Combining these two equilibrium equations yields
The concentration of bromide resulting from dissolution of 1.00 g of AgBr in 1.00 L of solution is
The stoichiometry of the dissolution equilibrium indicates the same concentration of aqueous silver ion will
result, 0.00532 M, and the very large value of ensures that essentially all the dissolved silver ion will be
complexed by thiosulfate ion:
Rearranging the K expression for the combined equilibrium equations and solving for the concentration of
thiosulfate ion yields
Finally, the total mass of required to provide enough thiosulfate to yield the concentrations cited
above can be calculated.
Mass of required to yield 0.00532 M
Mass of required to yield 0.00110 M
The mass of required to dissolve 1.00 g of AgBr in 1.00 L of water is thus 1.68 g + 0.17 g = 1.85 g
Check Your Learning
AgCl(s), silver chloride, has a very low solubility: K = 1.6 10–10. Adding
sp
ammonia significantly increases the solubility of AgCl because a complex ion is formed:
K = 1.7 107. What mass of NH is required to prepare 1.00 L of
f 3
solution that will dissolve 2.00 g of AgCl by formation of
Answer:
1.00 L of a solution prepared with 4.81 g NH dissolves 2.0 g of AgCl.
3
PAGE: 786
772 15 • Key Terms
Key Terms
common ion effect effect on equilibrium when a complex ion from its components
substance with an ion in common with the Lewis acid any species that can accept a pair of
dissolved species is added to the solution; causes electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond
a decrease in the solubility of an ionic species, or Lewis acid-base adduct compound or ion that
a decrease in the ionization of a weak acid or base contains a coordinate covalent bond between a
complex ion ion consisting of a central atom Lewis acid and a Lewis base
surrounding molecules or ions called ligands via Lewis acid-base chemistry reactions involving the
coordinate covalent bonds formation of coordinate covalent bonds
coordinate covalent bond (also, dative bond) Lewis base any species that can donate a pair of
covalent bond in which both electrons originated electrons and form a coordinate covalent bond
from the same atom ligand molecule or ion acting as a Lewis base in
coupled equilibria system characterized the complex ion formation; bonds to the central atom
simultaneous establishment of two or more of the complex
equilibrium reactions sharing one or more molar solubility solubility of a compound
reactant or product expressed in units of moles per liter (mol/L)
dissociation constant (K) equilibrium constant selective precipitation process in which ions are
d
for the decomposition of a complex ion into its separated using differences in their solubility
components with a given precipitating reagent
formation constant (K) (also, stability constant) solubility product constant (K ) equilibrium
f sp
equilibrium constant for the formation of a constant for the dissolution of an ionic compound
Key Equations
Summary
15.1Precipitation and Dissolution 15.2Lewis Acids and Bases
The equilibrium constant for an equilibrium A Lewis acid is a species that can accept an electron
involving the precipitation or dissolution of a slightly pair, whereas a Lewis base has an electron pair
soluble ionic solid is called the solubility product, available for donation to a Lewis acid. Complex ions
K , of the solid. For a heterogeneous equilibrium are examples of Lewis acid-base adducts and
sp
involving the slightly soluble solid M X and its ions comprise central metal atoms or ions acting as
p q
Mm+and Xn–: Lewis acids bonded to molecules or ions called
ligands that act as Lewis bases. The equilibrium
constant for the reaction between a metal ion and
the solubility product expression is: ligands produces a complex ion called a formation
constant; for the reverse reaction, it is called a
dissociation constant.
The solubility product of a slightly soluble
15.3Coupled Equilibria
electrolyte can be calculated from its solubility;
conversely, its solubility can be calculated from its Systems involving two or more chemical equilibria
K , provided the only significant reaction that that share one or more reactant or product are
sp
occurs when the solid dissolves is the formation of called coupled equilibria. Common examples of
its ions. coupled equilibria include the increased solubility of
some compounds in acidic solutions (coupled
A slightly soluble electrolyte begins to precipitate
dissolution and neutralization equilibria) and in
when the magnitude of the reaction quotient for the
solutions containing ligands (coupled dissolution
dissolution reaction exceeds the magnitude of the
and complex formation). The equilibrium tools from
solubility product. Precipitation continues until the
other chapters may be applied to describe and
reaction quotient equals the solubility product.
perform calculations on these systems.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 787
15 • Exercises 773
Exercises
15.1Precipitation and Dissolution
1. Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
2. Complete the changes in concentrations for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b
(c)
(d)
(e)
3. How do the concentrations of Ag+and in a saturated solution above 1.0 g of solid Ag CrO change
2 4
when 100 g of solid Ag CrO is added to the system? Explain.
2 4
4. How do the concentrations of Pb2+and S2–change when K S is added to a saturated solution of PbS?
2
PAGE: 788
774 15 • Exercises
5. What additional information do we need to answer the following question: How is the equilibrium of solid
silver bromide with a saturated solution of its ions affected when the temperature is raised?
6. Which of the following slightly soluble compounds has a solubility greater than that calculated from its
solubility product because of hydrolysis of the anion present: CoSO , CuI, PbCO , PbCl , Tl S, KClO ?
3 3 2 2 4
7. Which of the following slightly soluble compounds has a solubility greater than that calculated from its
solubility product because of hydrolysis of the anion present: AgCl, BaSO , CaF , Hg I , MnCO , and ZnS?
4 2 2 2 3
8. Write the ionic equation for dissolution and the solubility product (K ) expression for each of the following
sp
slightly soluble ionic compounds:
(a) PbCl
2
(b) Ag S
2
(c) Sr (PO )
3 42
(d) SrSO
4
9. Write the ionic equation for the dissolution and theK expression for each of the following slightly soluble
sp
ionic compounds:
(a) LaF
3
(b) CaCO
3
(c) Ag SO
2 4
(d) Pb(OH)
2
10. TheHandbook of Chemistry and Physics(http://openstax.org/l/16Handbook)gives solubilities of the
following compounds in grams per 100 mL of water. Because these compounds are only slightly soluble,
assume that the volume does not change on dissolution and calculate the solubility product for each.
(a) BaSiF , 0.026 g/100 mL (contains ions)
6
(b) Ce(IO ) , 1.5 10–2g/100 mL
34
(c) Gd (SO ) , 3.98 g/100 mL
2 43
(d) (NH ) PtBr , 0.59 g/100 mL (contains ions)
42 6
11. TheHandbook of Chemistry and Physics(http://openstax.org/l/16Handbook)gives solubilities of the
following compounds in grams per 100 mL of water. Because these compounds are only slightly soluble,
assume that the volume does not change on dissolution and calculate the solubility product for each.
(a) BaSeO , 0.0118 g/100 mL
4
(b) Ba(BrO ) ·H O, 0.30 g/100 mL
32 2
(c) NH MgAsO ·6H O, 0.038 g/100 mL
4 4 2
(d) La (MoO ) , 0.00179 g/100 mL
2 43
12. Use solubility products and predict which of the following salts is the most soluble, in terms of moles per
liter, in pure water: CaF , Hg Cl , PbI , or Sn(OH) .
2 2 2 2 2
13. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the molar solubility of each of
the following from its solubility product:
(a) KHC H O
4 4 6
(b) PbI
2
(c) Ag [Fe(CN) ], a salt containing the ion
4 6
(d) Hg I
2 2
14. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the molar solubility of each of
the following from its solubility product:
(a) Ag SO
2 4
(b) PbBr
2
(c) AgI
(d) CaC O ·H O
2 4 2
15. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute
species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion.
Show that changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions can be neglected.
(a) AgCl(s) in 0.025MNaCl
(b) CaF (s) in 0.00133MKF
2
(c) Ag SO (s) in 0.500 L of a solution containing 19.50 g of K SO
2 4 2 4
(d) Zn(OH) (s) in a solution buffered at a pH of 11.45
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 789
15 • Exercises 775
16. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute
species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion.
Show that changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions can be neglected.
(a) TlCl(s) in 1.250MHCl
(b) PbI (s) in 0.0355MCaI
2 2
(c) Ag CrO (s) in 0.225 L of a solution containing 0.856 g of K CrO
2 4 2 4
(d) Cd(OH) (s) in a solution buffered at a pH of 10.995
2
17. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentration of all solute
species in each of the following solutions of salts in contact with a solution containing a common ion.
Show that it is not appropriate to neglect the changes in the initial concentrations of the common ions.
(a) TlCl(s) in 0.025MTlNO
3
(b) BaF (s) in 0.0313MKF
2
(c) MgC O in 2.250 L of a solution containing 8.156 g of Mg(NO )
2 4 32
(d) Ca(OH) (s) in an unbuffered solution initially with a pH of 12.700
2
18. Explain why the changes in concentrations of the common ions inExercise 15.17can be neglected.
19. Explain why the changes in concentrations of the common ions inExercise 15.18cannot be neglected.
20. Calculate the solubility of aluminum hydroxide, Al(OH) , in a solution buffered at pH 11.00.
3
21. Refer toAppendix Jfor solubility products for calcium salts. Determine which of the calcium salts listed is
most soluble in moles per liter and which is most soluble in grams per liter.
22. Most barium compounds are very poisonous; however, barium sulfate is often administered internally as
an aid in the X-ray examination of the lower intestinal tract (Figure 15.4). This use of BaSO is possible
4
because of its low solubility. Calculate the molar solubility of BaSO and the mass of barium present in
4
1.00 L of water saturated with BaSO .
4
23. Public Health Service standards for drinking water set a maximum of 250 mg/L (2.60 10–3M) of
because of its cathartic action (it is a laxative). Does natural water that is saturated with CaSO (“gyp”
4
water) as a result or passing through soil containing gypsum, CaSO ·2H O, meet these standards? What is
4 2
the concentration of in such water?
24. Perform the following calculations:
(a) Calculate [Ag+] in a saturated aqueous solution of AgBr.
(b) What will [Ag+] be when enough KBr has been added to make [Br–] = 0.050M?
(c) What will [Br–] be when enough AgNO has been added to make [Ag+] = 0.020M?
3
25. The solubility product of CaSO ·2H O is 2.4 10–5. What mass of this salt will dissolve in 1.0 L of 0.010M
4 2
26. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentrations of ions in a
saturated solution of each of the following (seeAppendix Jfor solubility products).
(a) TlCl
(b) BaF
2
(c) Ag CrO
2 4
(d) CaC O ·H O
2 4 2
(e) the mineral anglesite, PbSO
4
27. Assuming that no equilibria other than dissolution are involved, calculate the concentrations of ions in a
saturated solution of each of the following (seeAppendix Jfor solubility products):
(a) AgI
(b) Ag SO
2 4
(c) Mn(OH)
2
(d) Sr(OH) ·8H O
2 2
(e) the mineral brucite, Mg(OH)
2
PAGE: 790
776 15 • Exercises
28. The following concentrations are found in mixtures of ions in equilibrium with slightly soluble solids.
From the concentrations given, calculateK for each of the slightly soluble solids indicated:
sp
(a) AgBr: [Ag+] = 5.7 10–7M, [Br–] = 5.7 10–7M
(b) CaCO : [Ca2+] = 5.3 10–3M, = 9.0 10–7M
3
(c) PbF : [Pb2+] = 2.1 10–3M, [F–] = 4.2 10–3M
2
(d) Ag CrO : [Ag+] = 5.3 10–5M, 3.2 10–3M
2 4
(e) InF : [In3+] = 2.3 10–3M, [F–] = 7.0 10–3M
3
29. The following concentrations are found in mixtures of ions in equilibrium with slightly soluble solids.
From the concentrations given, calculateK for each of the slightly soluble solids indicated:
sp
(a) TlCl: [Tl+] = 1.21 10–2M, [Cl–] = 1.2 10–2M
(b) Ce(IO ) : [Ce4+] = 1.8 10–4M, = 2.6 10–13M
34
(c) Gd (SO ) : [Gd3+] = 0.132M, = 0.198M
2 43
(d) Ag SO : [Ag+] = 2.40 10–2M, = 2.05 10–2M
2 4
(e) BaSO : [Ba2+] = 0.500M, = 4.6 10−8M
4
30. Which of the following compounds precipitates from a solution that has the concentrations indicated?
(SeeAppendix JforK values.)
sp
(a) KClO : [K+] = 0.01M, = 0.01M
4
(b) K PtCl : [K+] = 0.01M, = 0.01M
2 6
(c) PbI : [Pb2+] = 0.003M, [I–] = 1.3 10–3M
2
(d) Ag S: [Ag+] = 1 10–10M, [S2–] = 1 10–13M
2
31. Which of the following compounds precipitates from a solution that has the concentrations indicated?
(SeeAppendix JforK values.)
sp
(a) CaCO : [Ca2+] = 0.003M, = 0.003M
3
(b) Co(OH) : [Co2+] = 0.01M, [OH–] = 1 10–7M
2
(c) CaHPO : [Ca2+] = 0.01M, = 2 10–6M
4
(d) Pb (PO ) : [Pb2+] = 0.01M, = 1 10–13M
3 42
32. Calculate the concentration of Tl+when TlCl just begins to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0250Min
Cl–.
33. Calculate the concentration of sulfate ion when BaSO just begins to precipitate from a solution that is
4
0.0758Min Ba2+.
34. Calculate the concentration of Sr2+when SrCrO starts to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0025Min
4
CrO 2–.
4
35. Calculate the concentration of when Ag PO starts to precipitate from a solution that is 0.0125Min
3 4
Ag+.
36. Calculate the concentration of F–required to begin precipitation of CaF in a solution that is 0.010Min
2
Ca2+.
37. Calculate the concentration of Ag+required to begin precipitation of Ag CO in a solution that is 2.50
2 3
10–6Min
38. What [Ag+] is required to reduce to 8.2 10–4Mby precipitation of Ag CO ?
2 3
39. What [F–] is required to reduce [Ca2+] to 1.0 10–4Mby precipitation of CaF ?
2
40. A volume of 0.800 L of a 2 10–4-MBa(NO ) solution is added to 0.200 L of 5 10–4MLi SO . Does
32 2 4
BaSO precipitate? Explain your answer.
4
41. Perform these calculations for nickel(II) carbonate. (a) With what volume of water must a precipitate
containing NiCO be washed to dissolve 0.100 g of this compound? Assume that the wash water becomes
3
saturated with NiCO (K = 1.36 10–7).
3 sp
(b) If the NiCO were a contaminant in a sample of CoCO (K = 1.0 10–12), what mass of CoCO would
3 3 sp 3
have been lost? Keep in mind that both NiCO and CoCO dissolve in the same solution.
3 3
42. Iron concentrations greater than 5.4 10–6Min water used for laundry purposes can cause staining.
What [OH–] is required to reduce [Fe2+] to this level by precipitation of Fe(OH) ?
2
43. A solution is 0.010Min both Cu2+and Cd2+. What percentage of Cd2+remains in the solution when 99.9%
of the Cu2+has been precipitated as CuS by adding sulfide?
44. A solution is 0.15Min both Pb2+and Ag+. If Cl–is added to this solution, what is [Ag+] when PbCl begins to
2
precipitate?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 791
15 • Exercises 777
45. What reagent might be used to separate the ions in each of the following mixtures, which are 0.1Mwith
respect to each ion? In some cases it may be necessary to control the pH. (Hint: Consider theK values
sp
given inAppendix J.)
(a) and Cu2+
(b) and Cl–
(c) Hg2+and Co2+
(d) Zn2+and Sr2+
(e) Ba2+and Mg2+
(f) and OH–
46. A solution contains 1.0 10–5mol of KBr and 0.10 mol of KCl per liter. AgNO is gradually added to this
3
solution. Which forms first, solid AgBr or solid AgCl?
47. A solution contains 1.0 10–2mol of KI and 0.10 mol of KCl per liter. AgNO is gradually added to this
3
solution. Which forms first, solid AgI or solid AgCl?
48. The calcium ions in human blood serum are necessary for coagulation (Figure 15.5). Potassium oxalate,
K C O , is used as an anticoagulant when a blood sample is drawn for laboratory tests because it removes
2 2 4
the calcium as a precipitate of CaC O ·H O. It is necessary to remove all but 1.0% of the Ca2+in serum in
2 4 2
order to prevent coagulation. If normal blood serum with a buffered pH of 7.40 contains 9.5 mg of Ca2+per
100 mL of serum, what mass of K C O is required to prevent the coagulation of a 10 mL blood sample
2 2 4
that is 55% serum by volume? (All volumes are accurate to two significant figures. Note that the volume of
serum in a 10-mL blood sample is 5.5 mL. Assume that the K value for CaC O in serum is the same as in
sp 2 4
water.)
49. About 50% of urinary calculi (kidney stones) consist of calcium phosphate, Ca (PO ) . The normal mid
3 42
range calcium content excreted in the urine is 0.10 g of Ca2+per day. The normal mid range amount of
urine passed may be taken as 1.4 L per day. What is the maximum concentration of phosphate ion that
urine can contain before a calculus begins to form?
50. The pH of normal urine is 6.30, and the total phosphate concentration + +
+ [H PO ]) is 0.020M. What is the minimum concentration of Ca2+necessary to induce kidney stone
3 4
formation? (SeeExercise 15.49for additional information.)
51. Magnesium metal (a component of alloys used in aircraft and a reducing agent used in the production of
uranium, titanium, and other active metals) is isolated from sea water by the following sequence of
reactions:
Sea water has a density of 1.026 g/cm3and contains 1272 parts per million of magnesium as Mg2+(aq) by
mass. What mass, in kilograms, of Ca(OH) is required to precipitate 99.9% of the magnesium in 1.00
2
103L of sea water?
52. Hydrogen sulfide is bubbled into a solution that is 0.10Min both Pb2+and Fe2+and 0.30Min HCl. After
the solution has come to equilibrium it is saturated with H S ([H S] = 0.10M). What concentrations of Pb2+
2 2
and Fe2+remain in the solution? For a saturated solution of H S we can use the equilibrium:
2
(Hint: The changes as metal sulfides precipitate.)
53. Perform the following calculations involving concentrations of iodate ions:
(a) The iodate ion concentration of a saturated solution of La(IO ) was found to be 3.1 10–3mol/L. Find
33
theK .
sp
(b) Find the concentration of iodate ions in a saturated solution of Cu(IO ) (K = 7.4 10–8).
32 sp
54. Calculate the molar solubility of AgBr in 0.035MNaBr (K = 5 10–13).
sp
55. How many grams of Pb(OH) will dissolve in 500 mL of a 0.050-MPbCl solution (K = 1.2 10–15)?
2 2 sp
56. Use thesimulation(http://openstax.org/l/16solublesalts)from the earlier Link to Learning to complete the
following exercise. Using 0.01 g CaF , give the K values found in a 0.2-Msolution of each of the salts.
2 sp
Discuss why the values change as you change soluble salts.
PAGE: 792
778 15 • Exercises
57. How many grams of Milk of Magnesia, Mg(OH) (s) (58.3 g/mol), would be soluble in 200 mL of water.K =
2 sp
7.1 10–12. Include the ionic reaction and the expression forK in your answer. (K = 1 10–14=
sp w
[H O+][OH–])
3
58. Two hypothetical salts, LM and LQ, have the same molar solubility in H O. IfK for LM is 3.20 10–5,
2 2 sp 2
what is theK value for LQ?
sp
59. The carbonate ion concentration is gradually increased in a solution containing equal concentrations of
the divalent cations of magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and manganese. Which of the following
carbonates will precipitate first? Which will precipitate last? Explain.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
60. How many grams of Zn(CN) (s) (117.44 g/mol) would be soluble in 100 mL of H O? Include the balanced
2 2
reaction and the expression forK in your answer. TheK value for Zn(CN) (s) is 3.0 10–16.
sp sp 2
15.2Lewis Acids and Bases
61. Even though Ca(OH) is an inexpensive base, its limited solubility restricts its use. What is the pH of a
2
saturated solution of Ca(OH) ?
2
62. Under what circumstances, if any, does a sample of solid AgCl completely dissolve in pure water?
63. Explain why the addition of NH or HNO to a saturated solution of Ag CO in contact with solid Ag CO
3 3 2 3 2 3
increases the solubility of the solid.
64. Calculate the cadmium ion concentration, [Cd2+], in a solution prepared by mixing 0.100 L of 0.0100M
Cd(NO ) with 0.150 L of 0.100 NH (aq).
32 3
65. Explain why addition of NH or HNO to a saturated solution of Cu(OH) in contact with solid Cu(OH)
3 3 2 2
increases the solubility of the solid.
66. Sometimes equilibria for complex ions are described in terms of dissociation constants,K. For the
d
complex ion the dissociation reaction is:
and
Calculate the value of the formation constant,K, for
f
67. Using the value of the formation constant for the complex ion calculate the dissociation
constant.
68. Using the dissociation constant,K = 7.8 10–18, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of Cd2+and
d
CN–in a 0.250-Msolution of
69. Using the dissociation constant,K = 3.4 10–15, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of Zn2+and
d
OH–in a 0.0465-Msolution of
70. Using the dissociation constant,K = 2.2 10–34, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of Co3+and
d
NH in a 0.500-Msolution of
3
71. Using the dissociation constant,K = 1 10–44, calculate the equilibrium concentrations of Fe3+and CN–
d
in a 0.333 M solution of
72. Calculate the mass of potassium cyanide ion that must be added to 100 mL of solution to dissolve 2.0
10–2mol of silver cyanide, AgCN.
73. Calculate the minimum concentration of ammonia needed in 1.0 L of solution to dissolve 3.0 10–3mol of
silver bromide.
74. A roll of 35-mm black and white photographic film contains about 0.27 g of unexposed AgBr before
developing. What mass of Na S O ·5H O (sodium thiosulfate pentahydrate or hypo) in 1.0 L of developer
2 2 3 2
is required to dissolve the AgBr as (K = 4.7 1013)?
f
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 793
15 • Exercises 779
75. We have seen an introductory definition of an acid: An acid is a compound that reacts with water and
increases the amount of hydronium ion present. In the chapter on acids and bases, we saw two more
definitions of acids: a compound that donates a proton (a hydrogen ion, H+) to another compound is called
a Brønsted-Lowry acid, and a Lewis acid is any species that can accept a pair of electrons. Explain why the
introductory definition is a macroscopic definition, while the Brønsted-Lowry definition and the Lewis
definition are microscopic definitions.
76. Write the Lewis structures of the reactants and product of each of the following equations, and identify the
Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) (use Al-Cl single bonds)
(e)
77. Write the Lewis structures of the reactants and product of each of the following equations, and identify the
Lewis acid and the Lewis base in each:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
78. Using Lewis structures, write balanced equations for the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
79. Calculate in a solution prepared by adding 0.0200 mol of NaCl to 0.250 L of a 0.100-MHgCl
2
solution.
80. In a titration of cyanide ion, 28.72 mL of 0.0100MAgNO is added before precipitation begins. [The
3
reaction of Ag+with CN–goes to completion, producing the complex.] Precipitation of solid
AgCN takes place when excess Ag+is added to the solution, above the amount needed to complete the
formation of How many grams of NaCN were in the original sample?
81. What are the concentrations of Ag+, CN–, and in a saturated solution of AgCN?
82. In dilute aqueous solution HF acts as a weak acid. However, pure liquid HF (boiling point = 19.5 °C) is a
strong acid. In liquid HF, HNO acts like a base and accepts protons. The acidity of liquid HF can be
3
increased by adding one of several inorganic fluorides that are Lewis acids and accept F–ion (for example,
BF or SbF ). Write balanced chemical equations for the reaction of pure HNO with pure HF and of pure
3 5 3
HF with BF .
3
83. The simplest amino acid is glycine, H NCH CO H. The common feature of amino acids is that they contain
2 2 2
the functional groups: an amine group, –NH , and a carboxylic acid group, –CO H. An amino acid can
2 2
function as either an acid or a base. For glycine, the acid strength of the carboxyl group is about the same
as that of acetic acid, CH CO H, and the base strength of the amino group is slightly greater than that of
3 2
ammonia, NH .
3
(a) Write the Lewis structures of the ions that form when glycine is dissolved in 1MHCl and in 1MKOH.
(b) Write the Lewis structure of glycine when this amino acid is dissolved in water. (Hint: Consider the
relative base strengths of the –NH and groups.)
2
84. Boric acid, H BO , is not a Brønsted-Lowry acid but a Lewis acid.
3 3
(a) Write an equation for its reaction with water.
(b) Predict the shape of the anion thus formed.
(c) What is the hybridization on the boron consistent with the shape you have predicted?
PAGE: 794
780 15 • Exercises
15.3Coupled Equilibria
85. A saturated solution of a slightly soluble electrolyte in contact with some of the solid electrolyte is said to
be a system in equilibrium. Explain. Why is such a system called a heterogeneous equilibrium?
86. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of Ni2+in a 1.0-Msolution [Ni(NH ) ](NO ) .
36 32
87. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of Zn2+in a 0.30-Msolution of
88. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of Cu2+in a solution initially with 0.050MCu2+and 1.00MNH .
3
89. Calculate the equilibrium concentration of Zn2+in a solution initially with 0.150MZn2+and 2.50MCN–.
90. Calculate the Fe3+equilibrium concentration when 0.0888 mole of K [Fe(CN) ] is added to a solution with
3 6
0.0.00010MCN–.
91. Calculate the Co2+equilibrium concentration when 0.010 mole of [Co(NH ) ](NO ) is added to a solution
36 32
with 0.25MNH . Assume the volume is 1.00 L.
3
92. Calculate the molar solubility of Sn(OH) in a buffer solution containing equal concentrations of NH and
2 3
93. Calculate the molar solubility of Al(OH) in a buffer solution with 0.100MNH and 0.400M
3 3
94. What is the molar solubility of CaF in a 0.100-Msolution of HF?K for HF = 6.4 10–4.
2 a
95. What is the molar solubility of BaSO in a 0.250-Msolution of NaHSO ?K for = 1.2 10–2.
4 4 a
96. What is the molar solubility of Tl(OH) in a 0.10-Msolution of NH ?
3 3
97. What is the molar solubility of Pb(OH) in a 0.138-Msolution of CH NH ?
2 3 2
98. A solution of 0.075MCoBr is saturated with H S ([H S] = 0.10M). What is the minimum pH at which CoS
2 2 2
begins to precipitate?
99. A 0.125-Msolution of Mn(NO ) is saturated with H S ([H S] = 0.10M). At what pH does MnS begin to
32 2 2
precipitate?
100. Both AgCl and AgI dissolve in NH .
3
(a) What mass of AgI dissolves in 1.0 L of 1.0MNH ?
3
(b) What mass of AgCl dissolves in 1.0 L of 1.0MNH ?
3
101. The following question is taken from a Chemistry Advanced Placement Examination and is used with the
permission of the Educational Testing Service.
Solve the following problem:
In a saturated solution of MgF at 18 °C, the concentration of Mg2+is 1.21 10–3M. The equilibrium is
2
represented by the preceding equation.
(a) Write the expression for the solubility-product constant,K , and calculate its value at 18 °C.
sp
(b) Calculate the equilibrium concentration of Mg2+in 1.000 L of saturated MgF solution at 18 °C to
2
which 0.100 mol of solid KF has been added. The KF dissolves completely. Assume the volume change is
negligible.
(c) Predict whether a precipitate of MgF will form when 100.0 mL of a 3.00 10–3-Msolution of
2
Mg(NO ) is mixed with 200.0 mL of a 2.00 10–3-Msolution of NaF at 18 °C. Show the calculations to
32
support your prediction.
(d) At 27 °C the concentration of Mg2+in a saturated solution of MgF is 1.17 10–3M. Is the dissolving of
2
MgF in water an endothermic or an exothermic process? Give an explanation to support your
2
conclusion.
102. Which of the following compounds, when dissolved in a 0.01-Msolution of HClO , has a solubility greater
4
than in pure water: CuCl, CaCO , MnS, PbBr , CaF ? Explain your answer.
3 2 2
103. Which of the following compounds, when dissolved in a 0.01-Msolution of HClO , has a solubility greater
4
than in pure water: AgBr, BaF , Ca (PO ) , ZnS, PbI ? Explain your answer.
2 3 42 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 795
15 • Exercises 781
104. What is the effect on the amount of solid Mg(OH) that dissolves and the concentrations of Mg2+and OH–
2
when each of the following are added to a mixture of solid Mg(OH) and water at equilibrium?
2
(a) MgCl
2
(b) KOH
(c) HClO
4
(d) NaNO
3
(e) Mg(OH)
2
105. What is the effect on the amount of CaHPO that dissolves and the concentrations of Ca2+and
4
when each of the following are added to a mixture of solid CaHPO and water at equilibrium?
4
(a) CaCl
2
(b) HCl
(c) KClO
4
(d) NaOH
(e) CaHPO
4
106. Identify all chemical species present in an aqueous solution of Ca (PO ) and list these species in
3 42
decreasing order of their concentrations. (Hint: Remember that the ion is a weak base.)
PAGE: 796
782 15 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 797
CHAPTER 16
Thermodynamics
Figure16.1 Geysers are a dramatic display of thermodynamic principles in nature. Water deep within the
underground channels of the geyser is under high pressure and heated to high temperature by magma. When a
pocket of water near the surface reaches boiling point and is expelled, the resulting drop in pressure causes larger
volumes of water to flash boil, forcefully ejecting steam and water in an impressive eruption. (credit: modification of
work by Yellowstone National Park)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1Spontaneity
16.2Entropy
16.3The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics
16.4Free Energy
INTRODUCTION Among the many capabilities of chemistry is its ability to predict if a process will occur
under specified conditions. Thermodynamics, the study of relationships between the energy and work
associated with chemical and physical processes, provides this predictive ability. Previous chapters in this text
have described various applications of thermochemistry, an important aspect of thermodynamics concerned
with the heat flow accompanying chemical reactions and phase transitions. This chapter will introduce
additional thermodynamic concepts, including those that enable the prediction of any chemical or physical
changes under a given set of conditions.
16.1 Spontaneity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Distinguish between spontaneous and nonspontaneous processes
• Describe the dispersal of matter and energy that accompanies certain spontaneous processes
PAGE: 798
784 16 • Thermodynamics
Processes have a natural tendency to occur in one direction under a given set of conditions. Water will
naturally flow downhill, but uphill flow requires outside intervention such as the use of a pump. Iron exposed
to the earth’s atmosphere will corrode, but rust is not converted to iron without intentional chemical
treatment. Aspontaneous processis one that occurs naturally under certain conditions. Anonspontaneous
process, on the other hand, will not take place unless it is “driven” by the continual input of energy from an
external source. A process that is spontaneous in one direction under a particular set of conditions is
nonspontaneous in the reverse direction. At room temperature and typical atmospheric pressure, for example,
ice will spontaneously melt, but water will not spontaneously freeze.
The spontaneity of a process isnotcorrelated to the speed of the process. A spontaneous change may be so
rapid that it is essentially instantaneous or so slow that it cannot be observed over any practical period of time.
To illustrate this concept, consider the decay of radioactive isotopes, a topic more thoroughly treated in the
chapter on nuclear chemistry. Radioactive decay is by definition a spontaneous process in which the nuclei of
unstable isotopes emit radiation as they are converted to more stable nuclei. All the decay processes occur
spontaneously, but the rates at which different isotopes decay vary widely. Technetium-99m is a popular
radioisotope for medical imaging studies that undergoes relatively rapid decay and exhibits a half-life of about
six hours. Uranium-238 is the most abundant isotope of uranium, and its decay occurs much more slowly,
exhibiting a half-life of more than four billion years (Figure 16.2).
FIGURE16.2 Both U-238 and Tc-99m undergo spontaneous radioactive decay, but at drastically different rates.
Over the course of one week, essentially all of a Tc-99m sample and none of a U-238 sample will have decayed.
As another example, consider the conversion of diamond into graphite (Figure 16.3).
The phase diagram for carbon indicates that graphite is the stable form of this element under ambient
atmospheric pressure, while diamond is the stable allotrope at very high pressures, such as those present
during its geologic formation. Thermodynamic calculations of the sort described in the last section of this
chapter indicate that the conversion of diamond to graphite at ambient pressure occurs spontaneously, yet
diamonds are observed to exist, and persist, under these conditions. Though the process is spontaneous under
typical ambient conditions, its rate is extremely slow; so, for all practical purposes diamonds are indeed
“forever.” Situations such as these emphasize the important distinction between the thermodynamic and the
kinetic aspects of a process. In this particular case, diamonds are said to bethermodynamically unstablebut
kinetically stableunder ambient conditions.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 799
16.1 • Spontaneity 785
FIGURE16.3 The conversion of carbon from the diamond allotrope to the graphite allotrope is spontaneous at
ambient pressure, but its rate is immeasurably slow at low to moderate temperatures. This process is known as
graphitization, and its rate can be increased to easily measurable values at temperatures in the 1000–2000 K range.
(credit "diamond" photo: modification of work by "Fancy Diamonds"/Flickr; credit "graphite" photo: modification of
work by images-of-elements.com/carbon.php)
Dispersal of Matter and Energy
Extending the discussion of thermodynamic concepts toward the objective of predicting spontaneity, consider
now an isolated system consisting of two flasks connected with a closed valve. Initially there is an ideal gas in
one flask and the other flask is empty (P= 0). (Figure 16.4). When the valve is opened, the gas spontaneously
expands to fill both flasks equally. Recalling the definition of pressure-volume work from the chapter on
thermochemistry, note that no work has been done because the pressure in a vacuum is zero.
Note as well that since the system is isolated, no heat has been exchanged with the surroundings (q= 0). The
first law of thermodynamicsconfirms that there has been no change in the system’s internal energy as a result
of this process.
The spontaneity of this process is therefore not a consequence of any change in energy that accompanies the
process. Instead, the driving force appears to be related to thegreater, more uniform dispersal of matterthat
results when the gas is allowed to expand. Initially, the system was comprised of one flask containing matter
and another flask containing nothing. After the spontaneous expansion took place, the matter was distributed
both more widely (occupying twice its original volume) and more uniformly (present in equal amounts in each
flask).
FIGURE16.4 An isolated system consists of an ideal gas in one flask that is connected by a closed valve to a
PAGE: 800
786 16 • Thermodynamics
second flask containing a vacuum. Once the valve is opened, the gas spontaneously becomes evenly distributed
between the flasks.
Now consider two objects at different temperatures: object X at temperatureT and object Y at temperatureT,
X Y
withT >T (Figure 16.5). When these objects come into contact, heat spontaneously flows from the hotter
X Y
object (X) to the colder one (Y). This corresponds to a loss of thermal energy by X and a gain of thermal energy
by Y.
From the perspective of this two-object system, there was no net gain or loss of thermal energy, rather the
available thermal energy was redistributed among the two objects. This spontaneous process resulted in a
more uniform dispersal of energy.
FIGURE16.5 When two objects at different temperatures come in contact, heat spontaneously flows from the
hotter to the colder object.
As illustrated by the two processes described, an important factor in determining the spontaneity of a process
is the extent to which it changes the dispersal or distribution of matter and/or energy. In each case, a
spontaneous process took place that resulted in a more uniform distribution of matter or energy.
EXAMPLE 16.1
Redistribution of Matter during a Spontaneous Process
Describe how matter is redistributed when the following spontaneous processes take place:
(a) A solid sublimes.
(b) A gas condenses.
(c) A drop of food coloring added to a glass of water forms a solution with uniform color.
Solution
FIGURE16.6 (credit a: modification of work by Jenny Downing; credit b: modification of work by “Fuzzy
Gerdes”/Flickr; credit c: modification of work by Paul A. Flowers)
(a) Sublimation is the conversion of a solid (relatively high density) to a gas (much lesser density). This process
yields a much greater dispersal of matter, since the molecules will occupy a much greater volume after the
solid-to-gas transition.
(b) Condensation is the conversion of a gas (relatively low density) to a liquid (much greater density). This
process yields a much lesser dispersal of matter, since the molecules will occupy a much lesser volume after
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 801
16.2 • Entropy 787
the gas-to-liquid transition.
(c) The process in question is diffusion. This process yields a more uniform dispersal of matter, since the initial
state of the system involves two regions of different dye concentrations (high in the drop of dye, zero in the
water), and the final state of the system contains a single dye concentration throughout.
Check Your Learning
Describe how energy is redistributed when a spoon at room temperature is placed in a cup of hot coffee.
Answer:
Heat will spontaneously flow from the hotter object (coffee) to the colder object (spoon), resulting in a more
uniform distribution of thermal energy as the spoon warms and the coffee cools.
16.2 Entropy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define entropy
• Explain the relationship between entropy and the number of microstates
• Predict the sign of the entropy change for chemical and physical processes
In 1824, at the age of 28, Nicolas Léonard SadiCarnot(Figure 16.7) published the results of an extensive study
regarding the efficiency of steam heat engines. A later review of Carnot’s findings by RudolfClausius
introduced a new thermodynamic property that relates the spontaneous heat flow accompanying a process to
the temperature at which the process takes place. This new property was expressed as the ratio of the
reversibleheat (q ) and the kelvin temperature (T). In thermodynamics, areversible processis one that
rev
takes place at such a slow rate that it is always at equilibrium and its direction can be changed (it can be
“reversed”) by an infinitesimally small change in some condition. Note that the idea of a reversible process is a
formalism required to support the development of various thermodynamic concepts; no real processes are
truly reversible, rather they are classified asirreversible.
FIGURE16.7 (a) Nicholas Léonard Sadi Carnot’s research into steam-powered machinery and (b) Rudolf Clausius’s
later study of those findings led to groundbreaking discoveries about spontaneous heat flow processes.
Similar to other thermodynamic properties, this new quantity is a state function, so its change depends only
upon the initial and final states of a system. In 1865, Clausius named this propertyentropy (S)and defined its
change for any process as the following:
PAGE: 802
788 16 • Thermodynamics
The entropy change for a real, irreversible process is then equal to that for the theoretical reversible process
that involves the same initial and final states.
Entropy and Microstates
Following the work of Carnot and Clausius, LudwigBoltzmanndeveloped a molecular-scale statistical model
that related the entropy of a system to thenumber of microstates(W) possible for the system. Amicrostateis a
specific configuration of all the locations and energies of the atoms or molecules that make up a system. The
relation between a system’s entropy and the number of possible microstates is
wherekis the Boltzmann constant, 1.38 10−23J/K.
As for other state functions, the change in entropy for a process is the difference between its final (S) and
f
initial (S) values:
i
For processes involving an increase in the number of microstates,W >W, the entropy of the system increases
f i
and ΔS> 0. Conversely, processes that reduce the number of microstates,W <W, yield a decrease in system
f i
entropy, ΔS< 0. This molecular-scale interpretation of entropy provides a link to the probability that a process
will occur as illustrated in the next paragraphs.
Consider the general case of a system comprised ofNparticles distributed amongnboxes. The number of
microstates possible for such a system isnN. For example, distributing four particles among two boxes will
result in 24= 16 different microstates as illustrated inFigure 16.8. Microstates with equivalent particle
arrangements (not considering individual particle identities) are grouped together and are called
distributions. The probability that a system will exist with its components in a given distribution is
proportional to the number of microstates within the distribution. Since entropy increases logarithmically
with the number of microstates,the most probable distribution is therefore the one of greatest entropy.
FIGURE16.8 The sixteen microstates associated with placing four particles in two boxes are shown. The
microstates are collected into five distributions—(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)—based on the numbers of particles in each
box.
For this system, the most probable configuration is one of the six microstates associated with distribution (c)
where the particles are evenly distributed between the boxes, that is, a configuration of two particles in each
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 803
16.2 • Entropy 789
box. The probability of finding the system in this configuration is or The least probable configuration of
the system is one in which all four particles are in one box, corresponding to distributions (a) and (e), each with
a probability of The probability of finding all particles in only one box (either the left box or right box) is
then or
As you add more particles to the system, the number of possible microstates increases exponentially (2N). A
macroscopic (laboratory-sized) system would typically consist of moles of particles (N~ 1023), and the
corresponding number of microstates would be staggeringly huge. Regardless of the number of particles in the
system, however, the distributions in which roughly equal numbers of particles are found in each box are
always the most probable configurations.
This matter dispersal model of entropy is often described qualitatively in terms of thedisorderof the system.
By this description, microstates in which all the particles are in a single box are the most ordered, thus
possessing the least entropy. Microstates in which the particles are more evenly distributed among the boxes
are more disordered, possessing greater entropy.
The previous description of an ideal gas expanding into a vacuum (Figure 16.4) is a macroscopic example of
this particle-in-a-box model. For this system, the most probable distribution is confirmed to be the one in
which the matter is most uniformly dispersed or distributed between the two flasks. Initially, the gas molecules
are confined to just one of the two flasks. Opening the valve between the flasks increases the volume available
to the gas molecules and, correspondingly, the number of microstates possible for the system. SinceW >W,
f i
the expansion process involves an increase in entropy (ΔS> 0) and is spontaneous.
A similar approach may be used to describe the spontaneous flow of heat. Consider a system consisting of two
objects, each containing two particles, and two units of thermal energy (represented as “*”) inFigure 16.9. The
hot object is comprised of particlesAandBand initially contains both energy units. The cold object is
comprised of particlesCandD, which initially has no energy units. Distribution (a) shows the three
microstates possible for the initial state of the system, with both units of energy contained within the hot
object. If one of the two energy units is transferred, the result is distribution (b) consisting of four microstates.
If both energy units are transferred, the result is distribution (c) consisting of three microstates. Thus, we may
describe this system by a total of ten microstates. The probability that the heat does not flow when the two
objects are brought into contact, that is, that the system remains in distribution (a), is More likely is the
flow of heat to yield one of the other two distribution, the combined probability being The most likely result
is the flow of heat to yield the uniform dispersal of energy represented by distribution (b), the probability of
this configuration being This supports the common observation that placing hot and cold objects in
contact results in spontaneous heat flow that ultimately equalizes the objects’ temperatures. And, again, this
spontaneous process is also characterized by an increase in system entropy.
FIGURE16.9 This shows a microstate model describing the flow of heat from a hot object to a cold object. (a)
Before the heat flow occurs, the object comprised of particlesAandBcontains both units of energy and as
represented by a distribution of three microstates. (b) If the heat flow results in an even dispersal of energy (one
energy unit transferred), a distribution of four microstates results. (c) If both energy units are transferred, the
resulting distribution has three microstates.
PAGE: 804
790 16 • Thermodynamics
EXAMPLE 16.2
Determination of ΔS
Calculate the change in entropy for the process depicted below.
Solution
The initial number of microstates is one, the final six:
The sign of this result is consistent with expectation; since there are more microstates possible for the final
state than for the initial state, the change in entropy should be positive.
Check Your Learning
Consider the system shown inFigure 16.9. What is the change in entropy for the process whereallthe energy
is transferred from the hot object (AB) to the cold object (CD)?
Answer:
0 J/K
Predicting the Sign of ΔS
The relationships between entropy, microstates, and matter/energy dispersal described previously allow us to
make generalizations regarding the relative entropies of substances and to predict the sign of entropy changes
for chemical and physical processes. Consider the phase changes illustrated inFigure 16.10. In the solid
phase, the atoms or molecules are restricted to nearly fixed positions with respect to each other and are
capable of only modest oscillations about these positions. With essentially fixed locations for the system’s
component particles, the number of microstates is relatively small. In the liquid phase, the atoms or molecules
are free to move over and around each other, though they remain in relatively close proximity to one another.
This increased freedom of motion results in a greater variation in possible particle locations, so the number of
microstates is correspondingly greater than for the solid. As a result,S >S and the process of
liquid solid
converting a substance from solid to liquid (melting) is characterized by an increase in entropy, ΔS> 0. By the
same logic, the reciprocal process (freezing) exhibits a decrease in entropy, ΔS< 0.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 805
16.2 • Entropy 791
FIGURE16.10 The entropy of a substance increases (ΔS> 0) as it transforms from a relatively ordered solid, to a
less-ordered liquid, and then to a still less-ordered gas. The entropy decreases (ΔS< 0) as the substance transforms
from a gas to a liquid and then to a solid.
Now consider the gaseous phase, in which a given number of atoms or molecules occupy amuchgreater
volume than in the liquid phase. Each atom or molecule can be found in many more locations, corresponding
to a much greater number of microstates. Consequently, for any substance,S >S >S , and the
gas liquid solid
processes of vaporization and sublimation likewise involve increases in entropy, ΔS> 0. Likewise, the
reciprocal phase transitions, condensation and deposition, involve decreases in entropy, ΔS< 0.
According to kinetic-molecular theory, the temperature of a substance is proportional to the average kinetic
energy of its particles. Raising the temperature of a substance will result in more extensive vibrations of the
particles in solids and more rapid translations of the particles in liquids and gases. At higher temperatures, the
distribution of kinetic energies among the atoms or molecules of the substance is also broader (more
dispersed) than at lower temperatures. Thus, the entropy for any substance increases with temperature
(Figure 16.11).
FIGURE16.11 Entropy increases as the temperature of a substance is raised, which corresponds to the greater
spread of kinetic energies. When a substance undergoes a phase transition, its entropy changes significantly.
LINK TO LEARNING
Try thissimulator(http://openstax.org/l/16freemotion)with interactive visualization of the dependence of
PAGE: 806
792 16 • Thermodynamics
particle location and freedom of motion on physical state and temperature.
The entropy of a substance is influenced by the structure of the particles (atoms or molecules) that comprise
the substance. With regard to atomic substances, heavier atoms possess greater entropy at a given
temperature than lighter atoms, which is a consequence of the relation between a particle’s mass and the
spacing of quantized translational energy levels (a topic beyond the scope of this text). For molecules, greater
numbers of atoms increase the number of ways in which the molecules can vibrate and thus the number of
possible microstates and the entropy of the system.
Finally, variations in the types of particles affects the entropy of a system. Compared to a pure substance, in
which all particles are identical, the entropy of a mixture of two or more different particle types is greater. This
is because of the additional orientations and interactions that are possible in a system comprised of
nonidentical components. For example, when a solid dissolves in a liquid, the particles of the solid experience
both a greater freedom of motion and additional interactions with the solvent particles. This corresponds to a
more uniform dispersal of matter and energy and a greater number of microstates. The process of dissolution
therefore involves an increase in entropy, ΔS> 0.
Considering the various factors that affect entropy allows us to make informed predictions of the sign of ΔSfor
various chemical and physical processes as illustrated inExample 16.3.
EXAMPLE 16.3
Predicting the Sign of ∆S
Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes. Indicate the reason for each of your
predictions.
(a) One mole liquid water at room temperature one mole liquid water at 50 °C
(b)
(c)
(d)
Solution
(a) positive, temperature increases
(b) negative, reduction in the number of ions (particles) in solution, decreased dispersal of matter
(c) negative, net decrease in the amount of gaseous species
(d) positive, phase transition from solid to liquid, net increase in dispersal of matter
Check Your Learning
Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes. Give a reason for your prediction.
(a)
(b) the freezing of liquid water
(c)
(d)
Answer:
(a) Positive; The solid dissolves to give an increase of mobile ions in solution. (b) Negative; The liquid becomes
a more ordered solid. (c) Positive; The relatively ordered solid becomes a gas. (d) Positive; There is a net
increase in the amount of gaseous species.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 807
16.3 • The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics 793
16.3 The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State and explain the second and third laws of thermodynamics
• Calculate entropy changes for phase transitions and chemical reactions under standard conditions
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
In the quest to identify a property that may reliably predict the spontaneity of a process, a promising candidate
has been identified: entropy. Processes that involve an increase in entropyof the system(ΔS> 0) are very often
spontaneous; however, examples to the contrary are plentiful. By expanding consideration of entropy changes
to includethe surroundings, we may reach a significant conclusion regarding the relation between this
property and spontaneity. In thermodynamic models, the system and surroundings comprise everything, that
is, the universe, and so the following is true:
To illustrate this relation, consider again the process of heat flow between two objects, one identified as the
system and the other as the surroundings. There are three possibilities for such a process:
1. The objects are at different temperatures, and heat flows from the hotter to the cooler object.This is
always observed to occur spontaneously.Designating the hotter object as the system and invoking the
definition of entropy yields the following:
The magnitudes of −q andq are equal, their opposite arithmetic signs denoting loss of heat by the
rev rev
system and gain of heat by the surroundings. SinceT >T in this scenario, the entropydecreaseof the
sys surr
system will be less than the entropyincreaseof the surroundings, and sothe entropy of the universe will
increase:
2. The objects are at different temperatures, and heat flows from the cooler to the hotter object.This is never
observed to occur spontaneously.Again designating the hotter object as the system and invoking the
definition of entropy yields the following:
The arithmetic signs ofq denote the gain of heat by the system and the loss of heat by the surroundings.
rev
The magnitude of the entropy change for the surroundings will again be greater than that for the system,
but in this case, the signs of the heat changes (that is,the direction of the heat flow) will yield a negative
value for ΔS .This process involves a decrease in the entropy of the universe.
univ
3. The objects are at essentially the same temperature,T ≈T , and so the magnitudes of the entropy
sys surr
changes are essentially the same for both the system and the surroundings. In this case, the entropy
change of the universe is zero, and the system isat equilibrium.
These results lead to a profound statement regarding the relation between entropy and spontaneity known as
thesecond law of thermodynamics:all spontaneous changes cause an increase in the entropy of the
universe.A summary of these three relations is provided inTable 16.1.
PAGE: 808
794 16 • Thermodynamics
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
ΔS > 0 spontaneous
univ
ΔS < 0 nonspontaneous (spontaneous in opposite direction)
univ
ΔS = 0 at equilibrium
univ
TABLE16.1
For many realistic applications, the surroundings are vast in comparison to the system. In such cases, the heat
gained or lost by the surroundings as a result of some process represents a very small, nearly infinitesimal,
fraction of its total thermal energy. For example, combustion of a fuel in air involves transfer of heat from a
system (the fuel and oxygen molecules undergoing reaction) to surroundings that are infinitely more massive
(the earth’s atmosphere). As a result,q is a good approximation ofq , and the second law may be stated as
surr rev
the following:
We may use this equation to predict the spontaneity of a process as illustrated inExample 16.4.
EXAMPLE 16.4
Will Ice Spontaneously Melt?
The entropy change for the process
is 22.1 J/K and requires that the surroundings transfer 6.00 kJ of heat to the system. Is the process
spontaneous at −10.00 °C? Is it spontaneous at +10.00 °C?
Solution
We can assess the spontaneity of the process by calculating the entropy change of the universe. If ΔS is
univ
positive, then the process is spontaneous. At both temperatures, ΔS = 22.1 J/K andq = −6.00 kJ.
sys surr
At −10.00 °C (263.15 K), the following is true:
S < 0, so melting is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous) at −10.0 °C.
univ
At 10.00 °C (283.15 K), the following is true:
S > 0, so meltingisspontaneous at 10.00 °C.
univ
Check Your Learning
Using this information, determine if liquid water will spontaneously freeze at the same temperatures. What
can you say about the values ofS ?
univ
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 809
16.3 • The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics 795
Answer:
Entropy is a state function, so ΔS = −ΔS = −22.1 J/K andq = +6.00 kJ. At −10.00 °C spontaneous,
freezing melting surr
+0.7 J/K; at +10.00 °C nonspontaneous, −0.9 J/K.
The Third Law of Thermodynamics
The previous section described the various contributions of matter and energy dispersal that contribute to the
entropy of a system. With these contributions in mind, consider the entropy of a pure, perfectly crystalline
solid possessing no kinetic energy (that is, at a temperature of absolute zero, 0 K). This system may be
described by a single microstate, as its purity, perfect crystallinity and complete lack of motion means there is
but one possible location for each identical atom or molecule comprising the crystal (W= 1). According to the
Boltzmann equation, the entropy of this system is zero.
This limiting condition for a system’s entropy represents thethird law of thermodynamics:the entropy of a
pure, perfect crystalline substance at 0 K is zero.
Careful calorimetric measurements can be made to determine the temperature dependence of a substance’s
entropy and to derive absolute entropy values under specific conditions.Standard entropies (S°)are for one
mole of substance under standard conditions (a pressure of 1 bar and a temperature of 298.15 K; see details
regarding standard conditions in the thermochemistry chapter of this text). Thestandard entropy change
(ΔS°)for a reaction may be computed using standard entropies as shown below:
where ν represents stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced equation representing the process. For
example, ΔS° for the following reaction at room temperature
is computed as:
A partial listing of standard entropies is provided inTable 16.2, and additional values are provided in
Appendix G. The example exercises that follow demonstrate the use ofS° values in calculating standard
entropy changes for physical and chemical processes.
Substance (J mol−1K−1)
carbon
C(s, graphite) 5.740
C(s, diamond) 2.38
CO(g) 197.7
CO (g) 213.8
2
CH (g) 186.3
4
C H (g) 219.5
2 4
C H (g) 229.5
2 6
PAGE: 810
796 16 • Thermodynamics
CH OH(l) 126.8
3
C H OH(l) 160.7
2 5
hydrogen
H (g) 130.57
2
H(g) 114.6
H O(g) 188.71
2
H O(l) 69.91
2
HCI(g) 186.8
H S(g) 205.7
2
oxygen
O (g) 205.03
2
TABLE16.2Standard entropies for selected substances measured at 1 atm and 298.15 K. (Values are
approximately equal to those measured at 1 bar, the currently accepted standard state pressure.)
EXAMPLE 16.5
Determination of ΔS°
Calculate the standard entropy change for the following process:
Solution
Calculate the entropy change using standard entropies as shown above:
The value for ΔS° is negative, as expected for this phase transition (condensation), which the previous section
discussed.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the standard entropy change for the following process:
Answer:
−120.6 J K–1mol–1
EXAMPLE 16.6
Determination of ΔS°
Calculate the standard entropy change for the combustion of methanol, CH OH:
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 811
16.4 • Free Energy 797
Solution
Calculate the entropy change using standard entropies as shown above:
Check Your Learning
Calculate the standard entropy change for the following reaction:
Answer:
24.7 J/K
16.4 Free Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define Gibbs free energy, and describe its relation to spontaneity
• Calculate free energy change for a process using free energies of formation for its reactants and products
• Calculate free energy change for a process using enthalpies of formation and the entropies for its reactants and
products
• Explain how temperature affects the spontaneity of some processes
• Relate standard free energy changes to equilibrium constants
One of the challenges of using the second law of thermodynamics to determine if a process is spontaneous is
that it requires measurements of the entropy change for the systemandthe entropy change for the
surroundings. An alternative approach involving a new thermodynamic property defined in terms of system
properties only was introduced in the late nineteenth century by American mathematician Josiah Willard
Gibbs. This new property is called theGibbs free energy (G)(or simply thefree energy), and it is defined in
terms of a system’s enthalpy and entropy as the following:
Free energy is a state function, and at constant temperature and pressure, thefree energy change (ΔG)may
be expressed as the following:
(For simplicity’s sake, the subscript “sys” will be omitted henceforth.)
The relationship between this system property and the spontaneity of a process may be understood by
recalling the previously derived second law expression:
The first law requires thatq = −q , and at constant pressureq = ΔH, so this expression may be rewritten
surr sys sys
as:
Multiplying both sides of this equation by −T, and rearranging yields the following:
PAGE: 812
798 16 • Thermodynamics
Comparing this equation to the previous one for free energy change shows the following relation:
The free energy change is therefore a reliable indicator of the spontaneity of a process, being directly related to
the previously identified spontaneity indicator, ΔS .Table 16.3summarizes the relation between the
univ
spontaneity of a process and the arithmetic signs of these indicators.
Relation between Process Spontaneity and Signs of Thermodynamic Properties
ΔS > 0 ΔG< 0 spontaneous
univ
ΔS < 0 ΔG> 0 nonspontaneous
univ
ΔS = 0 ΔG= 0 at equilibrium
univ
TABLE16.3
What’s “Free” about ΔG?
In addition to indicating spontaneity, the free energy change also provides information regarding the amount
of useful work (w) that may be accomplished by a spontaneous process. Although a rigorous treatment of this
subject is beyond the scope of an introductory chemistry text, a brief discussion is helpful for gaining a better
perspective on this important thermodynamic property.
For this purpose, consider a spontaneous, exothermic process that involves a decrease in entropy. The free
energy, as defined by
may be interpreted as representing the difference between the energy produced by the process, ΔH, and the
energy lost to the surroundings,TΔS. The difference between the energy produced and the energy lost is the
energy available (or “free”) to do useful work by the process, ΔG. If the process somehow could be made to take
place under conditions of thermodynamic reversibility, the amount of work that could be done would be
maximal:
However, as noted previously in this chapter, such conditions are not realistic. In addition, the technologies
used to extract work from a spontaneous process (e.g., automobile engine, steam turbine) are never 100%
efficient, and so the work done by these processes is always less than the theoretical maximum. Similar
reasoning may be applied to a nonspontaneous process, for which the free energy change represents the
minimumamount of work that must be doneonthe system to carry out the process.
Calculating Free Energy Change
Free energy is a state function, so its value depends only on the conditions of the initial and final states of the
system. A convenient and common approach to the calculation of free energy changes for physical and
chemical reactions is by use of widely available compilations of standard state thermodynamic data. One
method involves the use of standard enthalpies and entropies to computestandard free energy changes,
ΔG°, according to the following relation.
EXAMPLE 16.7
Using Standard Enthalpy and Entropy Changes to Calculate ΔG°
Use standard enthalpy and entropy data fromAppendix Gto calculate the standard free energy change for the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 813
16.4 • Free Energy 799
vaporization of water at room temperature (298 K). What does the computed value for ΔG° say about the
spontaneity of this process?
Solution
The process of interest is the following:
The standard change in free energy may be calculated using the following equation:
FromAppendix G:
Substance
H O(l) −285.83 70.0
2
H O(g) −241.82 188.8
2
Using the appendix data to calculate the standard enthalpy and entropy changes yields:
Substitution into the standard free energy equation yields:
At 298 K (25 °C) so boiling is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous).
Check Your Learning
Use standard enthalpy and entropy data fromAppendix Gto calculate the standard free energy change for the
reaction shown here (298 K). What does the computed value for ΔG° say about the spontaneity of this process?
Answer:
the reaction is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous) at 25 °C.
The standard free energy change for a reaction may also be calculated fromstandard free energy of
formation ΔG°values of the reactants and products involved in the reaction. The standard free energy of
f
formation is the free energy change that accompanies the formation of one mole of a substance from its
elements in their standard states. Similar to the standard enthalpy of formation, is by definition zero for
elemental substances in their standard states. The approach used to calculate for a reaction from
values is the same as that demonstrated previously for enthalpy and entropy changes. For the reaction
the standard free energy change at room temperature may be calculated as
PAGE: 814
800 16 • Thermodynamics
EXAMPLE 16.8
Using Standard Free Energies of Formation to Calculate ΔG°
Consider the decomposition of yellow mercury(II) oxide.
Calculate the standard free energy change at room temperature, using (a) standard free energies of
formation and (b) standard enthalpies of formation and standard entropies. Do the results indicate the
reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous under standard conditions?
Solution
The required data are available inAppendix Gand are shown here.
Compound
HgO (s, yellow) −58.43 −90.46 71.13
Hg(l) 0 0 75.9
O (g) 0 0 205.2
2
(a) Using free energies of formation:
(b) Using enthalpies and entropies of formation:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 815
16.4 • Free Energy 801
Both ways to calculate the standard free energy change at 25 °C give the same numerical value (to three
significant figures), and both predict that the process is nonspontaneous (notspontaneous) at room
temperature.
Check Your Learning
Calculate ΔG° using (a) free energies of formation and (b) enthalpies of formation and entropies (Appendix G).
Do the results indicate the reaction to be spontaneous or nonspontaneous at 25 °C?
Answer:
(a) 140.8 kJ/mol, nonspontaneous
(b) 141.5 kJ/mol, nonspontaneous
Free Energy Changes for Coupled Reactions
The use of free energies of formation to compute free energy changes for reactions as described above is
possible because ΔGis a state function, and the approach is analogous to the use of Hess’ Law in computing
enthalpy changes (see the chapter on thermochemistry). Consider the vaporization of water as an example:
An equation representing this process may be derived by adding the formation reactions for the two phases of
water (necessarily reversing the reaction for the liquid phase). The free energy change for the sum reaction is
the sum of free energy changes for the two added reactions:
This approach may also be used in cases where a nonspontaneous reaction is enabled by coupling it to a
spontaneous reaction. For example, the production of elemental zinc from zinc sulfide is thermodynamically
unfavorable, as indicated by a positive value for ΔG°:
The industrial process for production of zinc from sulfidic ores involves coupling this decomposition reaction
to the thermodynamically favorable oxidation of sulfur:
The coupled reaction exhibits a negative free energy change and is spontaneous:
This process is typically carried out at elevated temperatures, so this result obtained using standard free
energy values is just an estimate. The gist of the calculation, however, holds true.
PAGE: 816
802 16 • Thermodynamics
EXAMPLE 16.9
Calculating Free Energy Change for a Coupled Reaction
Is a reaction coupling the decomposition of ZnS to the formation of H2S expected to be spontaneous under
standard conditions?
Solution
Following the approach outlined above and using free energy values fromAppendix G:
The coupled reaction exhibits a positive free energy change and is thus nonspontaneous.
Check Your Learning
What is the standard free energy change for the reaction below? Is the reaction expected to be spontaneous
under standard conditions?
Answer:
−199.7 kJ; spontaneous
Temperature Dependence of Spontaneity
As was previously demonstrated in this chapter’s section on entropy, the spontaneity of a process may depend
upon the temperature of the system. Phase transitions, for example, will proceed spontaneously in one
direction or the other depending upon the temperature of the substance in question. Likewise, some chemical
reactions can also exhibit temperature dependent spontaneities. To illustrate this concept, the equation
relating free energy change to the enthalpy and entropy changes for the process is considered:
The spontaneity of a process, as reflected in the arithmetic sign of its free energy change, is then determined
by the signs of the enthalpy and entropy changes and, in some cases, the absolute temperature. SinceTis the
absolute (kelvin) temperature, it can only have positive values. Four possibilities therefore exist with regard to
the signs of the enthalpy and entropy changes:
1. Both ΔHand ΔSare positive.This condition describes an endothermic process that involves an increase
in system entropy. In this case, ΔGwill be negative if the magnitude of theTΔSterm is greater than ΔH. If
theTΔSterm is less than ΔH, the free energy change will be positive. Such a process isspontaneous at
high temperatures and nonspontaneous at low temperatures.
2. Both ΔHand ΔSare negative.This condition describes an exothermic process that involves a decrease in
system entropy. In this case, ΔGwill be negative if the magnitude of theTΔSterm is less than ΔH. If the
TΔSterm’s magnitude is greater than ΔH, the free energy change will be positive. Such a process is
spontaneous at low temperatures and nonspontaneous at high temperatures.
3. ΔHis positive and ΔSis negative.This condition describes an endothermic process that involves a
decrease in system entropy. In this case, ΔGwill be positive regardless of the temperature. Such a process
isnonspontaneous at all temperatures.
4. ΔHis negative and ΔSis positive.This condition describes an exothermic process that involves an
increase in system entropy. In this case, ΔGwill be negative regardless of the temperature. Such a process
isspontaneous at all temperatures.
These four scenarios are summarized inFigure 16.12.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 817
16.4 • Free Energy 803
FIGURE16.12 There are four possibilities regarding the signs of enthalpy and entropy changes.
EXAMPLE 16.10
Predicting the Temperature Dependence of Spontaneity
The incomplete combustion of carbon is described by the following equation:
How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature?
Solution
Combustion processes are exothermic (ΔH< 0). This particular reaction involves an increase in entropy due to
the accompanying increase in the amount of gaseous species (net gain of one mole of gas, ΔS> 0). The reaction
is therefore spontaneous (ΔG< 0) at all temperatures.
Check Your Learning
Popular chemical hand warmers generate heat by the air-oxidation of iron:
How does the spontaneity of this process depend upon temperature?
Answer:
ΔHand ΔSare negative; the reaction is spontaneous at low temperatures.
When considering the conclusions drawn regarding the temperature dependence of spontaneity, it is
important to keep in mind what the terms “high” and “low” mean. Since these terms are adjectives, the
temperatures in question are deemed high or low relative to some reference temperature. A process that is
nonspontaneous at one temperature but spontaneous at another will necessarily undergo a change in
“spontaneity” (as reflected by its ΔG) as temperature varies. This is clearly illustrated by a graphical
presentation of the free energy change equation, in which ΔGis plotted on theyaxis versusTon thexaxis:
Such a plot is shown inFigure 16.13. A process whose enthalpy and entropy changes are of the same
arithmetic sign will exhibit a temperature-dependent spontaneity as depicted by the two yellow lines in the
plot. Each line crosses from one spontaneity domain (positive or negative ΔG) to the other at a temperature
that is characteristic of the process in question. This temperature is represented by thex-intercept of the line,
that is, the value ofTfor which ΔGis zero:
PAGE: 818
804 16 • Thermodynamics
So, saying a process is spontaneous at “high” or “low” temperatures means the temperature is above or below,
respectively, that temperature at which ΔGfor the process is zero. As noted earlier, the condition of ΔG = 0
describes a system at equilibrium.
FIGURE16.13 These plots show the variation in ΔGwith temperature for the four possible combinations of
arithmetic sign for ΔHand ΔS.
EXAMPLE 16.11
Equilibrium Temperature for a Phase Transition
As defined in the chapter on liquids and solids, the boiling point of a liquid is the temperature at which its
liquid and gaseous phases are in equilibrium (that is, when vaporization and condensation occur at equal
rates). Use the information inAppendix Gto estimate the boiling point of water.
Solution
The process of interest is the following phase change:
When this process is at equilibrium, ΔG= 0, so the following is true:
Using the standard thermodynamic data fromAppendix G,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 819
16.4 • Free Energy 805
The accepted value for water’s normal boiling point is 373.2 K (100.0 °C), and so this calculation is in
reasonable agreement. Note that the values for enthalpy and entropy changes data used were derived from
standard data at 298 K (Appendix G). If desired, you could obtain more accurate results by using enthalpy and
entropy changes determined at (or at least closer to) the actual boiling point.
Check Your Learning
Use the information inAppendix Gto estimate the boiling point of CS .
2
Answer:
313 K (accepted value 319 K)
Free Energy and Equilibrium
The free energy change for a process may be viewed as a measure of its driving force. A negative value for ΔG
represents a driving force for the process in the forward direction, while a positive value represents a driving
force for the process in the reverse direction. When ΔGis zero, the forward and reverse driving forces are
equal, and the process occurs in both directions at the same rate (the system is at equilibrium).
In the chapter on equilibrium thereaction quotient,Q, was introduced as a convenient measure of the status of
an equilibrium system. Recall thatQis the numerical value of the mass action expression for the system, and
that you may use its value to identify the direction in which a reaction will proceed in order to achieve
equilibrium. WhenQis lesser than the equilibrium constant,K, the reaction will proceed in the forward
direction until equilibrium is reached andQ=K. Conversely, ifQ>K, the process will proceed in the reverse
direction until equilibrium is achieved.
The free energy change for a process taking place with reactants and products present undernonstandard
conditions(pressures other than 1 bar; concentrations other than 1 M) is related to the standard free energy
change according to this equation:
Ris the gas constant (8.314 J/K mol),Tis the kelvin or absolute temperature, andQis the reaction quotient.
For gas phase equilibria, the pressure-based reaction quotient,Q, is used. The concentration-based reaction
P
quotient,Q , is used for condensed phase equilibria. This equation may be used to predict the spontaneity for
C
a process under any given set of conditions as illustrated inExample 16.12.
EXAMPLE 16.12
Calculating ΔGunder Nonstandard Conditions
What is the free energy change for the process shown here under the specified conditions?
T= 25 °C, and
Solution
The equation relating free energy change to standard free energy change and reaction quotient may be used
directly:
PAGE: 820
806 16 • Thermodynamics
Since the computed value for ΔGis positive, the reaction is nonspontaneous under these conditions.
Check Your Learning
Calculate the free energy change for this same reaction at 875 °C in a 5.00 L mixture containing 0.100 mol of
each gas. Is the reaction spontaneous under these conditions?
Answer:
ΔG= –123.5 kJ/mol; yes
For a system at equilibrium,Q=Kand ΔG= 0, and the previous equation may be written as
This form of the equation provides a useful link between these two essential thermodynamic properties, and it
can be used to derive equilibrium constants from standard free energy changes and vice versa. The relations
between standard free energy changes and equilibrium constants are summarized inTable 16.4.
Relations between Standard Free Energy Changes and Equilibrium Constants
K ΔG° Composition of an Equilibrium Mixture
> 1 < 0 Products are more abundant
< 1 > 0 Reactants are more abundant
= 1 = 0 Reactants and products are comparably abundant
TABLE16.4
EXAMPLE 16.13
Calculating an Equilibrium Constant using Standard Free Energy Change
Given that the standard free energies of formation of Ag+(aq), Cl−(aq), and AgCl(s) are 77.1 kJ/mol, −131.2 kJ/
mol, and −109.8 kJ/mol, respectively, calculate the solubility product,K , for AgCl.
sp
Solution
The reaction of interest is the following:
The standard free energy change for this reaction is first computed using standard free energies of formation
for its reactants and products:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 821
16.4 • Free Energy 807
The equilibrium constant for the reaction may then be derived from its standard free energy change:
This result is in reasonable agreement with the value provided inAppendix J.
Check Your Learning
Use the thermodynamic data provided inAppendix Gto calculate the equilibrium constant for the dissociation
of dinitrogen tetroxide at 25 °C.
Answer:
K= 6.9
To further illustrate the relation between these two essential thermodynamic concepts, consider the
observation that reactions spontaneously proceed in a direction that ultimately establishes equilibrium. As
may be shown by plotting the free energy versus the extent of the reaction (for example, as reflected in the
value ofQ), equilibrium is established when the system’s free energy is minimized (Figure 16.14). If a system
consists of reactants and products in nonequilibrium amounts (Q≠K), the reaction will proceed
spontaneously in the direction necessary to establish equilibrium.
PAGE: 822
808 16 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE16.14 These plots show the free energy versus reaction progress for systems whose standard free energy
changes are (a) negative, (b) positive, and (c) zero. Nonequilibrium systems will proceed spontaneously in whatever
direction is necessary to minimize free energy and establish equilibrium.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 823
16 • Key Terms 809
Key Terms
entropy (S) state function that is a measure of the spontaneous change process that takes place
matter and/or energy dispersal within a system, without a continuous input of energy from an
determined by the number of system microstates; external source
often described as a measure of the disorder of standard entropy (S°) entropy for one mole of a
the system substance at 1 bar pressure; tabulated values are
Gibbs free energy change (G) thermodynamic usually determined at 298.15 K
property defined in terms of system enthalpy and standard entropy change (ΔS°) change in entropy
entropy; all spontaneous processes involve a for a reaction calculated using the standard
decrease inG entropies
microstate possible configuration or arrangement standard free energy change (ΔG°) change in free
of matter and energy within a system energy for a process occurring under standard
nonspontaneous process process that requires conditions (1 bar pressure for gases, 1 M
continual input of energy from an external source concentration for solutions)
reversible process process that takes place so standard free energy of formation change
slowly as to be capable of reversing direction in in free energy accompanying the formation of one
response to an infinitesimally small change in mole of substance from its elements in their
conditions; hypothetical construct that can only standard states
be approximated by real processes third law of thermodynamics entropy of a perfect
second law of thermodynamics all spontaneous crystal at absolute zero (0 K) is zero
processes involve an increase in the entropy of
the universe
Key Equations
S=klnW
ΔS = ΔS + ΔS
univ sys surr
ΔG= ΔH−TΔS
Summary
16.1Spontaneity the number of microstates for a system (the number
of ways the system can be arranged) and to the ratio
Chemical and physical processes have a natural
of reversible heat to kelvin temperature. It may be
tendency to occur in one direction under certain
interpreted as a measure of the dispersal or
conditions. A spontaneous process occurs without
distribution of matter and/or energy in a system,
the need for a continual input of energy from some
and it is often described as representing the
external source, while a nonspontaneous process
“disorder” of the system.
requires such. Systems undergoing a spontaneous
process may or may not experience a gain or loss of For a given substance, entropy depends on phase
energy, but they will experience a change in the way withS solid <S liquid <S gas . For different substances in
matter and/or energy is distributed within the the same physical state at a given temperature,
system. entropy is typically greater for heavier atoms or
more complex molecules. Entropy increases when a
16.2Entropy
system is heated and when solutions form. Using
Entropy (S) is a state function that can be related to these guidelines, the sign of entropy changes for
PAGE: 824
810 16 • Exercises
some chemical reactions and physical changes may standard entropy change for a process by using
be reliably predicted. standard entropy values for the reactants and
products involved in the process.
16.3The Second and Third Laws of
Thermodynamics 16.4Free Energy
The second law of thermodynamics states that a Gibbs free energy (G) is a state function defined with
spontaneous process increases the entropy of the regard to system quantities only and may be used to
universe,S > 0. If ΔS < 0, the process is predict the spontaneity of a process. A negative
univ univ
nonspontaneous, and if ΔS = 0, the system is at value for ΔGindicates a spontaneous process; a
univ
equilibrium. The third law of thermodynamics positive ΔGindicates a nonspontaneous process;
establishes the zero for entropy as that of a perfect, and a ΔGof zero indicates that the system is at
pure crystalline solid at 0 K. With only one possible equilibrium. A number of approaches to the
microstate, the entropy is zero. We may compute the computation of free energy changes are possible.
Exercises
16.1Spontaneity
1. What is a spontaneous reaction?
2. What is a nonspontaneous reaction?
3. Indicate whether the following processes are spontaneous or nonspontaneous.
(a) Liquid water freezing at a temperature below its freezing point
(b) Liquid water freezing at a temperature above its freezing point
(c) The combustion of gasoline
(d) A ball thrown into the air
(e) A raindrop falling to the ground
(f) Iron rusting in a moist atmosphere
4. A helium-filled balloon spontaneously deflates overnight as He atoms diffuse through the wall of the
balloon. Describe the redistribution of matter and/or energy that accompanies this process.
5. Many plastic materials are organic polymers that contain carbon and hydrogen. The oxidation of these
plastics in air to form carbon dioxide and water is a spontaneous process; however, plastic materials tend
to persist in the environment. Explain.
16.2Entropy
6. InFigure 16.8all possible distributions and microstates are shown for four different particles shared
between two boxes. Determine the entropy change, ΔS, if the particles are initially evenly distributed
between the two boxes, but upon redistribution all end up in Box (b).
7. InFigure 16.8all of the possible distributions and microstates are shown for four different particles
shared between two boxes. Determine the entropy change, ΔS, for the system when it is converted from
distribution (b) to distribution (d).
8. How does the process described in the previous item relate to the system shown inFigure 16.4?
9. Consider a system similar to the one inFigure 16.8, except that it contains six particles instead of four.
What is the probability of having all the particles in only one of the two boxes in the case? Compare this
with the similar probability for the system of four particles that we have derived to be equal to What
does this comparison tell us about even larger systems?
10. Consider the system shown inFigure 16.9. What is the change in entropy for the process where the energy
is initially associated only with particle A, but in the final state the energy is distributed between two
different particles?
11. Consider the system shown inFigure 16.9. What is the change in entropy for the process where the energy
is initially associated with particles A and B, and the energy is distributed between two particles in
different boxes (one in A-B, the other in C-D)?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 825
16 • Exercises 811
12. Arrange the following sets of systems in order of increasing entropy. Assume one mole of each substance
and the same temperature for each member of a set.
(a) H (g), HBrO (g), HBr(g)
2 4
(b) H O(l), H O(g), H O(s)
2 2 2
(c) He(g), Cl (g), P (g)
2 4
13. At room temperature, the entropy of the halogens increases from I to Br to Cl . Explain.
2 2 2
14. Consider two processes: sublimation of I (s) and melting of I (s) (Note: the latter process can occur at the
2 2
same temperature but somewhat higher pressure).
Is ΔSpositive or negative in these processes? In which of the processes will the magnitude of the entropy
change be greater?
15. Indicate which substance in the given pairs has the higher entropy value. Explain your choices.
(a) C H OH(l) or C H OH(l)
2 5 3 7
(b) C H OH(l) or C H OH(g)
2 5 2 5
(c) 2H(g) or H(g)
16. Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes.
(a) An ice cube is warmed to near its melting point.
(b) Exhaled breath forms fog on a cold morning.
(c) Snow melts.
17. Predict the sign of the entropy change for the following processes. Give a reason for your prediction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
18. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion of methane, CH (g), to give carbon dioxide and
4
water vapor. Explain why it is difficult to predict whether ΔSis positive or negative for this chemical
reaction.
19. Write the balanced chemical equation for the combustion of benzene, C H (l), to give carbon dioxide and
6 6
water vapor. Would you expect ΔSto be positive or negative in this process?
16.3The Second and Third Laws of Thermodynamics
20. What is the difference between ΔSand ΔS° for a chemical change?
21. Calculate for the following changes.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
22. Determine the entropy change for the combustion of liquid ethanol, C H OH, under the standard
2 5
conditions to give gaseous carbon dioxide and liquid water.
23. Determine the entropy change for the combustion of gaseous propane, C H , under the standard
3 8
conditions to give gaseous carbon dioxide and water.
24. “Thermite” reactions have been used for welding metal parts such as railway rails and in metal refining.
One such thermite reaction is Is the reaction spontaneous at
room temperature under standard conditions? During the reaction, the surroundings absorb 851.8 kJ/mol
of heat.
25. Using the relevant values listed inAppendix G, calculate for the following changes:
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 826
812 16 • Exercises
26. From the following information, determine for the following:
27. By calculating ΔS at each temperature, determine if the melting of 1 mole of NaCl(s) is spontaneous at
univ
500 °C and at 700 °C.
What assumptions are made about the thermodynamic information (entropy and enthalpy values) used to
solve this problem?
28. Use the standard entropy data inAppendix Gto determine the change in entropy for each of the following
reactions. All the processes occur at the standard conditions and 25 °C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
29. Use the standard entropy data inAppendix Gto determine the change in entropy for each of the following
reactions. All the processes occur at the standard conditions and 25 °C.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
16.4Free Energy
30. What is the difference between ΔGand ΔG° for a chemical change?
31. A reaction has = 100 kJ/mol and Is the reaction spontaneous at room
temperature? If not, under what temperature conditions will it become spontaneous?
32. Explain what happens as a reaction starts with ΔG< 0 (negative) and reaches the point where ΔG= 0.
33. Use the standard free energy of formation data inAppendix Gto determine the free energy change for
each of the following reactions, which are run under standard state conditions and 25 °C. Identify each as
either spontaneous or nonspontaneous at these conditions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
34. Use the standard free energy data inAppendix Gto determine the free energy change for each of the
following reactions, which are run under standard state conditions and 25 °C. Identify each as either
spontaneous or nonspontaneous at these conditions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 827
16 • Exercises 813
35. Given:
(a) Determine the standard free energy of formation, for phosphoric acid.
(b) How does your calculated result compare to the value inAppendix G? Explain.
36. Is the formation of ozone (O (g)) from oxygen (O (g)) spontaneous at room temperature under standard
3 2
state conditions?
37. Consider the decomposition of red mercury(II) oxide under standard state conditions.
(a) Is the decomposition spontaneous under standard state conditions?
(b) Above what temperature does the reaction become spontaneous?
38. Among other things, an ideal fuel for the control thrusters of a space vehicle should decompose in a
spontaneous exothermic reaction when exposed to the appropriate catalyst. Evaluate the following
substances under standard state conditions as suitable candidates for fuels.
(a) Ammonia:
(b) Diborane:
(c) Hydrazine:
(d) Hydrogen peroxide:
39. Calculate ΔG° for each of the following reactions from the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
40. Calculate ΔG° for each of the following reactions from the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
41. Calculate the equilibrium constant at 25 °C for each of the following reactions from the value of ΔG° given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
42. Calculate the equilibrium constant at 25 °C for each of the following reactions from the value of ΔG° given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
43. Calculate the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
PAGE: 828
814 16 • Exercises
44. Calculate the equilibrium constant at the temperature given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
45. Consider the following reaction at 298 K:
What is the standard free energy change at this temperature? Describe what happens to the initial system,
where the reactants and products are in standard states, as it approaches equilibrium.
46. Determine the normal boiling point (in kelvin) of dichloromethane, CH Cl . Find the actual boiling point
2 2
using the Internet or some other source, and calculate the percent error in the temperature. Explain the
differences, if any, between the two values.
47. Under what conditions is spontaneous?
48. At room temperature, the equilibrium constant (K ) for the self-ionization of water is 1.00 10−14. Using
w
this information, calculate the standard free energy change for the aqueous reaction of hydrogen ion with
hydroxide ion to produce water. (Hint: The reaction is the reverse of the self-ionization reaction.)
49. Hydrogen sulfide is a pollutant found in natural gas. Following its removal, it is converted to sulfur by the
reaction What is the equilibrium constant for this
reaction? Is the reaction endothermic or exothermic?
50. Consider the decomposition of CaCO (s) into CaO(s) and CO (g). What is the equilibrium partial pressure
3 2
of CO at room temperature?
2
51. In the laboratory, hydrogen chloride (HCl(g)) and ammonia (NH (g)) often escape from bottles of their
3
solutions and react to form the ammonium chloride (NH Cl(s)), the white glaze often seen on glassware.
4
Assuming that the number of moles of each gas that escapes into the room is the same, what is the
maximum partial pressure of HCl and NH in the laboratory at room temperature? (Hint: The partial
3
pressures will be equal and are at their maximum value when at equilibrium.)
52. Benzene can be prepared from acetylene. Determine the equilibrium constant at
25 °C and at 850 °C. Is the reaction spontaneous at either of these temperatures? Why is all acetylene not
found as benzene?
53. Carbon dioxide decomposes into CO and O at elevated temperatures. What is the equilibrium partial
2
pressure of oxygen in a sample at 1000 °C for which the initial pressure of CO was 1.15 atm?
2
54. Carbon tetrachloride, an important industrial solvent, is prepared by the chlorination of methane at 850
K.
What is the equilibrium constant for the reaction at 850 K? Would the reaction vessel need to be heated or
cooled to keep the temperature of the reaction constant?
55. Acetic acid, CH CO H, can form a dimer, (CH CO H) , in the gas phase.
3 2 3 2 2
The dimer is held together by two hydrogen bonds with a total strength of 66.5 kJ per mole of dimer.
At 25 °C, the equilibrium constant for the dimerization is 1.3 103(pressure in atm). What is ΔS° for the
reaction?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 829
16 • Exercises 815
56. Determine ΔGº for the following reactions.
(a) Antimony pentachloride decomposes at 448 °C. The reaction is:
An equilibrium mixture in a 5.00 L flask at 448 °C contains 3.85 g of SbCl , 9.14 g of SbCl , and 2.84 g of
5 3
Cl .
2
(b) Chlorine molecules dissociate according to this reaction:
1.00% of Cl molecules dissociate at 975 K and a pressure of 1.00 atm.
2
57. Given that the for Pb2+(aq) and Cl−(aq) is −24.3 kJ/mole and −131.2 kJ/mole respectively, determine
the solubility product,K , for PbCl (s).
sp 2
58. Determine the standard free energy change, for the formation of S2−(aq) given that the for
Ag+(aq) and Ag S(s) are 77.1 kJ/mole and −39.5 kJ/mole respectively, and the solubility product for Ag S(s)
2 2
is 8 10−51.
59. Determine the standard enthalpy change, entropy change, and free energy change for the conversion of
diamond to graphite. Discuss the spontaneity of the conversion with respect to the enthalpy and entropy
changes. Explain why diamond spontaneously changing into graphite is not observed.
60. The evaporation of one mole of water at 298 K has a standard free energy change of 8.58 kJ.
(a) Is the evaporation of water under standard thermodynamic conditions spontaneous?
(b) Determine the equilibrium constant,K, for this physical process.
P
(c) By calculating ∆G, determine if the evaporation of water at 298 K is spontaneous when the partial
pressure of water, is 0.011 atm.
(d) If the evaporation of water were always nonspontaneous at room temperature, wet laundry would
never dry when placed outside. In order for laundry to dry, what must be the value of in the air?
61. In glycolysis, the reaction of glucose (Glu) to form glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) requires ATP to be present
as described by the following equation:
In this process, ATP becomes ADP summarized by the following equation:
Determine the standard free energy change for the following reaction, and explain why ATP is necessary
to drive this process:
62. One of the important reactions in the biochemical pathway glycolysis is the reaction of
glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) to form fructose-6-phosphate (F6P):
(a) Is the reaction spontaneous or nonspontaneous under standard thermodynamic conditions?
(b) Standard thermodynamic conditions imply the concentrations of G6P and F6P to be 1M, however, in a
typical cell, they are not even close to these values. Calculate ΔGwhen the concentrations of G6P and F6P
are 120 μMand 28 μMrespectively, and discuss the spontaneity of the forward reaction under these
conditions. Assume the temperature is 37 °C.
63. Without doing a numerical calculation, determine which of the following will reduce the free energy
change for the reaction, that is, make it less positive or more negative, when the temperature is increased.
Explain.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
64. When ammonium chloride is added to water and stirred, it dissolves spontaneously and the resulting
solution feels cold. Without doing any calculations, deduce the signs of ΔG, ΔH, and ΔSfor this process,
and justify your choices.
PAGE: 830
816 16 • Exercises
65. An important source of copper is from the copper ore, chalcocite, a form of copper(I) sulfide. When heated,
the Cu S decomposes to form copper and sulfur described by the following equation:
2
(a) Determine for the decomposition of Cu S(s).
2
(b) The reaction of sulfur with oxygen yields sulfur dioxide as the only product. Write an equation that
describes this reaction, and determine for the process.
(c) The production of copper from chalcocite is performed by roasting the Cu S in air to produce the Cu.
2
By combining the equations from Parts (a) and (b), write the equation that describes the roasting of the
chalcocite, and explain why coupling these reactions together makes for a more efficient process for the
production of the copper.
66. What happens to (becomes more negative or more positive) for the following chemical reactions when
the partial pressure of oxygen is increased?
(a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 831
CHAPTER 17
Electrochemistry
Figure17.1 Electric vehicles are powered by batteries, devices that harness the energy of spontaneous redox
reactions. (credit: modification of work by Robert Couse-Baker)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1Review of Redox Chemistry
17.2Galvanic Cells
17.3Electrode and Cell Potentials
17.4Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium
17.5Batteries and Fuel Cells
17.6Corrosion
17.7Electrolysis
INTRODUCTION Another chapter in this text introduced the chemistry of reduction-oxidation (redox)
reactions. This important reaction class is defined by changes in oxidation states for one or more reactant
elements, and it includes a subset of reactions involving the transfer of electrons between reactant species.
Around the turn of the nineteenth century, chemists began exploring ways these electrons could be
transferredindirectlyvia an external circuit rather than directly via intimate contact of redox reactants. In the
two centuries since, the field ofelectrochemistryhas evolved to yield significant insights on the fundamental
aspects of redox chemistry as well as a wealth of technologies ranging from industrial-scale metallurgical
processes to robust, rechargeable batteries for electric vehicles (Figure 17.1). In this chapter, the essential
concepts of electrochemistry will be addressed.
PAGE: 832
818 17 • Electrochemistry
17.1 Review of Redox Chemistry
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe defining traits of redox chemistry
• Identify the oxidant and reductant of a redox reaction
• Balance chemical equations for redox reactions using the half-reaction method
Since reactions involving electron transfer are essential to the topic of electrochemistry, a brief review of redox
chemistry is provided here that summarizes and extends the content of an earlier text chapter (see chapter on
reaction stoichiometry). Readers wishing additional review are referred to the text chapter on reaction
stoichiometry.
Oxidation Numbers
By definition, a redox reaction is one that entails changes inoxidation number(oroxidation state) for one or
more of the elements involved. The oxidation number of an element in a compound is essentially an
assessment of how the electronic environment of its atoms is different in comparison to atoms of the pure
element. By this description,the oxidation number of an atom in an element is equal to zero. For an atom in a
compound,the oxidation number is equal to the charge the atom would have in the compound if the
compound were ionic. Consequential to these rules,the sum of oxidation numbers for all atoms in a molecule
is equal to the charge on the molecule. To illustrate this formalism, examples from the two compound classes,
ionic and covalent, will be considered.
Simple ionic compounds present the simplest examples to illustrate this formalism, since by definition the
elements’ oxidation numbers are numerically equivalent to ionic charges. Sodium chloride, NaCl, is comprised
of Na+cations and Cl−anions, and so oxidation numbers for sodium and chlorine are, +1 and −1, respectively.
Calcium fluoride, CaF , is comprised of Ca2+cations and F−anions, and so oxidation numbers for calcium and
2
fluorine are, +2 and −1, respectively.
Covalent compounds require a more challenging use of the formalism. Water is a covalent compound whose
molecules consist of two H atoms bonded separately to a central O atom via polar covalent O−H bonds. The
shared electrons comprising an O−H bond are more strongly attracted to the more electronegative O atom, and
so it acquires a partial negative charge in the water molecule (relative to an O atom in elemental oxygen).
Consequently, H atoms in a water molecule exhibit partial positive charges compared to H atoms in elemental
hydrogen. The sum of the partial negative and partial positive charges for each water molecule is zero, and the
water molecule is neutral.
Imagine that the polarization of shared electrons within the O−H bonds of water were 100% complete—the
result would betransferof electrons from H to O, and water would be an ionic compound comprised of O2−
anions and H+cations. And so, the oxidations numbers for oxygen and hydrogen in water are −2 and +1,
respectively. Applying this same logic to carbon tetrachloride, CCl , yields oxidation numbers of +4 for carbon
4
and −1 for chlorine. In the nitrate ion, , the oxidation number for nitrogen is +5 and that for oxygen is −2,
summing to equal the 1− charge on the molecule:
Balancing Redox Equations
The unbalanced equation below describes the decomposition of molten sodium chloride:
This reaction satisfies the criterion for redox classification, since the oxidation number for Na is decreased
from +1 to 0 (it undergoesreduction) and that for Cl is increased from −1 to 0 (it undergoesoxidation). The
equation in this case is easily balanced by inspection, requiring stoichiometric coefficients of 2 for the NaCl
and Na:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 833
17.1 • Review of Redox Chemistry 819
Redox reactions that take place in aqueous solutions are commonly encountered in electrochemistry, and
many involve water or its characteristic ions, H+(aq) and OH−(aq), as reactants or products. In these cases,
equations representing the redox reaction can be very challenging to balance by inspection, and the use of a
systematic approach called thehalf-reaction methodis helpful. This approach involves the following steps:
1. Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
2. Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O.
3. Balance each half-reaction for O by adding H O.
2
4. Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H+.
5. Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons.
6. If necessary, multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal
to the number produced in the other.
7. Add the two half-reactions and simplify.
8. If the reaction takes place in a basic medium, add OH−ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize
the H+ions (add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation) and simplify.
The examples below demonstrate the application of this method to balancing equations for aqueous redox
reactions.
EXAMPLE 17.1
Balancing Equations for Redox Reactions in Acidic Solutions
Write the balanced equation representing reaction between solid copper and nitric acid to yield aqueous
copper(II) ions and nitrogen monoxide gas.
Solution
Following the steps of the half-reaction method:
1. Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
2. Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O.
3. Balance each half-reaction for O by adding HO.
2
4. Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H+.
5. Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons.
6. If necessary, multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal
to the number produced in the other.
7. Add the two half-reactions and simplify.
8. If the reaction takes place in a basic medium, add OH−ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize
the H+ions (add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation) and simplify.
PAGE: 834
820 17 • Electrochemistry
This step not necessary since the solution is stipulated to be acidic.
The balanced equation for the reaction in an acidic solution is then
Check Your Learning
The reaction above results when using relatively diluted nitric acid. If concentrated nitric acid is used,
nitrogen dioxide is produced instead of nitrogen monoxide. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
Answer:
EXAMPLE 17.2
Balancing Equations for Redox Reactions in Basic Solutions
Write the balanced equation representing reaction between aqueous permanganate ion, , and solid
chromium(III) hydroxide, Cr(OH) , to yield solid manganese(IV) oxide, MnO , and aqueous chromate ion,
3 2
The reaction takes place in a basic solution.
Solution
Following the steps of the half-reaction method:
1. Write skeletal equations for the oxidation and reduction half-reactions.
2. Balance each half-reaction for all elements except H and O.
3. Balance each half-reaction for O by adding HO.
2
4. Balance each half-reaction for H by adding H+.
5. Balance each half-reaction for charge by adding electrons.
6. If necessary, multiply one or both half-reactions so that the number of electrons consumed in one is equal
to the number produced in the other.
This step is not necessary since the number of electrons is already in balance.
7. Add the two half-reactions and simplify.
8. If the reaction takes place in a basic medium, add OH−ions the equation obtained in step 7 to neutralize
the H+ions (add in equal numbers to both sides of the equation) and simplify.
Check Your Learning
Aqueous permanganate ion may also be reduced using aqueous bromide ion, Br−, the products of this reaction
being solid manganese(IV) oxide and aqueous bromate ion, BrO −. Write the balanced equation for this
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 835
17.2 • Galvanic Cells 821
reaction occurring in a basic medium.
Answer:
17.2 Galvanic Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the function of a galvanic cell and its components
• Use cell notation to symbolize the composition and construction of galvanic cells
As demonstration of spontaneous chemical change,Figure 17.2shows the result of immersing a coiled wire of
copper into an aqueous solution of silver nitrate. A gradual but visually impressive change spontaneously
occurs as the initially colorless solution becomes increasingly blue, and the initially smooth copper wire
becomes covered with a porous gray solid.
FIGURE17.2 A copper wire and an aqueous solution of silver nitrate (left) are brought into contact (center) and a
spontaneous transfer of electrons occurs, creating blue Cu2+(aq) and gray Ag(s) (right).
These observations are consistent with (i) the oxidation of elemental copper to yield copper(II) ions, Cu2+(aq),
which impart a blue color to the solution, and (ii) the reduction of silver(I) ions to yield elemental silver, which
deposits as a fluffy solid on the copper wire surface. And so,the direct transfer of electrons from the copper
wire to the aqueous silver ions is spontaneousunder the employed conditions. A summary of this redox
system is provided by these equations:
Consider the construction of a device that contains all the reactants and products of a redox system like the
one here, but prevents physical contact between the reactants. Direct transfer of electrons is, therefore,
prevented; transfer, instead, takes place indirectly through an external circuit that contacts the separated
reactants. Devices of this sort are generally referred to aselectrochemical cells, and those in which a
spontaneous redox reaction takes place are calledgalvanic cells(orvoltaic cells).
A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between copper and silver(I) is depicted inFigure 17.3. The
cell is comprised of twohalf-cells, each containing the redox conjugate pair (“couple”) of a single reactant. The
half-cell shown at the left contains the Cu(0)/Cu(II) couple in the form of a solid copper foil and an aqueous
solution of copper nitrate. The right half-cell contains the Ag(I)/Ag(0) couple as solid silver foil and an aqueous
silver nitrate solution. An external circuit is connected to each half-cell at its solid foil, meaning the Cu and Ag
foil each function as anelectrode. By definition, theanodeof an electrochemical cell is the electrode at which
oxidation occurs (in this case, the Cu foil) and thecathodeis the electrode where reduction occurs (the Ag foil).
The redox reactions in a galvanic cell occur only at the interface between each half-cell’s reaction mixture and
its electrode. To keep the reactants separate while maintaining charge-balance, the two half-cell solutions are
connected by a tube filled with inert electrolyte solution called asalt bridge. The spontaneous reaction in this
cell produces Cu2+cations in the anode half-cell and consumes Ag+ions in the cathode half-cell, resulting in a
compensatory flow of inert ions from the salt bridge that maintains charge balance. Increasing concentrations
of Cu2+in the anode half-cell are balanced by an influx of NO −from the salt bridge, while a flow of Na+into the
3
cathode half-cell compensates for the decreasing Ag+concentration.
PAGE: 836
822 17 • Electrochemistry
FIGURE17.3 A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between copper and silver(I) ions.
Cell Notation
Abbreviated symbolism is commonly used to represent a galvanic cell by providing essential information on
its composition and structure. These symbolic representations are calledcell notationsorcell schematics,
and they are written following a few guidelines:
• The relevant components of each half-cell are represented by their chemical formulas or element symbols
• All interfaces between component phases are represented by vertical parallel lines; if two or more
components are present in the same phase, their formulas are separated by commas
• By convention, the schematic begins with the anode and proceeds left-to-right identifying phases and
interfaces encountered within the cell, ending with the cathode
A verbal description of the cell as viewed from anode-to-cathode is often a useful first-step in writing its
schematic. For example, the galvanic cell shown inFigure 17.3consists of a solid copper anode immersed in
an aqueous solution of copper(II) nitrate that is connected via a salt bridge to an aqueous silver(I) nitrate
solution, immersed in which is a solid silver cathode. Converting this statement to symbolism following the
above guidelines results in the cell schematic:
Consider a different galvanic cell (seeFigure 17.4) based on the spontaneous reaction between solid
magnesium and aqueous iron(III) ions:
In this cell, a solid magnesium anode is immersed in an aqueous solution of magnesium chloride that is
connected via a salt bridge to an aqueous solution containing a mixture of iron(III) chloride and iron(II)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 837
17.2 • Galvanic Cells 823
chloride, immersed in which is a platinum cathode. The cell schematic is then written as
Notice the cathode half-cell is different from the others considered thus far in that its electrode is comprised of
a substance (Pt) that is neither a reactant nor a product of the cell reaction. This is required when neither
member of the half-cell’s redox couple can reasonably function as an electrode, which must be electrically
conductive and in a phase separate from the half-cell solution. In this case, both members of the redox couple
are solute species, and so Pt is used as aninert electrodethat can simply provide or accept electrons to redox
species in solution. Electrodes constructed from a member of the redox couple, such as the Mg anode in this
cell, are calledactive electrodes.
FIGURE17.4 A galvanic cell based on the spontaneous reaction between magnesium and iron(III) ions.
EXAMPLE 17.3
Writing Galvanic Cell Schematics
A galvanic cell is fabricated by connecting two half-cells with a salt bridge, one in which a chromium wire is
immersed in a 1 M CrCl solution and another in which a copper wire is immersed in 1 M CuCl . Assuming the
3 2
chromium wire functions as an anode, write the schematic for this cell along with equations for the anode half-
reaction, the cathode half-reaction, and the overall cell reaction.
Solution
Since the chromium wire is stipulated to be the anode, the schematic begins with it and proceeds left-to-right,
symbolizing the other cell components until ending with the copper wire cathode:
The half-reactions for this cell are
PAGE: 838
824 17 • Electrochemistry
Multiplying to make the number of electrons lost by Cr and gained by Cu2+equal yields
Adding the half-reaction equations and simplifying yields an equation for the cell reaction:
Check Your Learning
Omitting solute concentrations and spectator ion identities, write the schematic for a galvanic cell whose net
cell reaction is shown below.
Answer:
17.3 Electrode and Cell Potentials
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe and relate the definitions of electrode and cell potentials
• Interpret electrode potentials in terms of relative oxidant and reductant strengths
• Calculate cell potentials and predict redox spontaneity using standard electrode potentials
Unlike the spontaneous oxidation of copper by aqueous silver(I) ions described in section 17.2, immersing a
copper wire in an aqueous solution of lead(II) ions yields no reaction. The two species, Ag+(aq)and Pb2+(aq),
thus show a distinct difference in their redox activity towards copper: the silver ion spontaneously oxidized
copper, but the lead ion did not. Electrochemical cells permit this relative redox activity to be quantified by an
easily measured property,potential. This property is more commonly calledvoltagewhen referenced in regard
to electrical applications, and it is a measure of energy accompanying the transfer of charge. Potentials are
measured in the volt unit, defined as one joule of energy per one coulomb of charge, V = J/C.
When measured for purposes of electrochemistry, a potential reflects the driving force for a specific type of
charge transfer process, namely, the transfer of electrons between redox reactants. Considering the nature of
potential in this context, it is clear that the potential of a single half-cell or a single electrode can’t be
measured; “transfer” of electrons requires both a donor and recipient, in this case a reductant and an oxidant,
respectively. Instead, a half-cell potential may only be assessed relative to that of another half-cell. It is only the
difference in potentialbetween two half-cells that may be measured, and these measured potentials are called
cell potentials, E , defined as
cell
where E and E are the potentials of two different half-cells functioning as specified in the subscripts.
cathode anode
As for other thermodynamic quantities, thestandard cell potential, E° , is a cell potential measured when
cell
both half-cells are under standard-state conditions (1Mconcentrations, 1 bar pressures, 298 K):
To simplify the collection and sharing of potential data for half-reactions, the scientific community has
designated one particular half-cell to serve as a universal reference for cell potential measurements, assigning
it a potential of exactly 0 V. This half-cell is thestandard hydrogen electrode (SHE)and it is based on half-
reaction below:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 839
17.3 • Electrode and Cell Potentials 825
A typical SHE contains an inert platinum electrode immersed in precisely 1Maqueous H+and a stream of
bubbling H gas at 1 bar pressure, all maintained at a temperature of 298 K (seeFigure 17.5).
2
FIGURE17.5 A standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).
The assigned potential of the SHE permits the definition of a conveniently measured potential for a single half-
cell. Theelectrode potential (E )for a half-cellXis defined asthe potential measured for a cell comprised of X
X
acting as cathode and the SHE acting as anode:
When the half-cellXis under standard-state conditions, its potential is thestandard electrode potential, E° .
X
Since the definition of cell potential requires the half-cells function as cathodes, these potentials are
sometimes calledstandard reduction potentials.
This approach to measuring electrode potentials is illustrated inFigure 17.6, which depicts a cell comprised of
an SHE connected to a copper(II)/copper(0) half-cell under standard-state conditions. A voltmeter in the
external circuit allows measurement of the potential difference between the two half-cells. Since the Cu half-
cell is designated as the cathode in the definition of cell potential, it is connected to the red (positive) input of
the voltmeter, while the designated SHE anode is connected to the black (negative) input. These connections
insure that the sign of the measured potential will be consistent with the sign conventions of electrochemistry
per the various definitions discussed above. A cell potential of +0.337 V is measured, and so
Tabulations of E° values for other half-cells measured in a similar fashion are available as reference literature
to permit calculations of cell potentials and the prediction of the spontaneity of redox processes.
PAGE: 840
826 17 • Electrochemistry
FIGURE17.6 A cell permitting experimental measurement of the standard electrode potential for the half-reaction
Table 17.1provides a listing of standard electrode potentials for a selection of half-reactions in numerical
order, and a more extensive alphabetical listing is given inAppendix L.
Selected Standard Reduction Potentials at 25 °C
Half-Reaction E° (V)
+2.866
+1.69
+1.507
+1.498
+1.35827
+1.229
+1.20
+1.0873
+0.7996
TABLE17.1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 841
17.3 • Electrode and Cell Potentials 827
Half-Reaction E° (V)
+0.7973
+0.771
+0.558
+0.5355
+0.49
+0.34
+0.26808
+0.22233
+0.151
0.00
−0.1262
−0.1375
−0.257
−0.28
−0.3505
−0.4030
−0.447
−0.744
−1.185
−1.245
−0.7618
−1.662
−2.372
−2.71
TABLE17.1
PAGE: 842
828 17 • Electrochemistry
Half-Reaction E° (V)
−2.868
−2.912
−2.931
−3.04
TABLE17.1
EXAMPLE 17.4
Calculating Standard Cell Potentials
What is the standard potential of the galvanic cell shown inFigure 17.3?
Solution
The cell inFigure 17.3is galvanic, the spontaneous cell reaction involving oxidation of its copper anode and
reduction of silver(I) ions at its silver cathode:
The standard cell potential computed as
Check Your Learning
What is the standard cell potential expected if the silver cathode half-cell inFigure 17.3is replaced with a lead
half-cell: ?
Answer:
−0. 47 V
Intrepreting Electrode and Cell Potentials
Thinking carefully about the definitions of cell and electrode potentials and the observations of spontaneous
redox change presented thus far, a significant relation is noted. The previous section described the
spontaneous oxidation of copper by aqueous silver(I) ions, but no observed reaction with aqueous lead(II) ions.
Results of the calculations inExample 17.4have just shownthe spontaneous process is described by a positive
cell potentialwhilethe nonspontaneous process exhibits a negative cell potential. And so, with regard to the
relative effectiveness (“strength”) with which aqueous Ag+and Pb2+ions oxidize Cu under standard conditions,
the stronger oxidant is the one exhibiting the greater standard electrode potential, E°. Since by convention
electrode potentials are for reduction processes, an increased value ofE°corresponds to an increased driving
force behind the reduction of the species (hence increased effectiveness of its action as anoxidizing agenton
some other species). Negative values for electrode potentials are simply a consequence of assigning a value of
0 V to the SHE, indicating the reactant of the half-reaction is a weaker oxidant than aqueous hydrogen ions.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 843
17.3 • Electrode and Cell Potentials 829
Applying this logic to the numerically ordered listing of standard electrode potentials inTable 17.1shows this
listing to be likewise in order of the oxidizing strength of the half-reaction’s reactant species, decreasing from
strongest oxidant (most positiveE°) to weakest oxidant (most negativeE°). Predictions regarding the
spontaneity of redox reactions under standard state conditions can then be easily made by simply comparing
the relative positions of their table entries. By definition,E° is positive whenE° >E° , and so any
cell cathode anode
redox reaction in which the oxidant’s entry is above the reductant’s entry is predicted to be spontaneous.
Reconsideration of the two redox reactions inExample 17.4provides support for this fact. The entry for the
silver(I)/silver(0) half-reaction is above that for the copper(II)/copper(0) half-reaction, and so the oxidation of
Cu by Ag+is predicted to be spontaneous (E° >E° and soE° > 0). Conversely, the entry for the
cathode anode cell
lead(II)/lead(0) half-cell is beneath that for copper(II)/copper(0), and the oxidation of Cu by Pb2+is
nonspontaneous (E° <E° and soE° < 0).
cathode anode cell
Recalling the chapter on thermodynamics, the spontaneities of the forward and reverse reactions of a
reversible process show a reciprocal relationship: if a process is spontaneous in one direction, it is non-
spontaneous in the opposite direction. As an indicator of spontaneity for redox reactions, the potential of a cell
reaction shows a consequential relationship in its arithmetic sign. The spontaneous oxidation of copper by
lead(II) ions isnotobserved,
and so the reverse reaction, the oxidation of lead by copper(II) ions, is predicted to occur spontaneously:
Note that reversing the direction of a redox reaction effectively interchanges the identities of the cathode and
anode half-reactions, and so the cell potential is calculated from electrode potentials in the reverse subtraction
order than that for the forward reaction. In practice, a voltmeter would report a potential of −0.47 V with its red
and black inputs connected to the Pb and Cu electrodes, respectively. If the inputs were swapped, the reported
voltage would be +0.47 V.
EXAMPLE 17.5
Predicting Redox Spontaneity
Are aqueous iron(II) ions predicted to spontaneously oxidize elemental chromium under standard state
conditions? Assume the half-reactions to be those available inTable 17.1.
Solution
Referring to the tabulated half-reactions, the redox reaction in question can be represented by the equations
below:
The entry for the putative oxidant, Fe2+, appearsabovethe entry for the reductant, Cr, and so a spontaneous
reaction is predicted per the quick approach described above. Supporting this predication by calculating the
standard cell potential for this reaction gives
The positive value for the standard cell potential indicates the process is spontaneous under standard state
conditions.
Check Your Learning
Use the data inTable 17.1to predict the spontaneity of the oxidation of bromide ion by molecular iodine under
standard state conditions, supporting the prediction by calculating the standard cell potential for the reaction.
PAGE: 844
830 17 • Electrochemistry
Repeat for the oxidation of iodide ion by molecular bromine.
Answer:
17.4 Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the relations between potential, free energy change, and equilibrium constants
• Perform calculations involving the relations between cell potentials, free energy changes, and equilibrium
• Use the Nernst equation to determine cell potentials under nonstandard conditions
So far in this chapter, the relationship between the cell potential and reactionspontaneityhas been described,
suggesting a link to the free energy change for the reaction (see chapter on thermodynamics). The
interpretation of potentials as measures of oxidantstrengthwas presented, bringing to mind similar measures
of acid-base strength as reflected in equilibrium constants (see the chapter on acid-base equilibria). This
section provides a summary of the relationships between potential and the related thermodynamic properties
ΔG and K.
E° and ΔG°
The standard free energy change of a process, ΔG°, was defined in a previous chapter as the maximum work
that could be performed by a system,w . In the case of a redox reaction taking place within a galvanic cell
max
under standard state conditions, essentially all the work is associated with transferring the electrons from
reductant-to-oxidant,w :
elec
The work associated with transferring electrons is determined by the total amount of charge (coulombs)
transferred and the cell potential:
wherenis the number of moles of electrons transferred,FisFaraday’s constant, andE° is the standard cell
cell
potential. The relation between free energy change and standard cell potential confirms the sign conventions
and spontaneity criteria previously discussed for both of these properties: spontaneous redox reactions
exhibit positive potentials and negative free energy changes.
E° and K
Combining a previously derived relation between ΔG° and K (see the chapter on thermodynamics) and the
equation above relating ΔG° andE° yields the following:
cell
This equation indicates redox reactions with large (positive) standard cell potentials will proceed far towards
completion, reaching equilibrium when the majority of reactant has been converted to product. A summary of
the relations betweenE°, ΔG° andKis depicted inFigure 17.7, and a table correlating reaction spontaneity to
values of these properties is provided inTable 17.2.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 845
17.4 • Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium 831
FIGURE17.7 Graphic depicting the relation between three important thermodynamic properties.
K ΔG° E°
cell
> 1 < 0 > 0 Reaction is spontaneous under standard conditions
Products more abundant at equilibrium
< 1 > 0 < 0 Reaction is non-spontaneous under standard conditions
Reactants more abundant at equilibrium
= 1 = 0 = 0 Reaction is at equilibrium under standard conditions
Reactants and products equally abundant
TABLE17.2
EXAMPLE 17.6
Equilibrium Constants, Standard Cell Potentials, and Standard Free Energy Changes
Use data fromAppendix Lto calculate the standard cell potential, standard free energy change, and
equilibrium constant for the following reaction at 25 °C. Comment on the spontaneity of the forward reaction
and the composition of an equilibrium mixture of reactants and products.
Solution
The reaction involves an oxidation-reduction reaction, so the standard cell potential can be calculated using
the data inAppendix L.
Withn= 2, the equilibrium constant is then
PAGE: 846
832 17 • Electrochemistry
The standard free energy is then
The reaction is spontaneous, as indicated by a negative free energy change and a positive cell potential. TheK
value is very large, indicating the reaction proceeds to near completion to yield an equilibrium mixture
containing mostly products.
Check Your Learning
What is the standard free energy change and the equilibrium constant for the following reaction at room
temperature? Is the reaction spontaneous?
Answer:
Spontaneous;n= 2; K= 6.8 109.
Potentials at Nonstandard Conditions: The Nernst Equation
Most of the redox processes that interest science and society do not occur under standard state conditions, and
so the potentials of these systems under nonstandard conditions are a property worthy of attention. Having
established the relationship between potential and free energy change in this section, the previously discussed
relation between free energy change and reaction mixture composition can be used for this purpose.
Notice the reaction quotient,Q, appears in this equation, making the free energy change dependent upon the
composition of the reaction mixture. Substituting the equation relating free energy change to cell potential
yields theNernst equation:
This equation describes how the potential of a redox system (such as a galvanic cell) varies from its standard
state value, specifically, showing it to be a function of the number of electrons transferred,n, the temperature,
T, and the reaction mixture composition as reflected inQ. A convenient form of the Nernst equation for most
work is one in which values for the fundamental constants (R and F) and standard temperature (298) K), along
with a factor converting from natural to base-10 logarithms, have been included:
EXAMPLE 17.7
Predicting Redox Spontaneity Under Nonstandard Conditions
Use the Nernst equation to predict the spontaneity of the redox reaction shown below.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 847
17.4 • Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium 833
Solution
Collecting information fromAppendix Land the problem,
Notice the negative value of the standard cell potential indicates the process is not spontaneous under
standard conditions. Substitution of the Nernst equation terms for the nonstandard conditions yields:
The cell potential remains negative (slightly) under the specified conditions, and so the reaction remains
nonspontaneous.
Check Your Learning
For the cell schematic below, identify values fornandQ, and calculate the cell potential,E .
cell
Answer:
n= 6;Q= 1440;E = +1.97 V, spontaneous.
cell
Aconcentration cellis constructed by connecting two nearly identical half-cells, each based on the same half-
reaction and using the same electrode, varying only in the concentration of one redox species. The potential of
a concentration cell, therefore, is determined only by the difference in concentration of the chosen redox
species. The example problem below illustrates the use of the Nernst equation in calculations involving
concentration cells.
EXAMPLE 17.8
Concentration Cells
What is the cell potential of the concentration cell described by
Solution
From the information given:
Substituting into the Nernst equation,
PAGE: 848
834 17 • Electrochemistry
The positive value for cell potential indicates the overall cell reaction (see above) is spontaneous. This
spontaneous reaction is one in which the zinc ion concentration in the cathode falls (it is reduced to elemental
zinc) while that in the anode rises (it is produced by oxidation of the zinc anode). A greater driving force for
zinc reduction is present in the cathode, where the zinc(II) ion concentration is greater (E >E ).
cathode anode
Check Your Learning
The concentration cell above was allowed to operate until the cell reaction reached equilibrium. What are the
cell potential and the concentrations of zinc(II) in each half-cell for the cell now?
Answer:
E = 0.000 V; [Zn2+] = [Zn2+] = 0.30M
cell cathode anode
17.5 Batteries and Fuel Cells
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the electrochemistry associated with several common batteries
• Distinguish the operation of a fuel cell from that of a battery
There are many technological products associated with the past two centuries of electrochemistry research,
none more immediately obvious than the battery. Abatteryis a galvanic cell that has been specially designed
and constructed in a way that best suits its intended use a source of electrical power for specific applications.
Among the first successful batteries was theDaniell cell, which relied on the spontaneous oxidation of zinc by
copper(II) ions (Figure 17.8):
FIGURE17.8 Illustration of a Daniell cell taken from a 1904 journal publication (left) along with a simplified
illustration depicting the electrochemistry of the cell (right). The 1904 design used a porous clay pot to both contain
one of the half-cell’s content and to serve as a salt bridge to the other half-cell.
Modern batteries exist in a multitude of forms to accommodate various applications, from tiny button batteries
that provide the modest power needs of a wristwatch to the very large batteries used to supply backup energy
to municipal power grids. Some batteries are designed for single-use applications and cannot be recharged
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 849
17.5 • Batteries and Fuel Cells 835
(primary cells), while others are based on conveniently reversible cell reactions that allow recharging by an
external power source (secondary cells). This section will provide a summary of the basic electrochemical
aspects of several batteries familiar to most consumers, and will introduce a related electrochemical device
called afuel cellthat can offer improved performance in certain applications.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16batteries)to learn more about batteries.
Single-Use Batteries
A common primary battery is thedry cell, which uses a zinc can as both container and anode (“–” terminal)
and a graphite rod as the cathode (“+” terminal). The Zn can is filled with an electrolyte paste containing
manganese(IV) oxide, zinc(II) chloride, ammonium chloride, and water. A graphite rod is immersed in the
electrolyte paste to complete the cell. The spontaneous cell reaction involves the oxidation of zinc:
and the reduction of manganese(IV)
which together yield the cell reaction:
The voltage (cell potential) of a dry cell is approximately 1.5 V. Dry cells are available in various sizes (e.g., D, C,
AA, AAA). All sizes of dry cells comprise the same components, and so they exhibit the same voltage, but larger
cells contain greater amounts of the redox reactants and therefore are capable of transferring correspondingly
greater amounts of charge. Like other galvanic cells, dry cells may be connected in series to yield batteries with
greater voltage outputs, if needed.
FIGURE17.9 A schematic diagram shows a typical dry cell.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16zinccarbon)to learn more about zinc-carbon batteries.
Alkaline batteries(Figure 17.10) were developed in the 1950s to improve on the performance of the dry cell,
PAGE: 850
836 17 • Electrochemistry
and they were designed around the same redox couples. As their name suggests, these types of batteries use
alkaline electrolytes, often potassium hydroxide. The reactions are
An alkaline battery can deliver about three to five times the energy of a zinc-carbon dry cell of similar size.
Alkaline batteries are prone to leaking potassium hydroxide, so they should be removed from devices for long-
term storage. While some alkaline batteries are rechargeable, most are not. Attempts to recharge an alkaline
battery that is not rechargeable often leads to rupture of the battery and leakage of the potassium hydroxide
electrolyte.
FIGURE17.10 Alkaline batteries were designed as improved replacements for zinc-carbon (dry cell) batteries.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16alkaline)to learn more about alkaline batteries.
Rechargeable (Secondary) Batteries
Nickel-cadmium, or NiCd, batteries (Figure 17.11) consist of a nickel-plated cathode, cadmium-plated anode,
and a potassium hydroxide electrode. The positive and negative plates, which are prevented from shorting by
the separator, are rolled together and put into the case. This is a “jelly-roll” design and allows the NiCd cell to
deliver much more current than a similar-sized alkaline battery. The reactions are
When properly treated, a NiCd battery can be recharged about 1000 times. Cadmium is a toxic heavy metal so
NiCd batteries should never be ruptured or incinerated, and they should be disposed of in accordance with
relevant toxic waste guidelines.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 851
17.5 • Batteries and Fuel Cells 837
FIGURE17.11 NiCd batteries use a “jelly-roll” design that significantly increases the amount of current the battery
can deliver as compared to a similar-sized alkaline battery.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16NiCdrecharge)for more information about nickel cadmium rechargeable
batteries.
Lithium ion batteries(Figure 17.12) are among the most popular rechargeable batteries and are used in many
portable electronic devices. The reactions are
The variable stoichiometry of the cell reaction leads to variation in cell voltages, but for typical conditions,xis
usually no more than 0.5 and the cell voltage is approximately 3.7 V. Lithium batteries are popular because
they can provide a large amount current, are lighter than comparable batteries of other types, produce a nearly
constant voltage as they discharge, and only slowly lose their charge when stored.
PAGE: 852
838 17 • Electrochemistry
FIGURE17.12 In a lithium ion battery, charge flows as the lithium ions are transferred between the anode and
cathode.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16lithiumion)for more information about lithium ion batteries.
Thelead acid battery(Figure 17.13) is the type of secondary battery commonly used in automobiles. It is
inexpensive and capable of producing the high current required by automobile starter motors. The reactions
for a lead acid battery are
Each cell produces 2 V, so six cells are connected in series to produce a 12-V car battery. Lead acid batteries
are heavy and contain a caustic liquid electrolyte, H SO (aq), but are often still the battery of choice because of
2 4
their high current density. Since these batteries contain a significant amount of lead, they must always be
disposed of properly.
FIGURE17.13 The lead acid battery in your automobile consists of six cells connected in series to give 12 V.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 853
17.5 • Batteries and Fuel Cells 839
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thissite(http://openstax.org/l/16leadacid)for more information about lead acid batteries.
Fuel Cells
Afuel cellis a galvanic cell that uses traditional combustive fuels, most often hydrogen or methane, that are
continuously fed into the cell along with an oxidant. (An alternative, but not very popular, name for a fuel cell is
aflow battery.) Within the cell, fuel and oxidant undergo the same redox chemistry as when they are
combusted, but via a catalyzed electrochemical that is significantly more efficient. For example, a typical
hydrogen fuel cell uses graphite electrodes embedded with platinum-based catalysts to accelerate the two half-
cell reactions:
FIGURE17.14 In this hydrogen fuel cell, oxygen from the air reacts with hydrogen, producing water and electricity.
These types of fuel cells generally produce voltages of approximately 1.2 V. Compared to an internal
combustion engine, the energy efficiency of a fuel cell using the same redox reaction is typically more than
double (~20%–25% for an engine versus ~50%–75% for a fuel cell). Hydrogen fuel cells are commonly used on
extended space missions, and prototypes for personal vehicles have been developed, though the technology
remains relatively immature.
LINK TO LEARNING
Check out thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16fuelcells)to learn more about fuel cells.
PAGE: 854
840 17 • Electrochemistry
17.6 Corrosion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define corrosion
• List some of the methods used to prevent or slow corrosion
Corrosionis usually defined as the degradation of metals by a naturally occurring electrochemical process.
The formation of rust on iron, tarnish on silver, and the blue-green patina that develops on copper are all
examples of corrosion. The total cost of corrosion remediation in the United States is significant, with
estimates in excess of half a trillion dollars a year.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Statue of Liberty: Changing Colors
The Statue of Liberty is a landmark every American recognizes. The Statue of Liberty is easily identified by
its height, stance, and unique blue-green color (Figure 17.15). When this statue was first delivered from
France, its appearance was not green. It was brown, the color of its copper “skin.” So how did the Statue of
Liberty change colors? The change in appearance was a direct result of corrosion. The copper that is the
primary component of the statue slowly underwent oxidation from the air. The oxidation-reduction
reactions of copper metal in the environment occur in several steps. Copper metal is oxidized to copper(I)
oxide (Cu O), which is red, and then to copper(II) oxide, which is black
2
Coal, which was often high in sulfur, was burned extensively in the early part of the last century. As a result,
atmospheric sulfur trioxide, carbon dioxide, and water all reacted with the CuO
These three compounds are responsible for the characteristic blue-green patina seen on the Statue of
Liberty (and other outdoor copper structures). Fortunately, formation of patina creates a protective layer
on the copper surface, preventing further corrosion of the underlying copper. The formation of the
protective layer is calledpassivation, a phenomenon discussed further in another chapter of this text.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 855
17.6 • Corrosion 841
FIGURE17.15 (a) The Statue of Liberty is covered with a copper skin, and was originally brown, as shown in
this painting. (b) Exposure to the elements has resulted in the formation of the blue-green patina seen today.
Perhaps the most familiar example of corrosion is the formation of rust on iron. Iron will rust when it is
exposed to oxygen and water. Rust formation involves the creation of a galvanic cell at an iron surface, as
illustrated inFigure 17.15. The relevant redox reactions are described by the following equations:
Further reaction of the iron(II) product in humid air results in the production of an iron(III) oxide hydrate
known as rust:
The stoichiometry of the hydrate varies, as indicated by the use ofxin the compound formula. Unlike the
patina on copper, the formation of rust does not create a protective layer and so corrosion of the iron continues
as the rust flakes off and exposes fresh iron to the atmosphere.
PAGE: 856
842 17 • Electrochemistry
FIGURE17.16 Corrosion can occur when a painted iron or steel surface is exposed to the environment by a scratch
through the paint. A galvanic cell results that may be approximated by the simplified cell schematic Fe(s) | Fe2+(aq)
||O (aq), H O(l) | Fe(s).
2 2
One way to keep iron from corroding is to keep it painted. The layer of paint prevents the water and oxygen
necessary for rust formation from coming into contact with the iron. As long as the paint remains intact, the
iron is protected from corrosion.
Other strategies include alloying the iron with other metals. For example, stainless steel is an alloy of iron
containing a small amount of chromium. The chromium tends to collect near the surface, where it corrodes
and forms a passivating an oxide layer that protects the iron.
Iron and other metals may also be protected from corrosion bygalvanization, a process in which the metal to
be protected is coated with a layer of a more readily oxidized metal, usually zinc. When the zinc layer is intact,
it prevents air from contacting the underlying iron and thus prevents corrosion. If the zinc layer is breached by
either corrosion or mechanical abrasion, the iron may still be protected from corrosion by acathodic
protectionprocess, which is described in the next paragraph.
Another important way to protect metal is to make it the cathode in a galvanic cell. This iscathodic protection
and can be used for metals other than just iron. For example, the rusting of underground iron storage tanks
and pipes can be prevented or greatly reduced by connecting them to a more active metal such as zinc or
magnesium (Figure 17.17). This is also used to protect the metal parts in water heaters. The more active
metals (lower reduction potential) are calledsacrificial anodesbecause as they get used up as they corrode
(oxidize) at the anode. The metal being protected serves as the cathode for the reduction of oxygen in air, and
so it simply serves to conduct (not react with) the electrons being transferred. When the anodes are properly
monitored and periodically replaced, the useful lifetime of the iron storage tank can be greatly extended.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 857
17.7 • Electrolysis 843
FIGURE17.17 Cathodic protection is a useful approach to electrochemically preventing corrosion of underground
storage tanks.
17.7 Electrolysis
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the process of electrolysis
• Compare the operation of electrolytic cells with that of galvanic cells
• Perform stoichiometric calculations for electrolytic processes
Electrochemical cells in which spontaneous redox reactions take place (galvanic cells) have been the topic of
discussion so far in this chapter. In these cells,electrical work is done by a redox system on its surroundingsas
electrons produced by the redox reaction are transferred through an external circuit. This final section of the
chapter will address an alternative scenario in whichan external circuit does work on a redox systemby
imposing a voltage sufficient to drive an otherwise nonspontaneous reaction, a process known aselectrolysis.
A familiar example of electrolysis is recharging a battery, which involves use of an external power source to
drive the spontaneous (discharge) cell reaction in the reverse direction, restoring to some extent the
composition of the half-cells and the voltage of the battery. Perhaps less familiar is the use of electrolysis in the
refinement of metallic ores, the manufacture of commodity chemicals, and theelectroplatingof metallic
coatings on various products (e.g., jewelry, utensils, auto parts). To illustrate the essential concepts of
electrolysis, a few specific processes will be considered.
The Electrolysis of Molten Sodium Chloride
Metallic sodium, Na, and chlorine gas, Cl , are used in numerous applications, and their industrial production
2
relies on the large-scale electrolysis of molten sodium chloride, NaCl(l). The industrial process typically uses a
Downs cellsimilar to the simplified illustration shown inFigure 17.18. The reactions associated with this
process are:
The cell potential for the above process is negative, indicating the reaction as written (decomposition of liquid
NaCl) is not spontaneous. To force this reaction,a positive potential of magnitude greater than the negative cell
potentialmust be applied to the cell.
PAGE: 858
844 17 • Electrochemistry
FIGURE17.18 Cells of this sort (a cell for the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride) are used in theDowns
processfor production of sodium and chlorine, and they typically use iron cathodes and carbon anodes.
The Electrolysis of Water
Water may be electrolytically decomposed in a cell similar to the one illustrated inFigure 17.19. To improve
electrical conductivity without introducing a different redox species, the hydrogen ion concentration of the
water is typically increased by addition of a strong acid. The redox processes associated with this cell are
Again, the cell potential as written is negative, indicating a nonspontaneous cell reaction that must be driven
by imposing a cell voltage greater than +1.229 V. Keep in mind thatstandardelectrode potentials are used to
inform thermodynamic predictions here, though the cell isnotoperating under standard state conditions.
Therefore, at best, calculated cell potentials should be considered ballpark estimates.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 859
17.7 • Electrolysis 845
FIGURE17.19 The electrolysis of water produces stoichiometric amounts of oxygen gas at the anode and
hydrogen at the anode.
The Electrolysis of Aqueous Sodium Chloride
When aqueous solutions of ionic compounds are electrolyzed, the anode and cathode half-reactions may
involve the electrolysis of either water species (H O, H+, OH-) or solute species (the cations and anions of the
2
compound). As an example, the electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride could involve either of these two
anode reactions:
The standard electrode (reduction) potentials of these two half-reactions indicate water may beoxidizedat a
less negative/more positive potential (–1.229 V) than chloride ion (–1.358 V). Thermodynamics thus predicts
that water would be more readily oxidized, though in practice it is observed that both water and chloride ion
are oxidized under typical conditions, producing a mixture of oxygen and chlorine gas.
Turning attention to the cathode, the possibilities for reduction are:
Comparison of thesestandardhalf-reaction potentials suggests the reduction of hydrogen ion is
PAGE: 860
846 17 • Electrochemistry
thermodynamically favored. However, in a neutral aqueous sodium chloride solution, the concentration of
hydrogen ion is far below the standard state value of 1M(approximately 10-7M), and so the observed cathode
reaction is actually reduction of water. The net cell reaction in this case is then
This electrolysis reaction is part of thechlor-alkali processused by industry to produce chlorine and sodium
hydroxide (lye).
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Electroplating
An important use for electrolytic cells is inelectroplating. Electroplating results in a thin coating of one
metal on top of a conducting surface. Reasons for electroplating include making the object more corrosion
resistant, strengthening the surface, producing a more attractive finish, or for purifying metal. The metals
commonly used in electroplating include cadmium, chromium, copper, gold, nickel, silver, and tin.
Common consumer products include silver-plated or gold-plated tableware, chrome-plated automobile
parts, and jewelry. The silver plating of eating utensils is used here to illustrate the process. (Figure 17.20).
FIGURE17.20 This schematic shows an electrolytic cell for silver plating eating utensils.
In the figure, the anode consists of a silver electrode, shown on the left. The cathode is located on the right
and is the spoon, which is made from inexpensive metal. Both electrodes are immersed in a solution of
silver nitrate. Applying a sufficient potential results in the oxidation of the silver anode
and reduction of silver ion at the (spoon) cathode:
The net result is the transfer of silver metal from the anode to the cathode. Several experimental factors
must be carefully controlled to obtain high-quality silver coatings, including the exact composition of the
electrolyte solution, the cell voltage applied, and the rate of the electrolysis reaction (electrical current).
Quantitative Aspects of Electrolysis
Electrical current is defined as the rate of flow for any charged species. Most relevant to this discussion is the
flow of electrons. Current is measured in a composite unit called an ampere, defined as one coulomb per
second (A = 1 C/s). The charge transferred,Q, by passage of a constant current,I, over a specified time interval,
t, is then given by the simple mathematical product
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 861
17.7 • Electrolysis 847
When electrons are transferred during a redox process, the stoichiometry of the reaction may be used to
derive the total amount of (electronic) charge involved. For example, the generic reduction process
involves the transfer ofnmole of electrons. The charge transferred is, therefore,
whereFis Faraday’s constant, the charge in coulombs for one mole of electrons. If the reaction takes place in
an electrochemical cell, the current flow is conveniently measured, and it may be used to assist in
stoichiometric calculations related to the cell reaction.
EXAMPLE 17.9
Converting Current to Moles of Electrons
In one process used for electroplating silver, a current of 10.23 A was passed through an electrolytic cell for
exactly 1 hour. How many moles of electrons passed through the cell? What mass of silver was deposited at the
cathode from the silver nitrate solution?
Solution
Faraday’s constant can be used to convert the charge (Q) into moles of electrons (n). The charge is the current
(I) multiplied by the time
From the problem, the solution contains AgNO , so the reaction at the cathode involves 1 mole of electrons for
3
each mole of silver
The atomic mass of silver is 107.9 g/mol, so
Check Your Learning
Aluminum metal can be made from aluminum(III) ions by electrolysis. What is the half-reaction at the
cathode? What mass of aluminum metal would be recovered if a current of 25.0 A passed through the solution
for 15.0 minutes?
Answer:
0.0777 mol Al = 2.10 g Al.
EXAMPLE 17.10
Time Required for Deposition
In one application, a 0.010-mm layer of chromium must be deposited on a part with a total surface area of 3.3
m2from a solution of containing chromium(III) ions. How long would it take to deposit the layer of chromium if
the current was 33.46 A? The density of chromium (metal) is 7.19 g/cm3.
Solution
First, compute the volume of chromium that must be produced (equal to the product of surface area and
thickness):
PAGE: 862
848 17 • Electrochemistry
Use the computed volume and the provided density to calculate the molar amount of chromium required:
The stoichiometry of the chromium(III) reduction process requires three moles of electrons for each mole of
chromium(0) produced, and so the total charge required is:
Finally, if this charge is passed at a rate of 33.46 C/s, the required time is:
Check Your Learning
What mass of zinc is required to galvanize the top of a 3.00 m 5.50 m sheet of iron to a thickness of 0.100
mm of zinc? If the zinc comes from a solution of Zn(NO ) and the current is 25.5 A, how long will it take to
32
galvanize the top of the iron? The density of zinc is 7.140 g/cm3.
Answer:
11.8 kg Zn requires 382 hours.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 863
17 • Key Terms 849
Key Terms
active electrode electrode that participates as a which a spontaneous redox reaction takes place;
reactant or product in the oxidation-reduction also called avoltaic cell
reaction of an electrochemical cell; the mass of an galvanization method of protecting iron or similar
active electrode changes during the oxidation- metals from corrosion by coating with a thin layer
reduction reaction of more easily oxidized zinc.
alkaline battery primary battery similar to adry half cell component of a cell that contains the
cellthat uses an alkaline (often potassium redox conjugate pair (“couple”) of a single
hydroxide) electrolyte; designed to be an reactant
improved replacement for the dry cell, but with inert electrode electrode that conducts electrons
more energy storage and less electrolyte leakage to and from the reactants in a half-cell but that is
than typical dry cell not itself oxidized or reduced
anode electrode in an electrochemical cell at lead acid battery rechargeable battery commonly
which oxidation occurs used in automobiles; it typically comprises six
battery single or series of galvanic cells designed galvanic cells based on Pb half-reactions in acidic
for use as a source of electrical power solution
cathode electrode in an electrochemical cell at lithium ion battery widely used rechargeable
which reduction occurs battery commonly used in portable electronic
cathodic protection approach to preventing devices, based on lithium ion transfer between
corrosion of a metal object by connecting it to a the anode and cathode
sacrificial anodecomposed of a more readily Nernst equation relating the potential of a redox
oxidized metal system to its composition
cell notation (schematic) symbolic representation nickel-cadmium battery rechargeable battery
of the components and reactions in an based on Ni/Cd half-cells with applications
electrochemical cell similar to those of lithium ion batteries
cell potential (E ) difference in potential of the primary cell nonrechargeable battery, suitable for
cell
cathode and anode half-cells single use only
concentration cell galvanic cell comprising half- sacrificial anode electrode constructed from an
cells of identical composition but for the easily oxidized metal, often magnesium or zinc,
concentration of one redox reactant or product used to prevent corrosion of metal objects via
corrosion degradation of metal via a natural cathodic protection
electrochemical process salt bridge tube filled with inert electrolyte
dry cell primary battery, also called a zinc-carbon solution
battery, based on the spontaneous oxidation of secondary cell battery designed to allow
zinc by manganese(IV) recharging
electrode potential (E ) the potential of a cell in standard cell potential the cell potential
X
which the half-cell of interest acts as a cathode when all reactants and products are in their
when connected to the standard hydrogen standard states (1 bar or 1 atm or gases; 1Mfor
electrode solutes), usually at 298.15 K
electrolysis process using electrical energy to standard electrode potential ( ) electrode
cause a nonspontaneous process to occur potential measured under standard conditions (1
electrolytic cell electrochemical cell in which an bar or 1 atm for gases; 1Mfor solutes) usually at
external source of electrical power is used to 298.15 K
drive an otherwise nonspontaneous process standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) half-cell
Faraday’s constant (F) charge on 1 mol of based on hydrogen ion production, assigned a
electrons;F= 96,485 C/mol e− potential of exactly 0 V under standard state
fuel cell devices similar to galvanic cells that conditions, used as the universal reference for
require a continuous feed of redox reactants; also measuring electrode potential
called aflow battery
galvanic (voltaic) cell electrochemical cell in
PAGE: 864
850 17 • Key Equations
Key Equations
ΔG= −nFE
cell
Q=I t=n F
Summary
17.1Review of Redox Chemistry assigned a potential of exactly 0 V and used to define
a single electrode potential for any given half-cell.
Redox reactions are defined by changes in reactant
The electrode potential of a half-cell,E , is the cell
X
oxidation numbers, and those most relevant to
potential of said half-cell acting as a cathode when
electrochemistry involve actual transfer of electrons.
connected to a SHE acting as an anode. When the
Aqueous phase redox processes often involve water
half-cell is operating under standard state
or its characteristic ions, H+and OH−, as reactants in
conditions, its potential is the standard electrode
addition to the oxidant and reductant, and equations
potential,E° . Standard electrode potentials reflect
X
representing these reactions can be challenging to
the relative oxidizing strength of the half-reaction’s
balance. The half-reaction method is a systematic
reactant, with stronger oxidants exhibiting larger
approach to balancing such equations that involves
(more positive)E° values. Tabulations of standard
X
separate treatment of the oxidation and reduction
electrode potentials may be used to compute
half-reactions.
standard cell potentials,E° , for many redox
cell
17.2Galvanic Cells reactions. The arithmetic sign of a cell potential
indicates the spontaneity of the cell reaction, with
Galvanic cells are devices in which a spontaneous
positive values for spontaneous reactions and
redox reaction occurs indirectly, with the oxidant
negative values for nonspontaneous reactions
and reductant redox couples contained in separate
(spontaneous in the reverse direction).
half-cells. Electrons are transferred from the
reductant (in the anode half-cell) to the oxidant (in 17.4Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium
the cathode half-cell) through an external circuit,
Potential is a thermodynamic quantity reflecting the
and inert solution phase ions are transferred
intrinsic driving force of a redox process, and it is
between half-cells, through a salt bridge, to maintain
directly related to the free energy change and
charge neutrality. The construction and composition
equilibrium constant for the process. For redox
of a galvanic cell may be succinctly represented
processes taking place in electrochemical cells, the
using chemical formulas and others symbols in the
maximum (electrical) work done by the system is
form of a cell schematic (cell notation).
easily computed from the cell potential and the
17.3Electrode and Cell Potentials reaction stoichiometry and is equal to the free
energy change for the process. The equilibrium
The property of potential,E, is the energy associated
constant for a redox reaction is logarithmically
with the separation/transfer of charge. In
related to the reaction’s cell potential, with larger
electrochemistry, the potentials of cells and half-
(more positive) potentials indicating reactions with
cells are thermodynamic quantities that reflect the
greater driving force that equilibrate when the
driving force or the spontaneity of their redox
reaction has proceeded far towards completion
processes. The cell potential of an electrochemical
(large value ofK). Finally, the potential of a redox
cell is the difference in between its cathode and
process varies with the composition of the reaction
anode. To permit easy sharing of half-cell potential
mixture, being related to the reactions standard
data, the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) is
potential and the value of its reaction quotient,Q, as
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 865
17 • Exercises 851
described by the Nernst equation. electrochemical processes is called corrosion,
familiar examples including the rusting of iron and
17.5Batteries and Fuel Cells
the tarnishing of silver. Corrosion process involve
Galvanic cells designed specifically to function as the creation of a galvanic cell in which different sites
electrical power supplies are called batteries. A on the metal object function as anode and cathode,
variety of both single-use batteries (primary cells) with the corrosion taking place at the anodic site.
and rechargeable batteries (secondary cells) are Approaches to preventing corrosion of metals
commercially available to serve a variety of include use of a protective coating of zinc
applications, with important specifications (galvanization) and the use of sacrificial anodes
including voltage, size, and lifetime. Fuel cells, connected to the metal object (cathodic protection).
sometimes called flow batteries, are devices that
17.7Electrolysis
harness the energy of spontaneous redox reactions
normally associated with combustion processes. Nonspontaneous redox processes may be forced to
Like batteries, fuel cells enable the reaction’s occur in electrochemical cells by the application of
electron transfer via an external circuit, but they an appropriate potential using an external power
require continuous input of the redox reactants (fuel source—a process known as electrolysis. Electrolysis
and oxidant) from an external reservoir. Fuel cells is the basis for certain ore refining processes, the
are typically much more efficient in converting the industrial production of many chemical
energy released by the reaction to useful work in commodities, and the electroplating of metal
comparison to internal combustion engines. coatings on various products. Measurement of the
current flow during electrolysis permits
17.6Corrosion
stoichiometric calculations.
Spontaneous oxidation of metals by natural
Exercises
17.1Review of Redox Chemistry
1. Identify each half-reaction below as either oxidation or reduction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2. Identify each half-reaction below as either oxidation or reduction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
3. Assuming each pair of half-reactions below takes place in an acidic solution, write a balanced equation for
the overall reaction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
4. Balance the equations below assuming they occur in an acidic solution.
(a)
(b)
(c)
5. Identify the oxidant and reductant of each reaction of the previous exercise.
PAGE: 866
852 17 • Exercises
6. Balance the equations below assuming they occur in a basic solution.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
7. Identify the oxidant and reductant of each reaction of the previous exercise.
8. Why don’t hydroxide ions appear in equations for half-reactions occurring in acidic solution?
9. Why don’t hydrogen ions appear in equations for half-reactions occurring in basic solution?
10. Why must the charge balance in oxidation-reduction reactions?
17.2Galvanic Cells
11. Write cell schematics for the following cell reactions, using platinum as an inert electrode as needed.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
12. Assuming the schematics below represent galvanic cells as written, identify the half-cell reactions
occurring in each.
(a)
(b)
13. Write a balanced equation for the cell reaction of each cell in the previous exercise.
14. Balance each reaction below, and write a cell schematic representing the reaction as it would occur in a
galvanic cell.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
15. Identify the oxidant and reductant in each reaction of the previous exercise.
16. From the information provided, use cell notation to describe the following systems:
(a) In one half-cell, a solution of Pt(NO ) forms Pt metal, while in the other half-cell, Cu metal goes into a
32
Cu(NO ) solution with all solute concentrations 1M.
32
(b) The cathode consists of a gold electrode in a 0.55MAu(NO ) solution and the anode is a magnesium
33
electrode in 0.75MMg(NO ) solution.
32
(c) One half-cell consists of a silver electrode in a 1MAgNO solution, and in the other half-cell, a copper
3
electrode in 1MCu(NO ) is oxidized.
32
17. Why is a salt bridge necessary in galvanic cells like the one inFigure 17.3?
18. An active (metal) electrode was found to gain mass as the oxidation-reduction reaction was allowed to
proceed. Was the electrode an anode or a cathode? Explain.
19. An active (metal) electrode was found to lose mass as the oxidation-reduction reaction was allowed to
proceed. Was the electrode an anode or a cathode? Explain.
20. The masses of three electrodes (A, B, and C), each from three different galvanic cells, were measured
before and after the cells were allowed to pass current for a while. The mass of electrode A increased, that
of electrode B was unchanged, and that of electrode C decreased. Identify each electrode as active or inert,
and note (if possible) whether it functioned as anode or cathode.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 867
17 • Exercises 853
17.3Electrode and Cell Potentials
21. Calculate the standard cell potential for each reaction below, and note whether the reaction is
spontaneous under standard state conditions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
22. Calculate the standard cell potential for each reaction below, and note whether the reaction is
spontaneous under standard state conditions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
23. Write the balanced cell reaction for the cell schematic below, calculate the standard cell potential, and
note whether the reaction is spontaneous under standard state conditions.
24. Determine the cell reaction and standard cell potential at 25 °C for a cell made from a cathode half-cell
consisting of a silver electrode in 1Msilver nitrate solution and an anode half-cell consisting of a zinc
electrode in 1Mzinc nitrate. Is the reaction spontaneous at standard conditions?
25. Determine the cell reaction and standard cell potential at 25 °C for a cell made from an anode half-cell
containing a cadmium electrode in 1Mcadmium nitrate and a cathode half-cell consisting of an
aluminum electrode in 1Maluminum nitrate solution. Is the reaction spontaneous at standard
conditions?
26. Write the balanced cell reaction for the cell schematic below, calculate the standard cell potential, and
note whether the reaction is spontaneous under standard state conditions.
17.4Potential, Free Energy, and Equilibrium
27. For each pair of standard cell potential and electron stoichiometry values below, calculate a
corresponding standard free energy change (kJ).
(a) 0.000 V, n = 2
(b) +0.434 V, n = 2
(c) −2.439 V, n = 1
28. For each pair of standard free energy change and electron stoichiometry values below, calculate a
corresponding standard cell potential.
(a) 12 kJ/mol, n = 3
(b) −45 kJ/mol, n = 1
29. Determine the standard cell potential and the cell potential under the stated conditions for the
electrochemical reactions described here. State whether each is spontaneous or nonspontaneous under
each set of conditions at 298.15 K.
(a)
(b) The cell made from an anode half-cell consisting of an aluminum electrode in 0.015Maluminum
nitrate solution and a cathode half-cell consisting of a nickel electrode in 0.25Mnickel(II) nitrate solution.
(c) The cell comprised of a half-cell in which aqueous bromine (1.0M) is being oxidized to bromide ion
(0.11M) and a half-cell in which Al3+(0.023M) is being reduced to aluminum metal.
30. Determine ΔGand ΔG° for each of the reactions in the previous problem.
31. Use the data inAppendix Lto calculate equilibrium constants for the following reactions. Assume 298.15
K if no temperature is given.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
PAGE: 868
854 17 • Exercises
17.5Batteries and Fuel Cells
32. Consider a battery made from one half-cell that consists of a copper electrode in 1MCuSO solution and
4
another half-cell that consists of a lead electrode in 1MPb(NO ) solution.
32
(a) What is the standard cell potential for the battery?
(b) What are the reactions at the anode, cathode, and the overall reaction?
(c) Most devices designed to use dry-cell batteries can operate between 1.0 and 1.5 V. Could this cell be
used to make a battery that could replace a dry-cell battery? Why or why not.
(d) Suppose sulfuric acid is added to the half-cell with the lead electrode and some PbSO (s) forms. Would
4
the cell potential increase, decrease, or remain the same?
33. Consider a battery with the overall reaction:
(a) What is the reaction at the anode and cathode?
(b) A battery is “dead” when its cell potential is zero. What is the value ofQwhen this battery is dead?
(c) If a particular dead battery was found to have [Cu2+] = 0.11M, what was the concentration of silver ion?
34. Why do batteries go dead, but fuel cells do not?
35. Use the Nernst equation to explain the drop in voltage observed for some batteries as they discharge.
36. Using the information thus far in this chapter, explain why battery-powered electronics perform poorly in
low temperatures.
17.6Corrosion
37. Which member of each pair of metals is more likely to corrode (oxidize)?
(a) Mg or Ca
(b) Au or Hg
(c) Fe or Zn
(d) Ag or Pt
38. Consider the following metals: Ag, Au, Mg, Ni, and Zn. Which of these metals could be used as a sacrificial
anode in the cathodic protection of an underground steel storage tank? Steel is an alloy composed mostly
of iron, so use −0.447 V as the standard reduction potential for steel.
39. Aluminum is more easily oxidized than iron and yet when
both are exposed to the environment, untreated aluminum has very good corrosion resistance while the
corrosion resistance of untreated iron is poor. What might explain this observation?
40. If a sample of iron and a sample of zinc come into contact, the zinc corrodes but the iron does not. If a
sample of iron comes into contact with a sample of copper, the iron corrodes but the copper does not.
Explain this phenomenon.
41. Suppose you have three different metals, A, B, and C. When metals A and B come into contact, B corrodes
and A does not corrode. When metals A and C come into contact, A corrodes and C does not corrode.
Based on this information, which metal corrodes and which metal does not corrode when B and C come
into contact?
42. Why would a sacrificial anode made of lithium metal be a bad choice
17.7Electrolysis
43. If a 2.5 A current flows through a circuit for 35 minutes, how many coulombs of charge moved through the
circuit?
44. For the scenario in the previous question, how many electrons moved through the circuit?
45. Write the half-reactions and cell reaction occurring during electrolysis of each molten salt below.
(a) CaCl
2
(b) LiH
(c) AlCl
3
(d) CrBr
3
46. What mass of each product is produced in each of the electrolytic cells of the previous problem if a total
charge of 3.33 105C passes through each cell?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 869
17 • Exercises 855
47. How long would it take to reduce 1 mole of each of the following ions using the current indicated?
(a) Al3+, 1.234 A
(b) Ca2+, 22.2 A
(c) Cr5+, 37.45 A
(d) Au3+, 3.57 A
48. A current of 2.345 A passes through the cell shown inFigure 17.19for 45 minutes. What is the volume of
the hydrogen collected at room temperature if the pressure is exactly 1 atm? (Hint: Is hydrogen the only
gas present above the water?)
49. An irregularly shaped metal part made from a particular alloy was galvanized with zinc using a Zn(NO )
32
solution. When a current of 2.599 A was used, it took exactly 1 hour to deposit a 0.01123-mm layer of zinc
on the part. What was the total surface area of the part? The density of zinc is 7.140 g/cm3.
PAGE: 870
856 17 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 871
CHAPTER 18
Representative Metals, Metalloids, and
Nonmetals
Figure18.1 Purity is extremely important when preparing silicon wafers. Technicians in a cleanroom prepare
silicon without impurities (left). The CEO of VLSI Research, Don Hutcheson, shows off a pure silicon wafer (center). A
silicon wafer covered in Pentium chips is an enlarged version of the silicon wafers found in many electronics used
today (right). (credit middle: modification of work by “Intel Free Press”/Flickr; credit right: modification of work by
Naotake Murayama)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
18.1Periodicity
18.2Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals
18.3Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids
18.4Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals
18.5Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen
18.6Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Carbonates
18.7Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen
18.8Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Phosphorus
18.9Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen
18.10Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Sulfur
18.11Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens
18.12Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of the Noble Gases
INTRODUCTION The development of the periodic table in the mid-1800s came from observations that there
was a periodic relationship between the properties of the elements. Chemists, who have an understanding of
the variations of these properties, have been able to use this knowledge to solve a wide variety of technical
challenges. For example, silicon and other semiconductors form the backbone of modern electronics because
of our ability to fine-tune the electrical properties of these materials. This chapter explores important
properties of representative metals, metalloids, and nonmetals in the periodic table.
PAGE: 872
858 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
18.1 Periodicity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Classify elements
• Make predictions about the periodicity properties of the representative elements
We begin this section by examining the behaviors of representative metals in relation to their positions in the
periodic table. The primary focus of this section will be the application of periodicity to the representative
metals.
It is possible to divide elements into groups according to their electron configurations. Therepresentative
elementsare elements where thesandporbitals are filling. The transition elements are elements where thed
orbitals (groups 3–11 on the periodic table) are filling, and the inner transition metals are the elements where
theforbitals are filling. Thedorbitals fill with the elements in group 11; therefore, the elements in group 12
qualify as representative elements because the last electron enters ansorbital. Metals among the
representative elements are therepresentative metals. Metallic character results from an element’s ability to
lose its outer valence electrons and results in high thermal and electrical conductivity, among other physical
and chemical properties. There are 20 nonradioactive representative metals in groups 1, 2, 3, 12, 13, 14, and
15 of the periodic table (the elements shaded in yellow inFigure 18.2). The radioactive elements copernicium,
flerovium, polonium, and livermorium are also metals but are beyond the scope of this chapter.
In addition to the representative metals, some of the representative elements are metalloids. Ametalloidis an
element that has properties that are between those of metals and nonmetals; these elements are typically
semiconductors.
The remaining representative elements are nonmetals. Unlikemetals, which typically form cations and ionic
compounds (containing ionic bonds), nonmetals tend to form anions or molecular compounds. In general, the
combination of a metal and a nonmetal produces a salt. A salt is an ionic compound consisting of cations and
anions.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 873
18.1 • Periodicity 859
FIGURE18.2 The location of the representative metals is shown in the periodic table. Nonmetals are shown in
green, metalloids in purple, and the transition metals and inner transition metals in blue.
Most of the representative metals do not occur naturally in an uncombined state because they readily react
with water and oxygen in the air. However, it is possible to isolate elemental beryllium, magnesium, zinc,
cadmium, mercury, aluminum, tin, and lead from their naturally occurring minerals and use them because
they react very slowly with air. Part of the reason why these elements react slowly is that these elements react
with air to form a protective coating. The formation of this protective coating ispassivation. The coating is a
nonreactive film of oxide or some other compound. Elemental magnesium, aluminum, zinc, and tin are
important in the fabrication of many familiar items, including wire, cookware, foil, and many household and
personal objects. Although beryllium, cadmium, mercury, and lead are readily available, there are limitations
in their use because of their toxicity.
Group 1: The Alkali Metals
The alkali metals lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, cesium, and francium constitute group 1 of the
periodic table. Although hydrogen is in group 1 (and also in group 17), it is a nonmetal and deserves separate
consideration later in this chapter. The name alkali metal is in reference to the fact that these metals and their
oxides react with water to form very basic (alkaline) solutions.
The properties of the alkali metals are similar to each other as expected for elements in the same family. The
alkali metals have the largest atomic radii and the lowest first ionization energy in their periods. This
combination makes it very easy to remove the single electron in the outermost (valence) shell of each. The easy
loss of this valence electron means that these metals readily form stable cations with a charge of 1+. Their
PAGE: 874
860 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
reactivity increases with increasing atomic number due to the ease of losing the lone valence electron
(decreasing ionization energy). Since oxidation is so easy, the reverse, reduction, is difficult, which explains
why it is hard to isolate the elements. The solid alkali metals are very soft; lithium, shown inFigure 18.3, has
the lowest density of any metal (0.5 g/cm3).
The alkali metals all react vigorously with water to form hydrogen gas and a basic solution of the metal
hydroxide. This means they are easier to oxidize than is hydrogen. As an example, the reaction of lithium with
water is:
FIGURE18.3 Lithium floats in paraffin oil because its density is less than the density of paraffin oil.
Alkali metals react directly with all the nonmetals (except the noble gases) to yield binary ionic compounds
containing 1+ metal ions. These metals are so reactive that it is necessary to avoid contact with both moisture
and oxygen in the air. Therefore, they are stored in sealed containers under mineral oil, as shown inFigure
18.4, to prevent contact with air and moisture. The pure metals never exist free (uncombined) in nature due to
their high reactivity. In addition, this high reactivity makes it necessary to prepare the metals by electrolysis of
alkali metal compounds.
FIGURE18.4 To prevent contact with air and water, potassium for laboratory use comes as sticks or beads stored
under kerosene or mineral oil, or in sealed containers. (credit: http://images-of-elements.com/potassium.php)
Unlike many other metals, the reactivity and softness of the alkali metals make these metals unsuitable for
structural applications. However, there are applications where the reactivity of the alkali metals is an
advantage. For example, the production of metals such as titanium and zirconium relies, in part, on the ability
of sodium to reduce compounds of these metals. The manufacture of many organic compounds, including
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 875
18.1 • Periodicity 861
certain dyes, drugs, and perfumes, utilizes reduction by lithium or sodium.
Sodium and its compounds impart a bright yellow color to a flame, as seen inFigure 18.5. Passing an electrical
discharge through sodium vapor also produces this color. In both cases, this is an example of an emission
spectrum as discussed in the chapter on electronic structure. Streetlights sometime employ sodium vapor
lights because the sodium vapor penetrates fog better than most other light. This is because the fog does not
scatter yellow light as much as it scatters white light. The other alkali metals and their salts also impart color to
a flame. Lithium creates a bright, crimson color, whereas the others create a pale, violet color.
FIGURE18.5 Dipping a wire into a solution of a sodium salt and then heating the wire causes emission of a bright
yellow light, characteristic of sodium.
LINK TO LEARNING
Thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16alkalih2o)demonstrates the reactions of the alkali metals with water.
Group 2: The Alkaline Earth Metals
Thealkaline earth metals(beryllium, magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and radium) constitute group
2 of the periodic table. The name alkaline metal comes from the fact that the oxides of the heavier members of
the group react with water to form alkaline solutions. The nuclear charge increases when going from group 1
to group 2. Because of this charge increase, the atoms of the alkaline earth metals are smaller and have higher
first ionization energies than the alkali metals within the same period. The higher ionization energy makes the
alkaline earth metals less reactive than the alkali metals; however, they are still very reactive elements. Their
reactivity increases, as expected, with increasing size and decreasing ionization energy. In chemical reactions,
these metals readily lose both valence electrons to form compounds in which they exhibit an oxidation state of
2+. Due to their high reactivity, it is common to produce the alkaline earth metals, like the alkali metals, by
PAGE: 876
862 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
electrolysis. Even though the ionization energies are low, the two metals with the highest ionization energies
(beryllium and magnesium) do form compounds that exhibit some covalent characters. Like the alkali metals,
the heavier alkaline earth metals impart color to a flame. As in the case of the alkali metals, this is part of the
emission spectrum of these elements. Calcium and strontium produce shades of red, whereas barium
produces a green color.
Magnesium is a silver-white metal that is malleable and ductile at high temperatures. Passivation decreases
the reactivity of magnesium metal. Upon exposure to air, a tightly adhering layer of magnesium oxycarbonate
forms on the surface of the metal and inhibits further reaction. (The carbonate comes from the reaction of
carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.) Magnesium is the lightest of the widely used structural metals, which is
why most magnesium production is for lightweight alloys.
Magnesium (shown inFigure 18.6), calcium, strontium, and barium react with water and air. At room
temperature, barium shows the most vigorous reaction. The products of the reaction with water are hydrogen
and the metal hydroxide. The formation of hydrogen gas indicates that the heavier alkaline earth metals are
better reducing agents (more easily oxidized) than is hydrogen. As expected, these metals react with both acids
and nonmetals to form ionic compounds. Unlike most salts of the alkali metals, many of the common salts of
the alkaline earth metals are insoluble in water because of the high lattice energies of these compounds,
containing a divalent metal ion.
FIGURE18.6 From left to right: Mg(s), warm water at pH 7, and the resulting solution with a pH greater than 7, as
indicated by the pink color of the phenolphthalein indicator. (credit: modification of work by Sahar Atwa)
The potent reducing power of hot magnesium is useful in preparing some metals from their oxides. Indeed,
magnesium’s affinity for oxygen is so great that burning magnesium reacts with carbon dioxide, producing
elemental carbon:
For this reason, a CO fire extinguisher will not extinguish a magnesium fire. Additionally, the brilliant white
2
light emitted by burning magnesium makes it useful in flares and fireworks.
Group 12
The elements in group 12 are transition elements; however, the last electron added is not adelectron, but ans
electron. Since the last electron added is anselectron, these elements qualify as representative metals, or
post-transition metals. The group 12 elements behave more like the alkaline earth metals than transition
metals. Group 12 contains the four elements zinc, cadmium, mercury, and copernicium. Each of these
elements has two electrons in its outer shell (ns2). When atoms of these metals form cations with a charge of
2+, where the two outer electrons are lost, they have pseudo-noble gas electron configurations. Mercury is
sometimes an exception because it also exhibits an oxidation state of 1+ in compounds that contain a diatomic
ion. In their elemental forms and in compounds, cadmium and mercury are both toxic.
Zinc is the most reactive in group 12, and mercury is the least reactive. (This is the reverse of the reactivity
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 877
18.1 • Periodicity 863
trend of the metals of groups 1 and 2, in which reactivity increases down a group. The increase in reactivity
with increasing atomic number only occurs for the metals in groups 1 and 2.) The decreasing reactivity is due
to the formation of ions with a pseudo-noble gas configuration and to other factors that are beyond the scope of
this discussion. The chemical behaviors of zinc and cadmium are quite similar to each other but differ from
that of mercury.
Zinc and cadmium have lower reduction potentials than hydrogen, and, like the alkali metals and alkaline
earth metals, they will produce hydrogen gas when they react with acids. The reaction of zinc with
hydrochloric acid, shown inFigure 18.7, is:
FIGURE18.7 Zinc is an active metal. It dissolves in hydrochloric acid, forming a solution of colorless Zn2+ions, Cl–
ions, and hydrogen gas.
Zinc is a silvery metal that quickly tarnishes to a blue-gray appearance. This change in color is due to an
adherent coating of a basic carbonate, Zn (OH) CO , which passivates the metal to inhibit further corrosion.
2 2 3
Dry cell and alkaline batteries contain a zinc anode. Brass (Cu and Zn) and some bronze (Cu, Sn, and
sometimes Zn) are important zinc alloys. About half of zinc production serves to protect iron and other metals
from corrosion. This protection may take the form of a sacrificial anode (also known as a galvanic anode, which
is a means of providing cathodic protection for various metals) or as a thin coating on the protected metal.
Galvanized steel is steel with a protective coating of zinc.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Sacrificial Anodes
A sacrificial anode, or galvanic anode, is a means of providing cathodic protection of various metals.
Cathodic protection refers to the prevention of corrosion by converting the corroding metal into a cathode.
As a cathode, the metal resists corrosion, which is an oxidation process. Corrosion occurs at the sacrificial
anode instead of at the cathode.
The construction of such a system begins with the attachment of a more active metal (more negative
reduction potential) to the metal needing protection. Attachment may be direct or via a wire. To complete
the circuit, asalt bridgeis necessary. This salt bridge is often seawater or ground water. Once the circuit is
complete, oxidation (corrosion) occurs at the anode and not the cathode.
The commonly used sacrificial anodes are magnesium, aluminum, and zinc. Magnesium has the most
negative reduction potential of the three and serves best when the salt bridge is less efficient due to a low
electrolyte concentration such as in freshwater. Zinc and aluminum work better in saltwater than does
magnesium. Aluminum is lighter than zinc and has a higher capacity; however, an oxide coating may
passivate the aluminum. In special cases, other materials are useful. For example, iron will protect copper.
PAGE: 878
864 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Mercury is very different from zinc and cadmium. Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at 25 °C. Many
metals dissolve in mercury, forming solutions called amalgams (see the feature on Amalgams), which are
alloys of mercury with one or more other metals. Mercury, shown inFigure 18.8, is a nonreactive element that
is more difficult to oxidize than hydrogen. Thus, it does not displace hydrogen from acids; however, it will react
with strong oxidizing acids, such as nitric acid:
The clear NO initially formed quickly undergoes further oxidation to the reddish brown NO .
2
FIGURE18.8 From left to right: Hg(l), Hg + concentrated HCl, Hg + concentrated HNO . (credit: Sahar Atwa)
3
Most mercury compounds decompose when heated. Most mercury compounds contain mercury with a 2+-
oxidation state. When there is a large excess of mercury, it is possible to form compounds containing the
ion. All mercury compounds are toxic, and it is necessary to exercise great care in their synthesis.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Amalgams
An amalgam is an alloy of mercury with one or more other metals. This is similar to considering steel to be
an alloy of iron with other metals. Most metals will form an amalgam with mercury, with the main
exceptions being iron, platinum, tungsten, and tantalum.
Due to toxicity issues with mercury, there has been a significant decrease in the use of amalgams.
Historically, amalgams were important in electrolytic cells and in the extraction of gold. Amalgams of the
alkali metals still find use because they are strong reducing agents and easier to handle than the pure alkali
metals.
Prospectors had a problem when they found finely divided gold. They learned that adding mercury to their
pans collected the gold into the mercury to form an amalgam for easier collection. Unfortunately, losses of
small amounts of mercury over the years left many streams in California polluted with mercury.
Dentists use amalgams containing silver and other metals to fill cavities. There are several reasons to use
an amalgam including low cost, ease of manipulation, and longevity compared to alternate materials.
Dental amalgams are approximately 50% mercury by weight, which, in recent years, has become a concern
due to the toxicity of mercury.
After reviewing the best available data, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) considers amalgam-based
fillings to be safe for adults and children over six years of age. Even with multiple fillings, the mercury
levels in the patients remain far below the lowest levels associated with harm. Clinical studies have found
no link between dental amalgams and health problems. Health issues may not be the same in cases of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 879
18.1 • Periodicity 865
children under six or pregnant women. The FDA conclusions are in line with the opinions of the
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC). The only health
consideration noted is that some people are allergic to the amalgam or one of its components.
Group 13
Group 13 contains the metalloid boron and the metals aluminum, gallium, indium, and thallium. The lightest
element, boron, is semiconducting, and its binary compounds tend to be covalent and not ionic. The
remaining elements of the group are metals, but their oxides and hydroxides change characters. The oxides
and hydroxides of aluminum and gallium exhibit both acidic and basic behaviors. A substance, such as these
two, that will react with both acids and bases is amphoteric. This characteristic illustrates the combination of
nonmetallic and metallic behaviors of these two elements. Indium and thallium oxides and hydroxides exhibit
only basic behavior, in accordance with the clearly metallic character of these two elements. The melting point
of gallium is unusually low (about 30 °C) and will melt in your hand.
Aluminum is amphoteric because it will react with both acids and bases. A typical reaction with an acid is:
The products of the reaction of aluminum with a base depend upon the reaction conditions, with the following
being one possibility:
With both acids and bases, the reaction with aluminum generates hydrogen gas.
The group 13 elements have a valence shell electron configuration ofns2np1. Aluminum normally uses all of
its valence electrons when it reacts, giving compounds in which it has an oxidation state of 3+. Although many
of these compounds are covalent, others, such as AlF and Al (SO ) , are ionic. Aqueous solutions of aluminum
3 2 43
salts contain the cation abbreviated as Al3+(aq). Gallium, indium, and thallium also form ionic
compounds containing M3+ions. These three elements exhibit not only the expected oxidation state of 3+ from
the three valence electrons but also an oxidation state (in this case, 1+) that is two below the expected value.
This phenomenon, the inert pair effect, refers to the formation of a stable ion with an oxidation state two lower
than expected for the group. The pair of electrons is the valencesorbital for those elements. In general, the
inert pair effect is important for the lowerp-block elements. In an aqueous solution, the Tl+(aq) ion is more
stable than is Tl3+(aq). In general, these metals will react with air and water to form 3+ ions; however, thallium
reacts to give thallium(I) derivatives. The metals of group 13 all react directly with nonmetals such as sulfur,
phosphorus, and the halogens, forming binary compounds.
The metals of group 13 (Al, Ga, In, and Tl) are all reactive. However, passivation occurs as a tough, hard, thin
film of the metal oxide forms upon exposure to air. Disruption of this film may counter the passivation,
allowing the metal to react. One way to disrupt the film is to expose the passivated metal to mercury. Some of
the metal dissolves in the mercury to form an amalgam, which sheds the protective oxide layer to expose the
metal to further reaction. The formation of an amalgam allows the metal to react with air and water.
LINK TO LEARNING
Although easily oxidized, the passivation of aluminum makes it very useful as a strong, lightweight building
material. Because of the formation of an amalgam, mercury is corrosive to structural materials made of
aluminum. Thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16aluminumhg)demonstrates how the integrity of an aluminum
beam can be destroyed by the addition of a small amount of elemental mercury.
The most important uses of aluminum are in the construction and transportation industries, and in the
manufacture of aluminum cans and aluminum foil. These uses depend on the lightness, toughness, and
strength of the metal, as well as its resistance to corrosion. Because aluminum is an excellent conductor of
heat and resists corrosion, it is useful in the manufacture of cooking utensils.
PAGE: 880
866 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Aluminum is a very good reducing agent and may replace other reducing agents in the isolation of certain
metals from their oxides. Although more expensive than reduction by carbon, aluminum is important in the
isolation of Mo, W, and Cr from their oxides.
Group 14
The metallic members of group 14 are tin, lead, and flerovium. Carbon is a typical nonmetal. The remaining
elements of the group, silicon and germanium, are examples of semimetals or metalloids. Tin and lead form
the stable divalent cations, Sn2+and Pb2+, with oxidation states two below the group oxidation state of 4+. The
stability of this oxidation state is a consequence of the inert pair effect. Tin and lead also form covalent
compounds with a formal 4+-oxidation state. For example, SnCl and PbCl are low-boiling covalent liquids.
4 4
FIGURE18.9 (a) Tin(II) chloride is an ionic solid; (b) tin(IV) chloride is a covalent liquid.
Tin reacts readily with nonmetals and acids to form tin(II) compounds (indicating that it is more easily
oxidized than hydrogen) and with nonmetals to form either tin(II) or tin(IV) compounds (shown inFigure 18.9),
depending on the stoichiometry and reaction conditions. Lead is less reactive. It is only slightly easier to
oxidize than hydrogen, and oxidation normally requires a hot concentrated acid.
Many of these elements exist as allotropes.Allotropesare two or more forms of the same element in the same
physical state with different chemical and physical properties. There are two common allotropes of tin. These
allotropes are grey (brittle) tin and white tin. As with other allotropes, the difference between these forms of tin
is in the arrangement of the atoms. White tin is stable above 13.2 °C and is malleable like other metals. At low
temperatures, gray tin is the more stable form. Gray tin is brittle and tends to break down to a powder.
Consequently, articles made of tin will disintegrate in cold weather, particularly if the cold spell is lengthy. The
change progresses slowly from the spot of origin, and the gray tin that is first formed catalyzes further change.
In a way, this effect is similar to the spread of an infection in a plant or animal body, leading people to call this
process tin disease or tin pest.
The principal use of tin is in the coating of steel to form tin plate-sheet iron, which constitutes the tin in tin
cans. Important tin alloys are bronze (Cu and Sn) and solder (Sn and Pb). Lead is important in the lead storage
batteries in automobiles.
Group 15
Bismuth, the heaviest member of group 15, is a less reactive metal than the other representative metals. It
readily gives up three of its five valence electrons to active nonmetals to form the tri-positive ion, Bi3+. It forms
compounds with the group oxidation state of 5+ only when treated with strong oxidizing agents. The stability of
the 3+-oxidation state is another example of the inert pair effect.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 881
18.2 • Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals 867
18.2 Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify natural sources of representative metals
• Describe electrolytic and chemical reduction processes used to prepare these elements from natural sources
Because of their reactivity, we do not find most representative metals as free elements in nature. However,
compounds that contain ions of most representative metals are abundant. In this section, we will consider the
two common techniques used to isolate the metals from these compounds—electrolysis and chemical
reduction.
These metals primarily occur in minerals, with lithium found in silicate or phosphate minerals, and sodium
and potassium found in salt deposits from evaporation of ancient seas and in silicates. The alkaline earth
metals occur as silicates and, with the exception of beryllium, as carbonates and sulfates. Beryllium occurs as
the mineral beryl, Be Al Si O , which, with certain impurities, may be either the gemstone emerald or
3 2 6 18
aquamarine. Magnesium is in seawater and, along with the heavier alkaline earth metals, occurs as silicates,
carbonates, and sulfates. Aluminum occurs abundantly in many types of clay and in bauxite, an impure
aluminum oxide hydroxide. The principle tin ore is the oxide cassiterite, SnO , and the principle lead and
2
thallium ores are the sulfides or the products of weathering of the sulfides. The remaining representative
metals occur as impurities in zinc or aluminum ores.
Electrolysis
Ions of metals in of groups 1 and 2, along with aluminum, are very difficult to reduce; therefore, it is necessary
to prepare these elements by electrolysis, an important process discussed in the chapter on electrochemistry.
Briefly, electrolysis involves using electrical energy to drive unfavorable chemical reactions to completion; it is
useful in the isolation of reactive metals in their pure forms. Sodium, aluminum, and magnesium are typical
examples.
The Preparation of Sodium
The most important method for the production of sodium is the electrolysis of molten sodium chloride; the
set-up is aDowns cell, shown inFigure 18.10. The reaction involved in this process is:
The electrolysis cell contains molten sodium chloride (melting point 801 °C), to which calcium chloride has
been added to lower the melting point to 600 °C (a colligative effect). The passage of a direct current through
the cell causes the sodium ions to migrate to the negatively charged cathode and pick up electrons, reducing
the ions to sodium metal. Chloride ions migrate to the positively charged anode, lose electrons, and undergo
oxidation to chlorine gas. The overall cell reaction comes from adding the following reactions:
Separation of the molten sodium and chlorine prevents recombination. The liquid sodium, which is less dense
than molten sodium chloride, floats to the surface and flows into a collector. The gaseous chlorine goes to
storage tanks. Chlorine is also a valuable product.
PAGE: 882
868 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.10 Pure sodium metal is isolated by electrolysis of molten sodium chloride using a Downs cell. It is not
possible to isolate sodium by electrolysis of aqueous solutions of sodium salts because hydrogen ions are more
easily reduced than are sodium ions; as a result, hydrogen gas forms at the cathode instead of the desired sodium
metal. The high temperature required to melt NaCl means that liquid sodium metal forms.
The Preparation of Aluminum
The preparation of aluminum utilizes a process invented in 1886 by Charles M.Hall, who began to work on the
problem while a student at Oberlin College in Ohio. Paul L. T.Héroultdiscovered the process independently a
month or two later in France. In honor to the two inventors, this electrolysis cell is known as theHall–Héroult
cell. The Hall–Héroult cell is an electrolysis cell for the production of aluminum.Figure 18.11illustrates the
Hall–Héroult cell.
The production of aluminum begins with the purification of bauxite, the most common source of aluminum.
The reaction of bauxite, AlO(OH), with hot sodium hydroxide forms soluble sodium aluminate, while clay and
other impurities remain undissolved:
After the removal of the impurities by filtration, the addition of acid to the aluminate leads to the
reprecipitation of aluminum hydroxide:
The next step is to remove the precipitated aluminum hydroxide by filtration. Heating the hydroxide produces
aluminum oxide, Al O , which dissolves in a molten mixture of cryolite, Na AlF , and calcium fluoride, CaF .
2 3 3 6 2
Electrolysis of this solution takes place in a cell like that shown inFigure 18.11. Reduction of aluminum ions to
the metal occurs at the cathode, while oxygen, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide form at the anode.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 883
18.2 • Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals 869
FIGURE18.11 An electrolytic cell is used for the production of aluminum. The electrolysis of a solution of cryolite
and calcium fluoride results in aluminum metal at the cathode, and oxygen, carbon monoxide, and carbon dioxide at
the anode.
The Preparation of Magnesium
Magnesium is the other metal that is isolated in large quantities by electrolysis. Seawater, which contains
approximately 0.5% magnesium chloride, serves as the major source of magnesium. Addition of calcium
hydroxide to seawater precipitates magnesium hydroxide. The addition of hydrochloric acid to magnesium
hydroxide, followed by evaporation of the resultant aqueous solution, leaves pure magnesium chloride. The
electrolysis of molten magnesium chloride forms liquid magnesium and chlorine gas:
Some production facilities have moved away from electrolysis completely. In the next section, we will see how
the Pidgeon process leads to the chemical reduction of magnesium.
Chemical Reduction
It is possible to isolate many of the representative metals bychemical reductionusing other elements as
reducing agents. In general, chemical reduction is much less expensive than electrolysis, and for this reason,
chemical reduction is the method of choice for the isolation of these elements. For example, it is possible to
produce potassium, rubidium, and cesium by chemical reduction, as it is possible to reduce the molten
chlorides of these metals with sodium metal. This may be surprising given that these metals are more reactive
than sodium; however, the metals formed are more volatile than sodium and can be distilled for collection. The
removal of the metal vapor leads to a shift in the equilibrium to produce more metal (see how reactions can be
driven in the discussions of Le Châtelier’s principle in the chapter on fundamental equilibrium concepts).
The production of magnesium, zinc, and tin provide additional examples of chemical reduction.
PAGE: 884
870 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
The Preparation of Magnesium
ThePidgeon processinvolves the reaction of magnesium oxide with elemental silicon at high temperatures to
form pure magnesium:
Although this reaction is unfavorable in terms of thermodynamics, the removal of the magnesium vapor
produced takes advantage of Le Châtelier’s principle to continue the forward progress of the reaction. Over
75% of the world’s production of magnesium, primarily in China, comes from this process.
The Preparation of Zinc
Zinc ores usually contain zinc sulfide, zinc oxide, or zinc carbonate. After separation of these compounds from
the ores, heating in air converts the ore to zinc oxide by one of the following reactions:
Carbon, in the form of coal, reduces the zinc oxide to form zinc vapor:
The zinc can be distilled (boiling point 907 °C) and condensed. This zinc contains impurities of cadmium (767
°C), iron (2862 °C), lead (1750 °C), and arsenic (613 °C). Careful redistillation produces pure zinc. Arsenic and
cadmium are distilled from the zinc because they have lower boiling points. At higher temperatures, the zinc is
distilled from the other impurities, mainly lead and iron.
The Preparation of Tin
The ready reduction of tin(IV) oxide by the hot coals of a campfire accounts for the knowledge of tin in the
ancient world. In the modern process, the roasting of tin ores containing SnO removes contaminants such as
2
arsenic and sulfur as volatile oxides. Treatment of the remaining material with hydrochloric acid removes the
oxides of other metals. Heating the purified ore with carbon at temperature above 1000 °C produces tin:
The molten tin collects at the bottom of the furnace and is drawn off and cast into blocks.
18.3 Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the general preparation, properties, and uses of the metalloids
• Describe the preparation, properties, and compounds of boron and silicon
A series of six elements called the metalloids separate the metals from the nonmetals in the periodic table. The
metalloids are boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony, and tellurium. These elements look metallic;
however, they do not conduct electricity as well as metals so they are semiconductors. They are
semiconductors because their electrons are more tightly bound to their nuclei than are those of metallic
conductors. Their chemical behavior falls between that of metals and nonmetals. For example, the pure
metalloids form covalent crystals like the nonmetals, but like the metals, they generally do not form
monatomic anions. This intermediate behavior is in part due to their intermediate electronegativity values. In
this section, we will briefly discuss the chemical behavior of metalloids and deal with two of these
elements—boron and silicon—in more detail.
The metalloid boron exhibits many similarities to its neighbor carbon and its diagonal neighbor silicon. All
three elements form covalent compounds. However, boron has one distinct difference in that its 2s22p1outer
electron structure gives it one less valence electron than it has valence orbitals. Although boron exhibits an
oxidation state of 3+ in most of its stable compounds, this electron deficiency provides boron with the ability to
form other, sometimes fractional, oxidation states, which occur, for example, in the boron hydrides.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 885
18.3 • Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids 871
Silicon has the valence shell electron configuration 3s23p2, and it commonly forms tetrahedral structures in
which it issp3hybridized with a formal oxidation state of 4+. The major differences between the chemistry of
carbon and silicon result from the relative strength of the carbon-carbon bond, carbon’s ability to form stable
bonds to itself, and the presence of the empty 3dvalence-shell orbitals in silicon. Silicon’s emptydorbitals and
boron’s emptyporbital enable tetrahedral silicon compounds and trigonal planar boron compounds to act as
Lewis acids. Carbon, on the other hand, has no available valence shell orbitals; tetrahedral carbon compounds
cannot act as Lewis acids. Germanium is very similar to silicon in its chemical behavior.
Arsenic and antimony generally form compounds in which an oxidation state of 3+ or 5+ is exhibited; however,
arsenic can form arsenides with an oxidation state of 3−. These elements tarnish only slightly in dry air but
readily oxidize when warmed.
Tellurium combines directly with most elements. The most stable tellurium compounds are the
tellurides—salts of Te2−formed with active metals and lanthanides—and compounds with oxygen, fluorine, and
chlorine, in which tellurium normally exhibits an oxidation state 2+ or 4+. Although tellurium(VI) compounds
are known (for example, TeF ), there is a marked resistance to oxidation to this maximum group oxidation
6
state.
Structures of the Metalloids
Covalent bonding is the key to the crystal structures of the metalloids. In this regard, these elements resemble
nonmetals in their behavior.
Elemental silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony, and tellurium are lustrous, metallic-looking solids. Silicon
and germanium crystallize with a diamond structure. Each atom within the crystal has covalent bonds to four
neighboring atoms at the corners of a regular tetrahedron. Single crystals of silicon and germanium are giant,
three-dimensional molecules. There are several allotropes of arsenic with the most stable being layer like and
containing puckered sheets of arsenic atoms. Each arsenic atom forms covalent bonds to three other atoms
within the sheet. The crystal structure of antimony is similar to that of arsenic, both shown inFigure 18.12.
The structures of arsenic and antimony are similar to the structure of graphite, covered later in this chapter.
Tellurium forms crystals that contain infinite spiral chains of tellurium atoms. Each atom in the chain bonds to
two other atoms.
LINK TO LEARNING
Explore acubic diamond(http://openstax.org/l/16crystal)crystal structure.
FIGURE18.12 (a) Arsenic and (b) antimony have a layered structure similar to that of (c) graphite, except that the
layers are puckered rather than planar. (d) Elemental tellurium forms spiral chains.
Pure crystalline boron is transparent. The crystals consist of icosahedra, as shown inFigure 18.13, with a
boron atom at each corner. In the most common form of boron, the icosahedra pack together in a manner
similar to the cubic closest packing of spheres. All boron-boron bonds within each icosahedron are identical
and are approximately 176 pm in length. In the different forms of boron, there are different arrangements and
connections between the icosahedra.
PAGE: 886
872 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.13 An icosahedron is a symmetrical, solid shape with 20 faces, each of which is an equilateral triangle.
The faces meet at 12 corners.
The name silicon is derived from the Latin word for flint,silex. The metalloid silicon readily forms compounds
containing Si-O-Si bonds, which are of prime importance in the mineral world. This bonding capability is in
contrast to the nonmetal carbon, whose ability to form carbon-carbon bonds gives it prime importance in the
plant and animal worlds.
Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Boron and Silicon
Boron constitutes less than 0.001% by weight of the earth’s crust. In nature, it only occurs in compounds with
oxygen. Boron is widely distributed in volcanic regions as boric acid, B(OH) , and in dry lake regions, including
3
the desert areas of California, as borates and salts of boron oxyacids, such as borax, Na B O ⋅10H O.
2 4 7 2
Elemental boron is chemically inert at room temperature, reacting with only fluorine and oxygen to form
boron trifluoride, BF , and boric oxide, B O , respectively. At higher temperatures, boron reacts with all
3 2 3
nonmetals, except tellurium and the noble gases, and with nearly all metals; it oxidizes to B O when heated
2 3
with concentrated nitric or sulfuric acid. Boron does not react with nonoxidizing acids. Many boron
compounds react readily with water to give boric acid, B(OH) (sometimes written as H BO ).
3 3 3
Reduction of boric oxide with magnesium powder forms boron (95–98.5% pure) as a brown, amorphous
powder:
Anamorphoussubstance is a material that appears to be a solid, but does not have a long-range order like a
true solid. Treatment with hydrochloric acid removes the magnesium oxide. Further purification of the boron
begins with conversion of the impure boron into boron trichloride. The next step is to heat a mixture of boron
trichloride and hydrogen:
Silicon makes up nearly one-fourth of the mass of the earth’s crust—second in abundance only to oxygen. The
crust is composed almost entirely of minerals in which the silicon atoms are at the center of the silicon-oxygen
tetrahedron, which connect in a variety of ways to produce, among other things, chains, layers, and three-
dimensional frameworks. These minerals constitute the bulk of most common rocks, soil, and clays. In
addition, materials such as bricks, ceramics, and glasses contain silicon compounds.
It is possible to produce silicon by the high-temperature reduction of silicon dioxide with strong reducing
agents, such as carbon and magnesium:
Extremely pure silicon is necessary for the manufacture of semiconductor electronic devices. This process
begins with the conversion of impure silicon into silicon tetrahalides, or silane (SiH ), followed by
4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 887
18.3 • Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids 873
decomposition at high temperatures. Zone refining, illustrated inFigure 18.14, completes the purification. In
this method, a rod of silicon is heated at one end by a heat source that produces a thin cross-section of molten
silicon. Slowly lowering the rod through the heat source moves the molten zone from one end of the rod to
other. As this thin, molten region moves, impurities in the silicon dissolve in the liquid silicon and move with
the molten region. Ultimately, the impurities move to one end of the rod, which is then cut off.
FIGURE18.14 A zone-refining apparatus used to purify silicon.
This highly purified silicon, containing no more than one part impurity per million parts of silicon, is the most
important element in the computer industry. Pure silicon is necessary in semiconductor electronic devices
such as transistors, computer chips, and solar cells.
Like some metals, passivation of silicon occurs due the formation of a very thin film of oxide (primarily silicon
dioxide, SiO ). Silicon dioxide is soluble in hot aqueous base; thus, strong bases destroy the passivation.
2
Removal of the passivation layer allows the base to dissolve the silicon, forming hydrogen gas and silicate
anions. For example:
Silicon reacts with halogens at high temperatures, forming volatile tetrahalides, such as SiF .
4
Unlike carbon, silicon does not readily form double or triple bonds. Silicon compounds of the general formula
SiX , where X is a highly electronegative group, can act as Lewis acids to form six-coordinate silicon. For
4
example, silicon tetrafluoride, SiF , reacts with sodium fluoride to yield Na [SiF ], which contains the
4 2 6
octahedral ion in which silicon issp3d2hybridized:
PAGE: 888
874 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Antimony reacts readily with stoichiometric amounts of fluorine, chlorine, bromine, or iodine, yielding
trihalides or, with excess fluorine or chlorine, forming the pentahalides SbF and SbCl . Depending on the
5 5
stoichiometry, it forms antimony(III) sulfide, Sb S , or antimony(V) sulfide when heated with sulfur. As
2 3
expected, the metallic nature of the element is greater than that of arsenic, which lies immediately above it in
group 15.
Boron and Silicon Halides
Boron trihalides—BF , BCl , BBr , and BI —can be prepared by the direct reaction of the elements. These
3 3 3 3
nonpolar molecules contain boron withsp2hybridization and a trigonal planar molecular geometry. The
fluoride and chloride compounds are colorless gasses, the bromide is a liquid, and the iodide is a white
crystalline solid.
Except for boron trifluoride, the boron trihalides readily hydrolyze in water to form boric acid and the
corresponding hydrohalic acid. Boron trichloride reacts according to the equation:
Boron trifluoride reacts with hydrofluoric acid, to yield a solution of fluoroboric acid, HBF :
4
In this reaction, the BF molecule acts as the Lewis acid (electron pair acceptor) and accepts a pair of electrons
3
from a fluoride ion:
All the tetrahalides of silicon, SiX , have been prepared. Silicon tetrachloride can be prepared by direct
4
chlorination at elevated temperatures or by heating silicon dioxide with chlorine and carbon:
Silicon tetrachloride is a covalent tetrahedral molecule, which is a nonpolar, low-boiling (57 °C), colorless
liquid.
It is possible to prepare silicon tetrafluoride by the reaction of silicon dioxide with hydrofluoric acid:
Hydrofluoric acid is the only common acid that will react with silicon dioxide or silicates. This reaction occurs
because the silicon-fluorine bond is the only bond that silicon forms that is stronger than the silicon-oxygen
bond. For this reason, it is possible to store all common acids, other than hydrofluoric acid, in glass containers.
Except for silicon tetrafluoride, silicon halides are extremely sensitive to water. Upon exposure to water, SiCl
4
reacts rapidly with hydroxide groups, replacing all four chlorine atoms to produce unstable orthosilicic acid,
Si(OH) or H SiO , which slowly decomposes into SiO .
4 4 4 2
Boron and Silicon Oxides and Derivatives
Boron burns at 700 °C in oxygen, forming boric oxide, B O . Boric oxide is necessary for the production of
2 3
heat-resistant borosilicate glass, like that shown inFigure 18.15and certain optical glasses. Boric oxide
dissolves in hot water to form boric acid, B(OH) :
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 889
18.3 • Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids 875
FIGURE18.15 Laboratory glassware, such as Pyrex and Kimax, is made of borosilicate glass because it does not
break when heated. The inclusion of borates in the glass helps to mediate the effects of thermal expansion and
contraction. This reduces the likelihood of thermal shock, which causes silicate glass to crack upon rapid heating or
cooling. (credit: “Tweenk”/Wikimedia Commons)
The boron atom in B(OH) issp2hybridized and is located at the center of an equilateral triangle with oxygen
3
atoms at the corners. In solid B(OH) , hydrogen bonding holds these triangular units together. Boric acid,
3
shown inFigure 18.16, is a very weak acid that does not act as a proton donor but rather as a Lewis acid,
accepting an unshared pair of electrons from the Lewis base OH−:
FIGURE18.16 Boric acid has a planar structure with three –OH groups spread out equally at 120° angles from
each other.
Heating boric acid to 100 °C causes molecules of water to split out between pairs of adjacent –OH groups to
form metaboric acid, HBO . At about 150 °C, additional B-O-B linkages form, connecting the BO groups
2 3
together with shared oxygen atoms to form tetraboric acid, H B O . Complete water loss, at still higher
2 4 7
temperatures, results in boric oxide.
Boratesare salts of the oxyacids of boron. Borates result from the reactions of a base with an oxyacid or from
the fusion of boric acid or boric oxide with a metal oxide or hydroxide. Borate anions range from the simple
trigonal planar ion to complex species containing chains and rings of three- and four-coordinated
boron atoms. The structures of the anions found in CaB O , K[B O (OH) ]⋅2H O (commonly written
2 4 5 6 4 2
KB O ⋅4H O) and Na [B O (OH) ]⋅8H O (commonly written Na B O ⋅10H O) are shown inFigure 18.17.
5 8 2 2 4 5 4 2 2 4 7 2
Commercially, the most important borate is borax, Na [B O (OH) ]⋅8H O, which is an important component of
2 4 5 4 2
some laundry detergents. Most of the supply of borax comes directly from dry lakes, such as Searles Lake in
California, or is prepared from kernite, Na B O ⋅4H O.
2 4 7 2
PAGE: 890
876 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.17 The borate anions are (a) CaB O , (b) KB O ⋅4H O, and (c) Na B O ⋅10H O. The anion in CaB O is
2 4 5 8 2 2 4 7 2 2 4
an “infinite” chain.
Silicon dioxide, silica, occurs in both crystalline and amorphous forms. The usual crystalline form of silicon
dioxide is quartz, a hard, brittle, clear, colorless solid. It is useful in many ways—for architectural decorations,
semiprecious jewels, and frequency control in radio transmitters. Silica takes many crystalline forms, or
polymorphs, in nature. Trace amounts of Fe3+in quartz give amethyst its characteristic purple color. The term
quartzis also used for articles such as tubing and lenses that are manufactured from amorphous silica. Opal is
a naturally occurring form of amorphous silica.
The contrast in structure and physical properties between silicon dioxide and carbon dioxide is interesting, as
illustrated inFigure 18.18. Solid carbon dioxide (dry ice) contains single CO molecules with each of the two
2
oxygen atoms attached to the carbon atom by double bonds. Very weak intermolecular forces hold the
molecules together in the crystal. The volatility of dry ice reflect these weak forces between molecules. In
contrast, silicon dioxide is a covalent network solid. In silicon dioxide, each silicon atom links to four oxygen
atoms by single bonds directed toward the corners of a regular tetrahedron, and SiO tetrahedra share oxygen
4
atoms. This arrangement gives a three dimensional, continuous, silicon-oxygen network. A quartz crystal is a
macromolecule of silicon dioxide. The difference between these two compounds is the ability of the group 14
elements to form strong π bonds. Second-period elements, such as carbon, form very strong π bonds, which is
why carbon dioxide forms small molecules with strong double bonds. Elements below the second period, such
as silicon, do not form π bonds as readily as second-period elements, and when they do form, the π bonds are
weaker than those formed by second-period elements. For this reason, silicon dioxide does not contain π
bonds but only σ bonds.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 891
18.4 • Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals 877
FIGURE18.18 Because carbon tends to form double and triple bonds and silicon does not, (a) carbon dioxide is a
discrete molecule with two C=O double bonds and (b) silicon dioxide is an infinite network of oxygen atoms bridging
between silicon atoms with each silicon atom possessing four Si-O single bonds. (credit a photo: modification of
work by Erica Gerdes; credit b photo: modification of work by Didier Descouens)
At 1600 °C, quartz melts to yield a viscous liquid. When the liquid cools, it does not crystallize readily but
usually supercools and forms a glass, also called silica. The SiO tetrahedra in glassy silica have a random
4
arrangement characteristic of supercooled liquids, and the glass has some very useful properties. Silica is
highly transparent to both visible and ultraviolet light. For this reason, it is important in the manufacture of
lamps that give radiation rich in ultraviolet light and in certain optical instruments that operate with
ultraviolet light. The coefficient of expansion of silica glass is very low; therefore, rapid temperature changes
do not cause it to fracture. CorningWare and other ceramic cookware contain amorphous silica.
Silicatesare salts containing anions composed of silicon and oxygen. In nearly all silicates,sp3-hybridized
silicon atoms occur at the centers of tetrahedra with oxygen at the corners. There is a variation in the silicon-
to-oxygen ratio that occurs because silicon-oxygen tetrahedra may exist as discrete, independent units or may
share oxygen atoms at corners in a variety of ways. In addition, the presence of a variety of cations gives rise to
the large number of silicate minerals.
Many ceramics are composed of silicates. By including small amounts of other compounds, it is possible to
modify the physical properties of the silicate materials to produce ceramics with useful characteristics.
18.4 Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe structure and properties of nonmetals
PAGE: 892
878 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
The nonmetals are elements located in the upper right portion of the periodic table. Their properties and
behavior are quite different from those of metals on the left side. Under normal conditions, more than half of
the nonmetals are gases, one is a liquid, and the rest include some of the softest and hardest of solids. The
nonmetals exhibit a rich variety of chemical behaviors. They include the most reactive and least reactive of
elements, and they form many different ionic and covalent compounds. This section presents an overview of
the properties and chemical behaviors of the nonmetals, as well as the chemistry of specific elements. Many of
these nonmetals are important in biological systems.
In many cases, trends in electronegativity enable us to predict the type of bonding and the physical states in
compounds involving the nonmetals. We know that electronegativity decreases as we move down a given
group and increases as we move from left to right across a period. The nonmetals have higher
electronegativities than do metals, and compounds formed between metals and nonmetals are generally ionic
in nature because of the large differences in electronegativity between them. The metals form cations, the
nonmetals form anions, and the resulting compounds are solids under normal conditions. On the other hand,
compounds formed between two or more nonmetals have small differences in electronegativity between the
atoms, and covalent bonding—sharing of electrons—results. These substances tend to be molecular in nature
and are gases, liquids, or volatile solids at room temperature and pressure.
In normal chemical processes, nonmetals do not form monatomic positive ions (cations) because their
ionization energies are too high. All monatomic nonmetal ions are anions; examples include the chloride ion,
Cl−, the nitride ion, N3−, and the selenide ion, Se2−.
The common oxidation states that the nonmetals exhibit in their ionic and covalent compounds are shown in
Figure 18.19. Remember that an element exhibits a positive oxidation state when combined with a more
electronegative element and that it exhibits a negative oxidation state when combined with a less
electronegative element.
FIGURE18.19 Nonmetals exhibit these common oxidation states in ionic and covalent compounds.
The first member of each nonmetal group exhibits different behaviors, in many respects, from the other group
members. The reasons for this include smaller size, greater ionization energy, and (most important) the fact
that the first member of each group has only four valence orbitals (one 2sand three 2p) available for bonding,
whereas other group members have emptydorbitals in their valence shells, making possible five, six, or even
more bonds around the central atom. For example, nitrogen forms only NF whereas phosphorus forms both
3,
PF and PF .
3 5
Another difference between the first group member and subsequent members is the greater ability of the first
member to formπbonds. This is primarily a function of the smaller size of the first member of each group,
which allows better overlap of atomic orbitals. Nonmetals, other than the first member of each group, rarely
form π bonds to nonmetals that are the first member of a group. For example, sulfur-oxygen π bonds are well
known, whereas sulfur does not normally form stable π bonds to itself.
The variety of oxidation states displayed by most of the nonmetals means that many of their chemical
reactions involve changes in oxidation state through oxidation-reduction reactions. There are five general
aspects of the oxidation-reduction chemistry:
1. Nonmetals oxidize most metals. The oxidation state of the metal becomes positive as it undergoes
oxidation and that of the nonmetal becomes negative as it undergoes reduction. For example:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 893
18.4 • Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals 879
2. With the exception of nitrogen and carbon, which are poor oxidizing agents, a more electronegative
nonmetal oxidizes a less electronegative nonmetal or the anion of the nonmetal:
3. Fluorine and oxygen are the strongest oxidizing agents within their respective groups; each oxidizes all
the elements that lie below it in the group. Within any period, the strongest oxidizing agent is in group 17.
A nonmetal often oxidizes an element that lies to its left in the same period. For example:
4. The stronger a nonmetal is as an oxidizing agent, the more difficult it is to oxidize the anion formed by the
nonmetal. This means that the most stable negative ions are formed by elements at the top of the group or
in group 17 of the period.
5. Fluorine and oxygen are the strongest oxidizing elements known. Fluorine does not form compounds in
which it exhibits positive oxidation states; oxygen exhibits a positive oxidation state only when combined
with fluorine. For example:
With the exception of most of the noble gases, all nonmetals form compounds with oxygen, yielding covalent
oxides. Most of these oxides are acidic, that is, they react with water to form oxyacids. Recall from the acid-base
chapter that an oxyacid is an acid consisting of hydrogen, oxygen, and some other element. Notable exceptions
are carbon monoxide, CO, nitrous oxide, N O, and nitric oxide, NO. There are three characteristics of these
2
acidic oxides:
1. Oxides such as SO and N O , in which the nonmetal exhibits one of its common oxidation states, areacid
2 2 5
anhydridesand react with water to form acids with no change in oxidation state. The product is an
oxyacid. For example:
2. Those oxides such as NO and ClO , in which the nonmetal does not exhibit one of its common oxidation
2 2
states, also react with water. In these reactions, the nonmetal is both oxidized and reduced. For example:
Reactions in which the same element is both oxidized and reduced are calleddisproportionation
reactions.
3. The acid strength increases as the electronegativity of the central atom increases. To learn more, see the
discussion in the chapter on acid-base chemistry.
The binary hydrogen compounds of the nonmetals also exhibit an acidic behavior in water, although only HCl,
HBr, and HI are strong acids. The acid strength of the nonmetal hydrogen compounds increases from left to
right across a period and down a group. For example, ammonia, NH , is a weaker acid than is water, H O,
3 2
which is weaker than is hydrogen fluoride, HF. Water, H O, is also a weaker acid than is hydrogen sulfide, H S
2 2 ,
which is weaker than is hydrogen selenide, H Se. Weaker acidic character implies greater basic character.
2
Structures of the Nonmetals
The structures of the nonmetals differ dramatically from those of metals. Metals crystallize in closely packed
arrays that do not contain molecules or covalent bonds. Nonmetal structures contain covalent bonds, and
many nonmetals consist of individual molecules. The electrons in nonmetals are localized in covalent bonds,
PAGE: 894
880 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
whereas in a metal, there is delocalization of the electrons throughout the solid.
The noble gases are all monatomic, whereas the other nonmetal gases—hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine,
and chlorine—normally exist as the diatomic molecules H N , O , F , and Cl . The other halogens are also
2, 2 2 2 2
diatomic; Br is a liquid and I exists as a solid under normal conditions. The changes in state as one moves
2 2
down the halogen family offer excellent examples of the increasing strength of intermolecular London forces
with increasing molecular mass and increasing polarizability.
Oxygen has two allotropes: O , dioxygen, and O , ozone. Phosphorus has three common allotropes, commonly
2 3
referred to by their colors: white, red, and black. Sulfur has several allotropes. There are also many carbon
allotropes. Most people know of diamond, graphite, and charcoal, but fewer people know of the recent
discovery of fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and graphene.
Descriptions of the physical properties of three nonmetals that are characteristic of molecular solids follow.
Carbon
Carbon occurs in the uncombined (elemental) state in many forms, such as diamond, graphite, charcoal, coke,
carbon black, graphene, and fullerene.
Diamond, shown inFigure 18.20, is a very hard crystalline material that is colorless and transparent when
pure. Each atom forms four single bonds to four other atoms at the corners of a tetrahedron (sp3
hybridization); this makes the diamond a giant molecule. Carbon-carbon single bonds are very strong, and,
because they extend throughout the crystal to form a three-dimensional network, the crystals are very hard
and have high melting points (~4400 °C).
FIGURE18.20 (a) Diamond and (b) graphite are two forms of carbon. (c) In the crystal structure of diamond, the
covalent bonds form three-dimensional tetrahedrons. (d) In the crystal structure of graphite, each planar layer is
composed of six-membered rings. (credit a: modification of work by “Fancy Diamonds”/Flickr; credit b: modification
of work from http://images-of-elements.com/carbon.php)
Graphite, also shown inFigure 18.20, is a soft, slippery, grayish-black solid that conducts electricity. These
properties relate to its structure, which consists of layers of carbon atoms, with each atom surrounded by three
other carbon atoms in a trigonal planar arrangement. Each carbon atom in graphite forms three σ bonds, one
to each of its nearest neighbors, by means ofsp2-hybrid orbitals. The unhybridizedporbital on each carbon
atom will overlap unhybridized orbitals on adjacent carbon atoms in the same layer to form π bonds. Many
resonance forms are necessary to describe the electronic structure of a graphite layer;Figure 18.21illustrates
two of these forms.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 895
18.4 • Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals 881
FIGURE18.21 (a) Carbon atoms in graphite have unhybridizedporbitals. Eachporbital is perpendicular to the
plane of carbon atoms. (b) These are two of the many resonance forms of graphite necessary to describe its
electronic structure as a resonance hybrid.
Atoms within a graphite layer are bonded together tightly by the σ and π bonds; however, the forces between
layers are weak. London dispersion forces hold the layers together. To learn more, see the discussion of these
weak forces in the chapter on liquids and solids. The weak forces between layers give graphite the soft, flaky
character that makes it useful as the so-called “lead” in pencils and the slippery character that makes it useful
as a lubricant. The loosely held electrons in the resonating π bonds can move throughout the solid and are
responsible for the electrical conductivity of graphite.
Other forms of elemental carbon include carbon black, charcoal, and coke. Carbon black is an amorphous form
of carbon prepared by the incomplete combustion of natural gas, CH . It is possible to produce charcoal and
4
coke by heating wood and coal, respectively, at high temperatures in the absence of air.
Recently, new forms of elemental carbon molecules have been identified in the soot generated by a smoky
flame and in the vapor produced when graphite is heated to very high temperatures in a vacuum or in helium.
One of these new forms, first isolated by Professor RichardSmalleyand coworkers at Rice University, consists
of icosahedral (soccer-ball-shaped) molecules that contain 60 carbon atoms, C . This is buckminsterfullerene
60
(often called bucky balls) after the architect BuckminsterFuller, who designed domed structures, which have a
similar appearance (Figure 18.22).
FIGURE18.22 The molecular structure of C , buckminsterfullerene, is icosahedral.
60
PAGE: 896
882 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Nanotubes and Graphene
Graphene and carbon nanotubes are two recently discovered allotropes of carbon. Both of the forms bear
some relationship to graphite. Graphene is a single layer of graphite (one atom thick), as illustrated in
Figure 18.23, whereas carbon nanotubes roll the layer into a small tube, as illustrated inFigure 18.23.
FIGURE18.23 (a) Graphene and (b) carbon nanotubes are both allotropes of carbon.
Graphene is a very strong, lightweight, and efficient conductor of heat and electricity discovered in 2003.
As in graphite, the carbon atoms form a layer of six-membered rings withsp2-hybridized carbon atoms at
the corners. Resonance stabilizes the system and leads to its conductivity. Unlike graphite, there is no
stacking of the layers to give a three-dimensional structure. AndreGeimand KostyaNovoselovat the
University of Manchester won the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics for their pioneering work characterizing
graphene.
The simplest procedure for preparing graphene is to use a piece of adhesive tape to remove a single layer
of graphene from the surface of a piece of graphite. This method works because there are only weak
London dispersion forces between the layers in graphite. Alternative methods are to deposit a single layer
of carbon atoms on the surface of some other material (ruthenium, iridium, or copper) or to synthesize it at
the surface of silicon carbide via the sublimation of silicon.
There currently are no commercial applications of graphene. However, its unusual properties, such as high
electron mobility and thermal conductivity, should make it suitable for the manufacture of many advanced
electronic devices and for thermal management applications.
Carbon nanotubes are carbon allotropes, which have a cylindrical structure. Like graphite and graphene,
nanotubes consist of rings ofsp2-hybridized carbon atoms. Unlike graphite and graphene, which occur in
layers, the layers wrap into a tube and bond together to produce a stable structure. The walls of the tube
may be one atom or multiple atoms thick.
Carbon nanotubes are extremely strong materials that are harder than diamond. Depending upon the
shape of the nanotube, it may be a conductor or semiconductor. For some applications, the conducting
form is preferable, whereas other applications utilize the semiconducting form.
The basis for the synthesis of carbon nanotubes is the generation of carbon atoms in a vacuum. It is
possible to produce carbon atoms by an electrical discharge through graphite, vaporization of graphite
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 897
18.4 • Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals 883
with a laser, and the decomposition of a carbon compound.
The strength of carbon nanotubes will eventually lead to some of their most exciting applications, as a
thread produced from several nanotubes will support enormous weight. However, the current applications
only employ bulk nanotubes. The addition of nanotubes to polymers improves the mechanical, thermal,
and electrical properties of the bulk material. There are currently nanotubes in some bicycle parts, skis,
baseball bats, fishing rods, and surfboards.
Phosphorus
The namephosphoruscomes from the Greek words meaninglight bringing.When phosphorus was first
isolated, scientists noted that it glowed in the dark and burned when exposed to air. Phosphorus is the only
member of its group that does not occur in the uncombined state in nature; it exists in many allotropic forms.
We will consider two of those forms: white phosphorus and red phosphorus.
White phosphorus is a white, waxy solid that melts at 44.2 °C and boils at 280 °C. It is insoluble in water (in
which it is stored—seeFigure 18.24), is very soluble in carbon disulfide, and bursts into flame in air. As a solid,
as a liquid, as a gas, and in solution, white phosphorus exists as P molecules with four phosphorus atoms at
4
the corners of a regular tetrahedron, as illustrated inFigure 18.24. Each phosphorus atom covalently bonds to
the other three atoms in the molecule by single covalent bonds. White phosphorus is the most reactive
allotrope and is very toxic.
FIGURE18.24 (a) Because white phosphorus bursts into flame in air, it is stored in water. (b) The structure of
white phosphorus consists of P molecules arranged in a tetrahedron. (c) Red phosphorus is much less reactive than
4
is white phosphorus. (d) The structure of red phosphorus consists of networks of P tetrahedra joined by P-P single
4
bonds. (credit a: modification of work from http://images-of-elements.com/phosphorus.php)
Heating white phosphorus to 270–300 °C in the absence of air yields red phosphorus. Red phosphorus (shown
inFigure 18.24) is denser, has a higher melting point (~600 °C), is much less reactive, is essentially nontoxic,
and is easier and safer to handle than is white phosphorus. Its structure is highly polymeric and appears to
contain three-dimensional networks of P tetrahedra joined by P-P single bonds. Red phosphorus is insoluble
4
in solvents that dissolve white phosphorus. When red phosphorus is heated, P molecules sublime from the
4
solid.
Sulfur
The allotropy of sulfur is far greater and more complex than that of any other element. Sulfur is the brimstone
referred to in the Bible and other places, and references to sulfur occur throughout recorded history—right up
to the relatively recent discovery that it is a component of the atmospheres of Venus and of Io, a moon of
Jupiter. The most common and most stable allotrope of sulfur is yellow, rhombic sulfur, so named because of
the shape of its crystals. Rhombic sulfur is the form to which all other allotropes revert at room temperature.
Crystals of rhombic sulfur melt at 113 °C. Cooling this liquid gives long needles of monoclinic sulfur. This form
is stable from 96 °C to the melting point, 119 °C. At room temperature, it gradually reverts to the rhombic
form.
Both rhombic sulfur and monoclinic sulfur contain S molecules in which atoms form eight-membered,
8
puckered rings that resemble crowns, as illustrated inFigure 18.25. Each sulfur atom is bonded to each of its
PAGE: 898
884 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
two neighbors in the ring by covalent S-S single bonds.
FIGURE18.25 These four sulfur allotropes show eight-membered, puckered rings. Each sulfur atom bonds to each
of its two neighbors in the ring by covalent S-S single bonds. Here are (a) individual S rings, (b) S chains formed
8 8
when the rings open, (c) longer chains formed by adding sulfur atoms to S chains, and (d) part of the very long
8
sulfur chains formed at higher temperatures.
When rhombic sulfur melts, the straw-colored liquid is quite mobile; its viscosity is low because S molecules
8
are essentially spherical and offer relatively little resistance as they move past each other. As the temperature
rises, S-S bonds in the rings break, and polymeric chains of sulfur atoms result. These chains combine end to
end, forming still longer chains that tangle with one another. The liquid gradually darkens in color and
becomes so viscous that finally (at about 230 °C) it does not pour easily. The dangling atoms at the ends of the
chains of sulfur atoms are responsible for the dark red color because their electronic structure differs from
those of sulfur atoms that have bonds to two adjacent sulfur atoms. This causes them to absorb light differently
and results in a different visible color. Cooling the liquid rapidly produces a rubberlike amorphous mass,
called plastic sulfur.
Sulfur boils at 445 °C and forms a vapor consisting of S , S , and S molecules; at about 1000 °C, the vapor
2 6 8
density corresponds to the formula S , which is a paramagnetic molecule like O with a similar electronic
2 2
structure and a weak sulfur-sulfur double bond.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 899
18.5 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen 885
As seen in this discussion, an important feature of the structural behavior of the nonmetals is that the
elements usually occur with eight electrons in their valence shells. If necessary, the elements form enough
covalent bonds to supplement the electrons already present to possess an octet. For example, members of
group 15 have five valence electrons and require only three additional electrons to fill their valence shells.
These elements form three covalent bonds in their free state: triple bonds in the N molecule or single bonds
2
to three different atoms in arsenic and phosphorus. The elements of group 16 require only two additional
electrons. Oxygen forms a double bond in the O molecule, and sulfur, selenium, and tellurium form two single
2
bonds in various rings and chains. The halogens form diatomic molecules in which each atom is involved in
only one bond. This provides the electron required necessary to complete the octet on the halogen atom. The
noble gases do not form covalent bonds to other noble gas atoms because they already have a filled outer shell.
18.5 Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and compounds of hydrogen
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe. The sun and other stars are composed largely of
hydrogen. Astronomers estimate that 90% of the atoms in the universe are hydrogen atoms. Hydrogen is a
component of more compounds than any other element. Water is the most abundant compound of hydrogen
found on earth. Hydrogen is an important part of petroleum, many minerals, cellulose and starch, sugar, fats,
oils, alcohols, acids, and thousands of other substances.
At ordinary temperatures, hydrogen is a colorless, odorless, tasteless, and nonpoisonous gas consisting of the
diatomic molecule H . Hydrogen is composed of three isotopes, and unlike other elements, these isotopes have
2
different names and chemical symbols: protium,1H, deuterium,2H (or “D”), and tritium3H (or “T”). In a
naturally occurring sample of hydrogen, there is one atom of deuterium for every 7000 H atoms and one atom
of radioactive tritium for every 1018H atoms. The chemical properties of the different isotopes are very similar
because they have identical electron structures, but they differ in some physical properties because of their
differing atomic masses. Elemental deuterium and tritium have lower vapor pressure than ordinary hydrogen.
Consequently, when liquid hydrogen evaporates, the heavier isotopes are concentrated in the last portions to
evaporate. Electrolysis of heavy water, D O, yields deuterium. Most tritium originates from nuclear reactions.
2
Preparation of Hydrogen
Elemental hydrogen must be prepared from compounds by breaking chemical bonds. The most common
methods of preparing hydrogen follow.
From Steam and Carbon or Hydrocarbons
Water is the cheapest and most abundant source of hydrogen. Passing steam over coke (an impure form of
elemental carbon) at 1000 °C produces a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen known as water gas:
Water gas is as an industrial fuel. It is possible to produce additional hydrogen by mixing the water gas with
steam in the presence of a catalyst to convert the CO to CO . This reaction is the water gas shift reaction.
2
It is also possible to prepare a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide by passing hydrocarbons from
natural gas or petroleum and steam over a nickel-based catalyst. Propane is an example of a hydrocarbon
reactant:
Electrolysis
Hydrogen forms when direct current electricity passes through water containing an electrolyte such as H SO ,
2 4
as illustrated inFigure 18.26. Bubbles of hydrogen form at the cathode, and oxygen evolves at the anode. The
PAGE: 900
886 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
net reaction is:
FIGURE18.26 The electrolysis of water produces hydrogen and oxygen. Because there are twice as many
hydrogen atoms as oxygen atoms and both elements are diatomic, there is twice the volume of hydrogen produced
at the cathode as there is oxygen produced at the anode.
Reaction of Metals with Acids
This is the most convenient laboratory method of producing hydrogen. Metals with lower reduction potentials
reduce the hydrogen ion in dilute acids to produce hydrogen gas and metal salts. For example, as shown in
Figure 18.27, iron in dilute hydrochloric acid produces hydrogen gas and iron(II) chloride:
FIGURE18.27 The reaction of iron with an acid produces hydrogen. Here, iron reacts with hydrochloric acid.
(credit: Mark Ott)
Reaction of Ionic Metal Hydrides with Water
It is possible to produce hydrogen from the reaction of hydrides of the active metals, which contain the very
strongly basic H−anion, with water:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 901
18.5 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen 887
Metal hydrides are expensive but convenient sources of hydrogen, especially where space and weight are
important factors. They are important in the inflation of life jackets, life rafts, and military balloons.
Reactions
Under normal conditions, hydrogen is relatively inactive chemically, but when heated, it enters into many
chemical reactions.
Two thirds of the world’s hydrogen production is devoted to the manufacture of ammonia, which is a fertilizer
and used in the manufacture of nitric acid. Large quantities of hydrogen are also important in the process of
hydrogenation, discussed in the chapter on organic chemistry.
It is possible to use hydrogen as a nonpolluting fuel. The reaction of hydrogen with oxygen is a very exothermic
reaction, releasing 286 kJ of energy per mole of water formed. Hydrogen burns without explosion under
controlled conditions. The oxygen-hydrogen torch, because of the high heat of combustion of hydrogen, can
achieve temperatures up to 2800 °C. The hot flame of this torch is useful in cutting thick sheets of many
metals. Liquid hydrogen is also an important rocket fuel (Figure 18.28).
FIGURE18.28 Before the fleet’s retirement in 2011, liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen were used in the three
main engines of a space shuttle. Two compartments in the large tank held these liquids until the shuttle was
launched. (credit: “reynermedia”/Flickr)
An uncombined hydrogen atom consists of a nucleus and one valence electron in the 1sorbital. Then= 1
valence shell has a capacity for two electrons, and hydrogen can rightfully occupy two locations in the periodic
table. It is possible to consider hydrogen a group 1 element because hydrogen can lose an electron to form the
cation, H+. It is also possible to consider hydrogen to be a group 17 element because it needs only one electron
to fill its valence orbital to form a hydride ion, H−, or it can share an electron to form a single, covalent bond. In
reality, hydrogen is a unique element that almost deserves its own location in the periodic table.
Reactions with Elements
When heated, hydrogen reacts with the metals of group 1 and with Ca, Sr, and Ba (the more active metals in
group 2). The compounds formed are crystalline, ionic hydrides that contain the hydride anion, H−, a strong
reducing agent and a strong base, which reacts vigorously with water and other acids to form hydrogen gas.
The reactions of hydrogen with nonmetals generally produceacidichydrogen compounds with hydrogen in
the 1+ oxidation state. The reactions become more exothermic and vigorous as the electronegativity of the
nonmetal increases. Hydrogen reacts with nitrogen and sulfur only when heated, but it reacts explosively with
fluorine (forming HF) and, under some conditions, with chlorine (forming HCl). A mixture of hydrogen and
oxygen explodes if ignited. Because of the explosive nature of the reaction, it is necessary to exercise caution
when handling hydrogen (or any other combustible gas) to avoid the formation of an explosive mixture in a
confined space. Although most hydrides of the nonmetals are acidic, ammonia and phosphine (PH ) are very,
3
very weak acids and generally function as bases. There is a summary of these reactions of hydrogen with the
elements inTable 18.1.
PAGE: 902
888 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Chemical Reactions of Hydrogen with Other Elements
General Equation Comments
ionic hydrides with group 1 and Ca, Sr, and Ba
requires high pressure and temperature; low yield
exothermic and potentially explosive
requires heating; low yield
X = F, Cl, Br, and I; explosive with F ; low yield with I
2 2
TABLE18.1
Reaction with Compounds
Hydrogen reduces the heated oxides of many metals, with the formation of the metal and water vapor. For
example, passing hydrogen over heated CuO forms copper and water.
Hydrogen may also reduce the metal ions in some metal oxides to lower oxidation states:
Hydrogen Compounds
Other than the noble gases, each of the nonmetals forms compounds with hydrogen. For brevity, we will
discuss only a few hydrogen compounds of the nonmetals here.
Nitrogen Hydrogen Compounds
Ammonia, NH , forms naturally when any nitrogen-containing organic material decomposes in the absence of
3
air. The laboratory preparation of ammonia is by the reaction of an ammonium salt with a strong base such as
sodium hydroxide. The acid-base reaction with the weakly acidic ammonium ion gives ammonia, illustrated in
Figure 18.29. Ammonia also forms when ionic nitrides react with water. The nitride ion is a much stronger
base than the hydroxide ion:
The commercial production of ammonia is by the direct combination of the elements in theHaber process:
FIGURE18.29 The structure of ammonia is shown with a central nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms.
Ammonia is a colorless gas with a sharp, pungent odor. Smelling salts utilize this powerful odor. Gaseous
ammonia readily liquefies to give a colorless liquid that boils at −33 °C. Due to intermolecular hydrogen
bonding, the enthalpy of vaporization of liquid ammonia is higher than that of any other liquid except water, so
ammonia is useful as a refrigerant. Ammonia is quite soluble in water (658 L at STP dissolves in 1 L H O).
2
The chemical properties of ammonia are as follows:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 903
18.5 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen 889
1. Ammonia acts as a Brønsted base, as discussed in the chapter on acid-base chemistry. The ammonium
ion is similar in size to the potassium ion; compounds of the two ions exhibit many similarities in their
structures and solubilities.
2. Ammonia can display acidic behavior, although it is a much weaker acid than water. Like other acids,
ammonia reacts with metals, although it is so weak that high temperatures are necessary. Hydrogen and
(depending on the stoichiometry) amides (salts of imides (salts of NH2−), or nitrides (salts of N3−)
form.
3. The nitrogen atom in ammonia has its lowest possible oxidation state (3−) and thus is not susceptible to
reduction. However, it can be oxidized. Ammonia burns in air, giving NO and water. Hot ammonia and the
ammonium ion are active reducing agents. Of particular interest are the oxidations of ammonium ion by
nitrite ion, to yield pure nitrogen and by nitrate ion to yield nitrous oxide, N O.
2
4. There are a number of compounds that we can consider derivatives of ammonia through the replacement
of one or more hydrogen atoms with some other atom or group of atoms. Inorganic derivations include
chloramine, NH Cl, and hydrazine, N H :
2 2 4
Chloramine, NH Cl, results from the reaction of sodium hypochlorite, NaOCl, with ammonia in basic solution.
2
In the presence of a large excess of ammonia at low temperature, the chloramine reacts further to produce
hydrazine, N H :
2 4
Anhydrous hydrazine is relatively stable in spite of its positive free energy of formation:
Hydrazine is a fuming, colorless liquid that has some physical properties remarkably similar to those of H O (it
2
melts at 2 °C, boils at 113.5 °C, and has a density at 25 °C of 1.00 g/mL). It burns rapidly and completely in air
with substantial evolution of heat:
Like ammonia, hydrazine is both a Brønsted base and a Lewis base, although it is weaker than ammonia. It
reacts with strong acids and forms two series of salts that contain the and ions, respectively.
Some rockets use hydrazine as a fuel.
Phosphorus Hydrogen Compounds
The most important hydride of phosphorus is phosphine, PH , a gaseous analog of ammonia in terms of both
3
formula and structure. Unlike ammonia, it is not possible to form phosphine by direct union of the elements.
There are two methods for the preparation of phosphine. One method is by the action of an acid on an ionic
phosphide. The other method is the disproportionation of white phosphorus with hot concentrated base to
produce phosphine and the hydrogen phosphite ion:
Phosphine is a colorless, very poisonous gas, which has an odor like that of decaying fish. Heat easily
decomposes phosphine and the compound burns in air. The major uses of phosphine
are as a fumigant for grains and in semiconductor processing. Like ammonia, gaseous phosphine unites with
gaseous hydrogen halides, forming phosphonium compounds like PH Cl and PH I. Phosphine is a much
4 4
weaker base than ammonia; therefore, these compounds decompose in water, and the insoluble PH escapes
3
PAGE: 904
890 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
from solution.
Sulfur Hydrogen Compounds
Hydrogen sulfide, H S, is a colorless gas that is responsible for the offensive odor of rotten eggs and of many
2
hot springs. Hydrogen sulfide is as toxic as hydrogen cyanide; therefore, it is necessary to exercise great care in
handling it. Hydrogen sulfide is particularly deceptive because it paralyzes the olfactory nerves; after a short
exposure, one does not smell it.
The production of hydrogen sulfide by the direct reaction of the elements (H + S) is unsatisfactory because the
2
yield is low. A more effective preparation method is the reaction of a metal sulfide with a dilute acid. For
example:
It is easy to oxidize the sulfur in metal sulfides and in hydrogen sulfide, making metal sulfides and H S good
2
reducing agents. In acidic solutions, hydrogen sulfide reduces Fe3+to Fe2+, to Mn2+, to Cr3+,
and HNO to NO . The sulfur in H S usually oxidizes to elemental sulfur, unless a large excess of the oxidizing
3 2 2
agent is present. In which case, the sulfide may oxidize to or (or to SO or SO in the absence of
2 3
water):
This oxidation process leads to the removal of the hydrogen sulfide found in many sources of natural gas. The
deposits of sulfur in volcanic regions may be the result of the oxidation of H S present in volcanic gases.
2
Hydrogen sulfide is a weak diprotic acid that dissolves in water to form hydrosulfuric acid. The acid ionizes in
two stages, yielding hydrogen sulfide ions, HS−, in the first stage and sulfide ions, S2−, in the second. Since
hydrogen sulfide is a weak acid, aqueous solutions of soluble sulfides and hydrogen sulfides are basic:
Halogen Hydrogen Compounds
Binary compounds containing only hydrogen and a halogen arehydrogen halides. At room temperature, the
pure hydrogen halides HF, HCl, HBr, and HI are gases.
In general, it is possible to prepare the halides by the general techniques used to prepare other acids. Fluorine,
chlorine, and bromine react directly with hydrogen to form the respective hydrogen halide. This is a
commercially important reaction for preparing hydrogen chloride and hydrogen bromide.
The acid-base reaction between a nonvolatile strong acid and a metal halide will yield a hydrogen halide. The
escape of the gaseous hydrogen halide drives the reaction to completion. For example, the usual method of
preparing hydrogen fluoride is by heating a mixture of calcium fluoride, CaF , and concentrated sulfuric acid:
2
Gaseous hydrogen fluoride is also a by-product in the preparation of phosphate fertilizers by the reaction of
fluoroapatite, Ca (PO ) F, with sulfuric acid. The reaction of concentrated sulfuric acid with a chloride salt
5 43
produces hydrogen chloride both commercially and in the laboratory.
In most cases, sodium chloride is the chloride of choice because it is the least expensive chloride. Hydrogen
bromide and hydrogen iodide cannot be prepared using sulfuric acid because this acid is an oxidizing agent
capable of oxidizing both bromide and iodide. However, it is possible to prepare both hydrogen bromide and
hydrogen iodide using an acid such as phosphoric acid because it is a weaker oxidizing agent. For example:
All of the hydrogen halides are very soluble in water, forming hydrohalic acids. With the exception of hydrogen
fluoride, which has a strong hydrogen-fluoride bond, they are strong acids. Reactions of hydrohalic acids with
metals, metal hydroxides, oxides, or carbonates produce salts of the halides. Most chloride salts are soluble in
water. AgCl, PbCl , and Hg Cl are the commonly encountered exceptions.
2 2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 905
18.6 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Carbonates 891
The halide ions give the substances the properties associated with X−(aq). The heavier halide ions (Cl−, Br−, and
I−) can act as reducing agents, and the lighter halogens or other oxidizing agents will oxidize them:
For example, bromine oxidizes iodine:
Hydrofluoric acid is unique in its reactions with sand (silicon dioxide) and with glass, which is a mixture of
silicates:
The volatile silicon tetrafluoride escapes from these reactions. Because hydrogen fluoride attacks glass, it can
frost or etch glass and is used to etch markings on thermometers, burets, and other glassware.
The largest use for hydrogen fluoride is in production of hydrochlorofluorocarbons for refrigerants, in plastics,
and in propellants. The second largest use is in the manufacture of cryolite, Na AlF , which is important in the
3 6
production of aluminum. The acid is also important in the production of other inorganic fluorides (such as
BF ), which serve as catalysts in the industrial synthesis of certain organic compounds.
3
Hydrochloric acid is relatively inexpensive. It is an important and versatile acid in industry and is important
for the manufacture of metal chlorides, dyes, glue, glucose, and various other chemicals. A considerable
amount is also important for the activation of oil wells and as pickle liquor—an acid used to remove oxide
coating from iron or steel that is to be galvanized, tinned, or enameled. The amounts of hydrobromic acid and
hydroiodic acid used commercially are insignificant by comparison.
18.6 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Carbonates
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the preparation, properties, and uses of some representative metal carbonates
The chemistry of carbon is extensive; however, most of this chemistry is not relevant to this chapter. The other
aspects of the chemistry of carbon will appear in the chapter covering organic chemistry. In this chapter, we
will focus on the carbonate ion and related substances. The metals of groups 1 and 2, as well as zinc, cadmium,
mercury, and lead(II), form ioniccarbonates—compounds that contain the carbonate anions, The
metals of group 1, magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium also formhydrogen carbonates—compounds
that contain the hydrogen carbonate anion, also known as thebicarbonate anion.
With the exception of magnesium carbonate, it is possible to prepare carbonates of the metals of groups 1 and
2 by the reaction of carbon dioxide with the respective oxide or hydroxide. Examples of such reactions include:
The carbonates of the alkaline earth metals of group 12 and lead(II) are not soluble. These carbonates
precipitate upon mixing a solution of soluble alkali metal carbonate with a solution of soluble salts of these
metals. Examples of net ionic equations for the reactions are:
Pearls and the shells of most mollusks are calcium carbonate. Tin(II) or one of the trivalent or tetravalent ions
such as Al3+or Sn4+behave differently in this reaction as carbon dioxide and the corresponding oxide form
PAGE: 906
892 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
instead of the carbonate.
Alkali metal hydrogen carbonates such as NaHCO and CsHCO form by saturating a solution of the hydroxides
3 3
with carbon dioxide. The net ionic reaction involves hydroxide ion and carbon dioxide:
It is possible to isolate the solids by evaporation of the water from the solution.
Although they are insoluble in pure water, alkaline earth carbonates dissolve readily in water containing
carbon dioxide because hydrogen carbonate salts form. For example, caves and sinkholes form in limestone
when CaCO dissolves in water containing dissolved carbon dioxide:
3
Hydrogen carbonates of the alkaline earth metals remain stable only in solution; evaporation of the solution
produces the carbonate. Stalactites and stalagmites, like those shown inFigure 18.30, form in caves when
drops of water containing dissolved calcium hydrogen carbonate evaporate to leave a deposit of calcium
carbonate.
FIGURE18.30 (a) Stalactites and (b) stalagmites are cave formations of calcium carbonate. (credit a: modification
of work by Arvind Govindaraj; credit b: modification of work by the National Park Service.)
The two carbonates used commercially in the largest quantities are sodium carbonate and calcium carbonate.
In the United States, sodium carbonate is extracted from the mineral trona, Na (CO )(HCO )(H O) . Following
3 3 3 2 2
recrystallization to remove clay and other impurities, heating the recrystallized trona produces Na CO :
2 3
Carbonates are moderately strong bases. Aqueous solutions are basic because the carbonate ion accepts
hydrogen ion from water in this reversible reaction:
Carbonates react with acids to form salts of the metal, gaseous carbon dioxide, and water. The reaction of
calcium carbonate, the active ingredient of the antacid Tums, with hydrochloric acid (stomach acid), as shown
inFigure 18.31, illustrates the reaction:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 907
18.7 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen 893
FIGURE18.31 The reaction of calcium carbonate with hydrochloric acid is shown. (credit: Mark Ott)
Other applications of carbonates include glass making—where carbonate ions serve as a source of oxide
ions—and synthesis of oxides.
Hydrogen carbonates are amphoteric because they act as both weak acids and weak bases. Hydrogen
carbonate ions act as acids and react with solutions of soluble hydroxides to form a carbonate and water:
With acids, hydrogen carbonates form a salt, carbon dioxide, and water. Baking soda (bicarbonate of soda or
sodium bicarbonate) is sodium hydrogen carbonate. Baking powder contains baking soda and a solid acid
such as potassium hydrogen tartrate (cream of tartar), KHC H O . As long as the powder is dry, no reaction
4 4 6
occurs; immediately after the addition of water, the acid reacts with the hydrogen carbonate ions to form
carbon dioxide:
Dough will trap the carbon dioxide, causing it to expand during baking, producing the characteristic texture of
baked goods.
18.7 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and uses of nitrogen
Most pure nitrogen comes from the fractional distillation of liquid air. The atmosphere consists of 78%
nitrogen by volume. This means there are more than 20 million tons of nitrogen over every square mile of the
earth’s surface. Nitrogen is a component of proteins and of the genetic material (DNA/RNA) of all plants and
animals.
Under ordinary conditions, nitrogen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas. It boils at 77 K and freezes at 63
K. Liquid nitrogen is a useful coolant because it is inexpensive and has a low boiling point. Nitrogen is very
unreactive because of the very strong triple bond between the nitrogen atoms. The only common reactions at
room temperature occur with lithium to form Li N, with certain transition metal complexes, and with
3
hydrogen or oxygen in nitrogen-fixing bacteria. The general lack of reactivity of nitrogen makes the
remarkable ability of some bacteria to synthesize nitrogen compounds using atmospheric nitrogen gas as the
source one of the most exciting chemical events on our planet. This process is one type ofnitrogen fixation. In
this case, nitrogen fixation is the process where organisms convert atmospheric nitrogen into biologically
useful chemicals. Nitrogen fixation also occurs when lightning passes through air, causing molecular nitrogen
to react with oxygen to form nitrogen oxides, which are then carried down to the soil.
PAGE: 908
894 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Nitrogen Fixation
All living organisms require nitrogen compounds for survival. Unfortunately, most of these organisms
cannot absorb nitrogen from its most abundant source—the atmosphere. Atmospheric nitrogen consists of
N molecules, which are very unreactive due to the strong nitrogen-nitrogen triple bond. However, a few
2
organisms can overcome this problem through a process known as nitrogen fixation, illustrated inFigure
18.32.
FIGURE18.32 All living organisms require nitrogen. A few microorganisms are able to process atmospheric
nitrogen using nitrogen fixation. (credit “roots”: modification of work by the United States Department of
Agriculture; credit “root nodules”: modification of work by Louisa Howard)
Nitrogen fixation is the process where organisms convert atmospheric nitrogen into biologically useful
chemicals. To date, the only known kind of biological organisms capable of nitrogen fixation are
microorganisms. These organisms employ enzymes called nitrogenases, which contain iron and
molybdenum. Many of these microorganisms live in a symbiotic relationship with plants, with the best-
known example being the presence of rhizobia in the root nodules of legumes.
Large volumes of atmospheric nitrogen are necessary for making ammonia—the principal starting material
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 909
18.7 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen 895
used for preparation of large quantities of other nitrogen-containing compounds. Most other uses for
elemental nitrogen depend on its inactivity. It is helpful when a chemical process requires an inert
atmosphere. Canned foods and luncheon meats cannot oxidize in a pure nitrogen atmosphere, so they retain a
better flavor and color, and spoil less rapidly, when sealed in nitrogen instead of air. This technology allows
fresh produce to be available year-round, regardless of growing season.
There are compounds with nitrogen in all of its oxidation states from 3− to 5+. Much of the chemistry of
nitrogen involves oxidation-reduction reactions. Some active metals (such as alkali metals and alkaline earth
metals) can reduce nitrogen to form metal nitrides. In the remainder of this section, we will examine nitrogen-
oxygen chemistry.
There are well-characterized nitrogen oxides in which nitrogen exhibits each of its positive oxidation numbers
from 1+ to 5+. When ammonium nitrate is carefully heated, nitrous oxide (dinitrogen oxide) and water vapor
form. Stronger heating generates nitrogen gas, oxygen gas, and water vapor. No one should ever attempt this
reaction—it can be very explosive. In 1947, there was a major ammonium nitrate explosion in Texas City,
Texas, and, in 2013, there was another major explosion in West, Texas. In the last 100 years, there were nearly
30 similar disasters worldwide, resulting in the loss of numerous lives. In this oxidation-reduction reaction,
the nitrogen in the nitrate ion oxidizes the nitrogen in the ammonium ion. Nitrous oxide, shown inFigure
18.33, is a colorless gas possessing a mild, pleasing odor and a sweet taste. It finds application as an anesthetic
for minor operations, especially in dentistry, under the name “laughing gas.”
FIGURE18.33 Nitrous oxide, N O, is an anesthetic that has these molecular (left) and resonance (right) structures.
2
Low yields of nitric oxide, NO, form when heating nitrogen and oxygen together. NO also forms when lightning
passes through air during thunderstorms. Burning ammonia is the commercial method of preparing nitric
oxide. In the laboratory, the reduction of nitric acid is the best method for preparing nitric oxide. When copper
reacts with dilute nitric acid, nitric oxide is the principal reduction product:
Gaseous nitric oxide is the most thermally stable of the nitrogen oxides and is the simplest known thermally
stable molecule with an unpaired electron. It is one of the air pollutants generated by internal combustion
engines, resulting from the reaction of atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen during the combustion process.
At room temperature, nitric oxide is a colorless gas consisting of diatomic molecules. As is often the case with
molecules that contain an unpaired electron, two molecules combine to form a dimer by pairing their
unpaired electrons to form a bond. Liquid and solid NO both contain N O dimers, like that shown inFigure
2 2
18.34. Most substances with unpaired electrons exhibit color by absorbing visible light; however, NO is
colorless because the absorption of light is not in the visible region of the spectrum.
FIGURE18.34 This shows the equilibrium between NO and N O . The molecule, N O , absorbs light.
2 2 2 2
Cooling a mixture of equal parts nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide to −21 °C produces dinitrogen trioxide, a
blue liquid consisting of N O molecules (shown inFigure 18.35). Dinitrogen trioxide exists only in the liquid
2 3
and solid states. When heated, it reverts to a mixture of NO and NO .
2
PAGE: 910
896 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.35 Dinitrogen trioxide, N O , only exists in liquid or solid states and has these molecular (left) and
2 3
resonance (right) structures.
It is possible to prepare nitrogen dioxide in the laboratory by heating the nitrate of a heavy metal, or by the
reduction of concentrated nitric acid with copper metal, as shown inFigure 18.36. Commercially, it is possible
to prepare nitrogen dioxide by oxidizing nitric oxide with air.
FIGURE18.36 The reaction of copper metal with concentrated HNO produces a solution of Cu(NO ) and brown
3 3 2
fumes of NO . (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
2
The nitrogen dioxide molecule (illustrated inFigure 18.37) contains an unpaired electron, which is
responsible for its color and paramagnetism. It is also responsible for the dimerization of NO . At low
2
pressures or at high temperatures, nitrogen dioxide has a deep brown color that is due to the presence of the
NO molecule. At low temperatures, the color almost entirely disappears as dinitrogen tetraoxide, N O , forms.
2 2 4
At room temperature, an equilibrium exists:
FIGURE18.37 The molecular and resonance structures for nitrogen dioxide (NO , left) and dinitrogen tetraoxide
2
(N O , right) are shown.
2 4
Dinitrogen pentaoxide, N O (illustrated inFigure 18.38), is a white solid that is formed by the dehydration of
2 5
nitric acid by phosphorus(V) oxide (tetraphosphorus decoxide):
It is unstable above room temperature, decomposing to N O and O .
2 4 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 911
18.8 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Phosphorus 897
FIGURE18.38 This image shows the molecular structure and one resonance structure of a molecule of dinitrogen
pentaoxide, N O
2 5.
The oxides of nitrogen(III), nitrogen(IV), and nitrogen(V) react with water and form nitrogen-containing
oxyacids. Nitrogen(III) oxide, N O , is the anhydride of nitrous acid; HNO forms when N O reacts with water.
2 3 2 2 3
There are no stable oxyacids containing nitrogen with an oxidation state of 4+; therefore, nitrogen(IV) oxide,
NO , disproportionates in one of two ways when it reacts with water. In cold water, a mixture of HNO and
2 2
HNO forms. At higher temperatures, HNO and NO will form. Nitrogen(V) oxide, N O , is the anhydride of
3 3 2 5
nitric acid; HNO is produced when N O reacts with water:
3 2 5
The nitrogen oxides exhibit extensive oxidation-reduction behavior. Nitrous oxide resembles oxygen in its
behavior when heated with combustible substances. N O is a strong oxidizing agent that decomposes when
2
heated to form nitrogen and oxygen. Because one-third of the gas liberated is oxygen, nitrous oxide supports
combustion better than air (one-fifth oxygen). A glowing splinter bursts into flame when thrust into a bottle of
this gas. Nitric oxide acts both as an oxidizing agent and as a reducing agent. For example:
Nitrogen dioxide (or dinitrogen tetraoxide) is a good oxidizing agent. For example:
18.8 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Phosphorus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and uses of phosphorus
The industrial preparation of phosphorus is by heating calcium phosphate, obtained from phosphate rock,
with sand and coke:
The phosphorus distills out of the furnace and is condensed into a solid or burned to form P O . The
4 10
preparation of many other phosphorus compounds begins with P O . The acids and phosphates are useful as
4 10
fertilizers and in the chemical industry. Other uses are in the manufacture of special alloys such as
ferrophosphorus and phosphor bronze. Phosphorus is important in making pesticides, matches, and some
plastics. Phosphorus is an active nonmetal. In compounds, phosphorus usually occurs in oxidation states of
3−, 3+, and 5+. Phosphorus exhibits oxidation numbers that are unusual for a group 15 element in compounds
that contain phosphorus-phosphorus bonds; examples include diphosphorus tetrahydride, H P-PH , and
2 2
tetraphosphorus trisulfide, P S , illustrated inFigure 18.39.
4 3
PAGE: 912
898 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.39 P S is a component of the heads of strike-anywhere matches.
4 3
Phosphorus Oxygen Compounds
Phosphorus forms two common oxides, phosphorus(III) oxide (or tetraphosphorus hexaoxide), P O , and
4 6
phosphorus(V) oxide (or tetraphosphorus decaoxide), P O , both shown inFigure 18.40. Phosphorus(III)
4 10
oxide is a white crystalline solid with a garlic-like odor. Its vapor is very poisonous. It oxidizes slowly in air and
inflames when heated to 70 °C, forming P O . Phosphorus(III) oxide dissolves slowly in cold water to form
4 10
phosphorous acid, H PO .
3 3
FIGURE18.40 This image shows the molecular structures of P O (left) and P O (right).
4 6 4 10
Phosphorus(V) oxide, P O , is a white powder that is prepared by burning phosphorus in excess oxygen. Its
4 10
enthalpy of formation is very high (−2984 kJ), and it is quite stable and a very poor oxidizing agent. Dropping
P O into water produces a hissing sound, heat, and orthophosphoric acid:
4 10
Because of its great affinity for water, phosphorus(V) oxide is an excellent drying agent for gases and solvents,
and for removing water from many compounds.
Phosphorus Halogen Compounds
Phosphorus will react directly with the halogens, forming trihalides, PX , and pentahalides, PX . The trihalides
3 5
are much more stable than the corresponding nitrogen trihalides; nitrogen pentahalides do not form because
of nitrogen’s inability to form more than four bonds.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 913
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 899
The chlorides PCl and PCl , both shown inFigure 18.41, are the most important halides of phosphorus.
3 5
Phosphorus trichloride is a colorless liquid that is prepared by passing chlorine over molten phosphorus.
Phosphorus pentachloride is an off-white solid that is prepared by oxidizing the trichloride with excess
chlorine. The pentachloride sublimes when warmed and forms an equilibrium with the trichloride and
chlorine when heated.
FIGURE18.41 This image shows the molecular structure of PCl (left) and PCl (right) in the gas phase.
3 5
Like most other nonmetal halides, both phosphorus chlorides react with an excess of water and yield hydrogen
chloride and an oxyacid: PCl yields phosphorous acid H PO and PCl yields phosphoric acid, H PO .
3 3 3 5 3 4
The pentahalides of phosphorus are Lewis acids because of the empty valencedorbitals of phosphorus. These
compounds readily react with halide ions (Lewis bases) to give the anion Whereas phosphorus
pentafluoride is a molecular compound in all states, X-ray studies show that solid phosphorus pentachloride is
an ionic compound, as are phosphorus pentabromide, [Br−], and phosphorus
pentaiodide, [I−].
18.9 Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and compounds of oxygen
• Describe the preparation, properties, and uses of some representative metal oxides, peroxides, and hydroxides
Oxygen is the most abundant element on the earth’s crust. The earth’s surface is composed of the crust,
atmosphere, and hydrosphere. About 50% of the mass of the earth’s crust consists of oxygen (combined with
other elements, principally silicon). Oxygen occurs as O molecules and, to a limited extent, as O (ozone)
2 3
molecules in air. It forms about 20% of the mass of the air. About 89% of water by mass consists of combined
oxygen. In combination with carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen, oxygen is a large part of plants and animals.
Oxygen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas at ordinary temperatures. It is slightly denser than air.
Although it is only slightly soluble in water (49 mL of gas dissolves in 1 L at STP), oxygen’s solubility is very
important to aquatic life.
Most of the oxygen isolated commercially comes from air and the remainder from the electrolysis of water. The
separation of oxygen from air begins with cooling and compressing the air until it liquefies. As liquid air
warms, oxygen with its higher boiling point (90 K) separates from nitrogen, which has a lower boiling point (77
K). It is possible to separate the other components of air at the same time based on differences in their boiling
points.
Oxygen is essential in combustion processes such as the burning of fuels. Plants and animals use the oxygen
from the air in respiration. The administration of oxygen-enriched air is an important medical practice when a
patient is receiving an inadequate supply of oxygen because of shock, pneumonia, or some other illness.
The chemical industry employs oxygen for oxidizing many substances. A significant amount of oxygen
produced commercially is important in the removal of carbon from iron during steel production. Large
quantities of pure oxygen are also necessary in metal fabrication and in the cutting and welding of metals with
PAGE: 914
900 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
oxyhydrogen and oxyacetylene torches.
Liquid oxygen is important to the space industry. It is an oxidizing agent in rocket engines. It is also the source
of gaseous oxygen for life support in space.
As we know, oxygen is very important to life. The energy required for the maintenance of normal body
functions in human beings and in other organisms comes from the slow oxidation of chemical compounds.
Oxygen is the final oxidizing agent in these reactions. In humans, oxygen passes from the lungs into the blood,
where it combines with hemoglobin, producing oxyhemoglobin. In this form, blood transports the oxygen to
tissues, where it is transferred to the tissues. The ultimate products are carbon dioxide and water. The blood
carries the carbon dioxide through the veins to the lungs, where the blood releases the carbon dioxide and
collects another supply of oxygen. Digestion and assimilation of food regenerate the materials consumed by
oxidation in the body; the energy liberated is the same as if the food burned outside the body.
Green plants continually replenish the oxygen in the atmosphere by a process calledphotosynthesis. The
products of photosynthesis may vary, but, in general, the process converts carbon dioxide and water into
glucose (a sugar) and oxygen using the energy of light:
Thus, the oxygen that became carbon dioxide and water by the metabolic processes in plants and animals
returns to the atmosphere by photosynthesis.
When dry oxygen is passed between two electrically charged plates,ozone(O , illustrated inFigure 18.42), an
3
allotrope of oxygen possessing a distinctive odor, forms. The formation of ozone from oxygen is an
endothermic reaction, in which the energy comes from an electrical discharge, heat, or ultraviolet light:
The sharp odor associated with sparking electrical equipment is due, in part, to ozone.
FIGURE18.42 The image shows the bent ozone (O ) molecule and the resonance structures necessary to describe
3
its bonding.
Ozone forms naturally in the upper atmosphere by the action of ultraviolet light from the sun on the oxygen
there. Most atmospheric ozone occurs in the stratosphere, a layer of the atmosphere extending from about 10
to 50 kilometers above the earth’s surface. This ozone acts as a barrier to harmful ultraviolet light from the sun
by absorbing it via a chemical decomposition reaction:
The reactive oxygen atoms recombine with molecular oxygen to complete the ozone cycle. The presence of
stratospheric ozone decreases the frequency of skin cancer and other damaging effects of ultraviolet radiation.
It has been clearly demonstrated that chlorofluorocarbons, CFCs (known commercially as Freons), which were
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 915
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 901
present as aerosol propellants in spray cans and as refrigerants, caused depletion of ozone in the stratosphere.
This occurred because ultraviolet light also causes CFCs to decompose, producing atomic chlorine. The
chlorine atoms react with ozone molecules, resulting in a net removal of O molecules from stratosphere. This
3
process is explored in detail in our coverage of chemical kinetics. There is a worldwide effort to reduce the
amount of CFCs used commercially, and the ozone hole is already beginning to decrease in size as atmospheric
concentrations of atomic chlorine decrease. While ozone in the stratosphere helps protect us, ozone in the
troposphere is a problem. This ozone is a toxic component of photochemical smog.
The uses of ozone depend on its reactivity with other substances. It can be used as a bleaching agent for oils,
waxes, fabrics, and starch: It oxidizes the colored compounds in these substances to colorless compounds. It is
an alternative to chlorine as a disinfectant for water.
Reactions
Elemental oxygen is a strong oxidizing agent. It reacts with most other elements and many compounds.
Reaction with Elements
Oxygen reacts directly at room temperature or at elevated temperatures with all other elements except the
noble gases, the halogens, and few second- and third-row transition metals of low reactivity (those with higher
reduction potentials than copper). Rust is an example of the reaction of oxygen with iron. The more active
metals form peroxides or superoxides. Less active metals and the nonmetals give oxides. Two examples of
these reactions are:
The oxides of halogens, at least one of the noble gases, and metals with higher reduction potentials than
copper do not form by the direct action of the elements with oxygen.
Reaction with Compounds
Elemental oxygen also reacts with some compounds. If it is possible to oxidize any of the elements in a given
compound, further oxidation by oxygen can occur. For example, hydrogen sulfide, H S, contains sulfur with an
2
oxidation state of 2−. Because the sulfur does not exhibit its maximum oxidation state, we would expect H S to
2
react with oxygen. It does, yielding water and sulfur dioxide. The reaction is:
It is also possible to oxidize oxides such as CO and P O that contain an element with a lower oxidation state.
4 6
The ease with which elemental oxygen picks up electrons is mirrored by the difficulty of removing electrons
from oxygen in most oxides. Of the elements, only the very reactive fluorine can oxidize oxides to form oxygen
gas.
Oxides, Peroxides, and Hydroxides
Compounds of the representative metals with oxygen fall into three categories: (1)oxides, containing oxide
ions, O2−; (2)peroxides, containing peroxides ions, with oxygen-oxygen covalent single bonds and a
very limited number ofsuperoxides, containing superoxide ions, with oxygen-oxygen covalent bonds
that have a bond order of In addition, there are (3)hydroxides, containing hydroxide ions, OH−. All
representative metals form oxides. Some of the metals of group 2 also form peroxides, MO , and the metals of
2
group 1 also form peroxides, M O , and superoxides, MO .
2 2 2
Oxides
It is possible to produce the oxides of most representative metals by heating the corresponding hydroxides
(forming the oxide and gaseous water) or carbonates (forming the oxide and gaseous CO ). Equations for
2
example reactions are:
PAGE: 916
902 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
However, alkali metal salts generally are very stable and do not decompose easily when heated. Alkali metal
oxides result from the oxidation-reduction reactions created by heating nitrates or hydroxides with the metals.
Equations for sample reactions are:
With the exception of mercury(II) oxide, it is possible to produce the oxides of the metals of groups 2–15 by
burning the corresponding metal in air. The heaviest member of each group, the member for which the inert
pair effect is most pronounced, forms an oxide in which the oxidation state of the metal ion is two less than the
group oxidation state (inert pair effect). Thus, Tl O, PbO, and Bi O form when burning thallium, lead, and
2 2 3
bismuth, respectively. The oxides of the lighter members of each group exhibit the group oxidation state. For
example, SnO forms from burning tin. Mercury(II) oxide, HgO, forms slowly when mercury is warmed below
2
500 °C; it decomposes at higher temperatures.
Burning the members of groups 1 and 2 in air is not a suitable way to form the oxides of these elements. These
metals are reactive enough to combine with nitrogen in the air, so they form mixtures of oxides and ionic
nitrides. Several also form peroxides or superoxides when heated in air.
Ionic oxides all contain the oxide ion, a very powerful hydrogen ion acceptor. With the exception of the very
insoluble aluminum oxide, Al O , tin(IV), SnO , and lead(IV), PbO , the oxides of the representative metals
2 3 2 2
react with acids to form salts. Some equations for these reactions are:
The oxides of the metals of groups 1 and 2 and of thallium(I) oxide react with water and form hydroxides.
Examples of such reactions are:
The oxides of the alkali metals have little industrial utility, unlike magnesium oxide, calcium oxide, and
aluminum oxide. Magnesium oxide is important in making firebrick, crucibles, furnace linings, and thermal
insulation—applications that require chemical and thermal stability. Calcium oxide, sometimes called
quicklimeor lime in the industrial market, is very reactive, and its principal uses reflect its reactivity. Pure
calcium oxide emits an intense white light when heated to a high temperature (as illustrated inFigure 18.43).
Blocks of calcium oxide heated by gas flames were the stage lights in theaters before electricity was available.
This is the source of the phrase “in the limelight.”
FIGURE18.43 Calcium oxide has many industrial uses. When it is heated at high temperatures, it emits an intense
white light.
Calcium oxide and calcium hydroxide are inexpensive bases used extensively in chemical processing,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 917
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 903
although most of the useful products prepared from them do not contain calcium. Calcium oxide, CaO, is made
by heating calcium carbonate, CaCO , which is widely and inexpensively available as limestone or oyster
3
shells:
Although this decomposition reaction is reversible, it is possible to obtain a 100% yield of CaO by allowing the
CO to escape. It is possible to prepare calcium hydroxide by the familiar acid-base reaction of a soluble metal
2
oxide with water:
Both CaO and Ca(OH) are useful as bases; they accept protons and neutralize acids.
2
Alumina (Al O ) occurs in nature as the mineral corundum, a very hard substance used as an abrasive for
2 3
grinding and polishing. Corundum is important to the jewelry trade as ruby and sapphire. The color of ruby is
due to the presence of a small amount of chromium; other impurities produce the wide variety of colors
possible for sapphires. Artificial rubies and sapphires are now manufactured by melting aluminum oxide
(melting point = 2050 °C) with small amounts of oxides to produce the desired colors and cooling the melt in
such a way as to produce large crystals. Ruby lasers use synthetic ruby crystals.
Zinc oxide, ZnO, was a useful white paint pigment; however, pollutants tend to discolor the compound. The
compound is also important in the manufacture of automobile tires and other rubber goods, and in the
preparation of medicinal ointments. For example, zinc-oxide-based sunscreens, as shown inFigure 18.44,
help prevent sunburn. The zinc oxide in these sunscreens is present in the form of very small grains known as
nanoparticles. Lead dioxide is a constituent of charged lead storage batteries. Lead(IV) tends to revert to the
more stable lead(II) ion by gaining two electrons, so lead dioxide is a powerful oxidizing agent.
FIGURE18.44 Zinc oxide protects exposed skin from sunburn. (credit: modification of work by "osseous"/Flickr)
Peroxides and Superoxides
Peroxides and superoxides are strong oxidizers and are important in chemical processes. Hydrogen peroxide,
H O , prepared from metal peroxides, is an important bleach and disinfectant. Peroxides and superoxides
2 2
form when the metal or metal oxides of groups 1 and 2 react with pure oxygen at elevated temperatures.
Sodium peroxide and the peroxides of calcium, strontium, and barium form by heating the corresponding
metal or metal oxide in pure oxygen:
The peroxides of potassium, rubidium, and cesium can be prepared by heating the metal or its oxide in a
carefully controlled amount of oxygen:
With an excess of oxygen, the superoxides KO , RbO , and CsO form. For example:
2 2 2
PAGE: 918
904 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
The stability of the peroxides and superoxides of the alkali metals increases as the size of the cation increases.
Hydroxides
Hydroxides are compounds that contain the OH−ion. It is possible to prepare these compounds by two general
types of reactions. Soluble metal hydroxides can be produced by the reaction of the metal or metal oxide with
water. Insoluble metal hydroxides form when a solution of a soluble salt of the metal combines with a solution
containing hydroxide ions.
With the exception of beryllium and magnesium, the metals of groups 1 and 2 react with water to form
hydroxides and hydrogen gas. Examples of such reactions include:
However, these reactions can be violent and dangerous; therefore, it is preferable to produce soluble metal
hydroxides by the reaction of the respective oxide with water:
Most metal oxides arebase anhydrides. This is obvious for the soluble oxides because they form metal
hydroxides. Most other metal oxides are insoluble and do not form hydroxides in water; however, they are still
base anhydrides because they will react with acids.
It is possible to prepare the insoluble hydroxides of beryllium, magnesium, and other representative metals by
the addition of sodium hydroxide to a solution of a salt of the respective metal. The net ionic equations for the
reactions involving a magnesium salt, an aluminum salt, and a zinc salt are:
An excess of hydroxide must be avoided when preparing aluminum, gallium, zinc, and tin(II) hydroxides, or
the hydroxides will dissolve with the formation of the corresponding complex ions:
and (seeFigure 18.45). The important aspect of complex ions for this chapter is that
they form by a Lewis acid-base reaction with the metal being the Lewis acid.
FIGURE18.45 (a) Mixing solutions of NaOH and Zn(NO ) produces a white precipitate of Zn(OH) . (b) Addition of
3 2 2
an excess of NaOH results in dissolution of the precipitate. (credit: modification of work by Mark Ott)
Industry uses large quantities of sodium hydroxide as a cheap, strong base. Sodium chloride is the starting
material for the production of NaOH because NaCl is a less expensive starting material than the oxide. Sodium
hydroxide is among the top 10 chemicals in production in the United States, and this production was almost
entirely by electrolysis of solutions of sodium chloride. This process is thechlor-alkali process, and it is the
primary method for producing chlorine.
Sodium hydroxide is an ionic compound and melts without decomposition. It is very soluble in water, giving off
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 919
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 905
a great deal of heat and forming very basic solutions: 40 grams of sodium hydroxide dissolves in only 60 grams
of water at 25 °C. Sodium hydroxide is employed in the production of other sodium compounds and is used to
neutralize acidic solutions during the production of other chemicals such as petrochemicals and polymers.
Many of the applications of hydroxides are for the neutralization of acids (such as the antacid shown inFigure
18.46) and for the preparation of oxides by thermal decomposition. An aqueous suspension of magnesium
hydroxide constitutes the antacid milk of magnesia. Because of its ready availability (from the reaction of water
with calcium oxide prepared by the decomposition of limestone, CaCO ), low cost, and activity, calcium
3
hydroxide is used extensively in commercial applications needing a cheap, strong base. The reaction of
hydroxides with appropriate acids is also used to prepare salts.
FIGURE18.46 Calcium carbonate, CaCO , can be consumed in the form of an antacid to neutralize the effects of
3
acid in your stomach. (credit: “Midnightcomm”/Wikimedia Commons)
Chemistry in Everyday Life
The Chlor-Alkali Process
Although they are very different chemically, there is a link between chlorine and sodium hydroxide
because there is an important electrochemical process that produces the two chemicals simultaneously.
The process known as the chlor-alkali process, utilizes sodium chloride, which occurs in large deposits in
many parts of the world. This is an electrochemical process to oxidize chloride ion to chlorine and generate
sodium hydroxide.
Passing a direct current of electricity through a solution of NaCl causes the chloride ions to migrate to the
positive electrode where oxidation to gaseous chlorine occurs when the ion gives up an electron to the
electrode:
The electrons produced travel through the outside electrical circuit to the negative electrode. Although the
positive sodium ions migrate toward this negative electrode, metallic sodium does not form because
sodium ions are too difficult to reduce under the conditions used. (Recall that metallic sodium is active
enough to react with water and hence, even if produced, would immediately react with water to produce
sodium ions again.) Instead, water molecules pick up electrons from the electrode and undergo reduction
to form hydrogen gas and hydroxide ions:
PAGE: 920
906 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
The overall result is the conversion of the aqueous solution of NaCl to an aqueous solution of NaOH,
gaseous Cl , and gaseous H :
2 2
Nonmetal Oxygen Compounds
Most nonmetals react with oxygen to form nonmetal oxides. Depending on the available oxidation states for the
element, a variety of oxides might form. Fluorine will combine with oxygen to form fluorides such as OF ,
2
where the oxygen has a 2+-oxidation state.
Sulfur Oxygen Compounds
The two common oxides of sulfur are sulfur dioxide, SO , and sulfur trioxide, SO . The odor of burning sulfur
2 3
comes from sulfur dioxide. Sulfur dioxide, shown inFigure 18.47, occurs in volcanic gases and in the
atmosphere near industrial plants that burn fuel containing sulfur compounds.
FIGURE18.47 This image shows the molecular structure (left) and resonance forms (right) of sulfur dioxide.
Commercial production of sulfur dioxide is from either burning sulfur or roasting sulfide ores such as ZnS,
FeS , and Cu S in air. (Roasting, which forms the metal oxide, is the first step in the separation of many metals
2 2
from their ores.) A convenient method for preparing sulfur dioxide in the laboratory is by the action of a strong
acid on either sulfite salts containing the ion or hydrogen sulfite salts containing Sulfurous
acid, H SO , forms first, but quickly decomposes into sulfur dioxide and water. Sulfur dioxide also forms when
2 3
many reducing agents react with hot, concentrated sulfuric acid. Sulfur trioxide forms slowly when heating
sulfur dioxide and oxygen together, and the reaction is exothermic:
Sulfur dioxide is a gas at room temperature, and the SO molecule is bent. Sulfur trioxide melts at 17 °C and
2
boils at 43 °C. In the vapor state, its molecules are single SO units (shown inFigure 18.48), but in the solid
3
state, SO exists in several polymeric forms.
3
FIGURE18.48 This image shows the structure (top) of sulfur trioxide in the gas phase and its resonance forms
(bottom).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 921
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 907
The sulfur oxides react as Lewis acids with many oxides and hydroxides in Lewis acid-base reactions, with the
formation ofsulfitesorhydrogen sulfites, andsulfatesorhydrogen sulfates, respectively.
Halogen Oxygen Compounds
The halogens do not react directly with oxygen, but it is possible to prepare binary oxygen-halogen compounds
by the reactions of the halogens with oxygen-containing compounds. Oxygen compounds with chlorine,
bromine, and iodine are oxides because oxygen is the more electronegative element in these compounds. On
the other hand, fluorine compounds with oxygen are fluorides because fluorine is the more electronegative
element.
As a class, the oxides are extremely reactive and unstable, and their chemistry has little practical importance.
Dichlorine oxide, formally called dichlorine monoxide, and chlorine dioxide, both shown inFigure 18.49, are
the only commercially important compounds. They are important as bleaching agents (for use with pulp and
flour) and for water treatment.
FIGURE18.49 This image shows the structures of the (a) Cl O and (b) ClO molecules.
2 2
Nonmetal Oxyacids and Their Salts
Nonmetal oxides form acids when allowed to react with water; these are acid anhydrides. The resulting
oxyanions can form salts with various metal ions.
Nitrogen Oxyacids and Salts
Nitrogen pentaoxide, N O , and NO react with water to form nitric acid, HNO . Alchemists, as early as the
2 5 2 3
eighth century, knew nitric acid (shown inFigure 18.50) asaqua fortis(meaning "strong water"). The acid was
useful in the separation of gold from silver because it dissolves silver but not gold. Traces of nitric acid occur in
the atmosphere after thunderstorms, and its salts are widely distributed in nature. There are tremendous
deposits of Chile saltpeter, NaNO , in the desert region near the boundary of Chile and Peru. Bengal saltpeter,
3
KNO , occurs in India and in other countries of the Far East.
3
FIGURE18.50 This image shows the molecular structure (left) of nitric acid, HNO and its resonance forms (right).
3
In the laboratory, it is possible to produce nitric acid by heating a nitrate salt (such as sodium or potassium
nitrate) with concentrated sulfuric acid:
TheOstwald processis the commercial method for producing nitric acid. This process involves the oxidation
of ammonia to nitric oxide, NO; oxidation of nitric oxide to nitrogen dioxide, NO ; and further oxidation and
2
hydration of nitrogen dioxide to form nitric acid:
PAGE: 922
908 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Or
Pure nitric acid is a colorless liquid. However, it is often yellow or brown in color because NO forms as the acid
2
decomposes. Nitric acid is stable in aqueous solution; solutions containing 68% of the acid are commercially
available concentrated nitric acid. It is both a strong oxidizing agent and a strong acid.
The action of nitric acid on a metal rarely produces H (by reduction of H+) in more than small amounts.
2
Instead, the reduction of nitrogen occurs. The products formed depend on the concentration of the acid, the
activity of the metal, and the temperature. Normally, a mixture of nitrates, nitrogen oxides, and various
reduction products form. Less active metals such as copper, silver, and lead reduce concentrated nitric acid
primarily to nitrogen dioxide. The reaction of dilute nitric acid with copper produces NO. In each case, the
nitrate salts of the metals crystallize upon evaporation of the resultant solutions.
Nonmetallic elements, such as sulfur, carbon, iodine, and phosphorus, undergo oxidation by concentrated
nitric acid to their oxides or oxyacids, with the formation of NO :
2
Nitric acid oxidizes many compounds; for example, concentrated nitric acid readily oxidizes hydrochloric acid
to chlorine and chlorine dioxide. A mixture of one part concentrated nitric acid and three parts concentrated
hydrochloric acid (calledaqua regia, which means royal water) reacts vigorously with metals. This mixture is
particularly useful in dissolving gold, platinum, and other metals that are more difficult to oxidize than
hydrogen. A simplified equation to represent the action ofaqua regiaon gold is:
LINK TO LEARNING
Although gold is generally unreactive, you can watch avideo(http://openstax.org/l/16gold)of the complex
mixture of compounds present inaqua regiadissolving it into solution.
Nitrates, salts of nitric acid, form when metals, oxides, hydroxides, or carbonates react with nitric acid. Most
nitrates are soluble in water; indeed, one of the significant uses of nitric acid is to prepare soluble metal
nitrates.
Nitric acid finds extensive use in the laboratory and in chemical industries as a strong acid and strong
oxidizing agent. It is important in the manufacture of explosives, dyes, plastics, and drugs. Salts of nitric acid
(nitrates) are valuable as fertilizers. Gunpowder is a mixture of potassium nitrate, sulfur, and charcoal.
The reaction of N O with water gives a pale blue solution of nitrous acid, HNO . However, HNO (shown in
2 3 2 2
Figure 18.51) is easier to prepare by the addition of an acid to a solution of nitrite; nitrous acid is a weak acid,
so the nitrite ion is basic in aqueous solution:
Nitrous acid is very unstable and exists only in solution. It disproportionates slowly at room temperature
(rapidly when heated) into nitric acid and nitric oxide. Nitrous acid is an active oxidizing agent with strong
reducing agents, and strong oxidizing agents oxidize it to nitric acid.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 923
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 909
FIGURE18.51 This image shows the molecular structure of a molecule of nitrous acid, HNO .
2
Sodium nitrite, NaNO , is an additive to meats such as hot dogs and cold cuts. The nitrite ion has two functions.
2
It limits the growth of bacteria that can cause food poisoning, and it prolongs the meat’s retention of its red
color. The addition of sodium nitrite to meat products is controversial because nitrous acid reacts with certain
organic compounds to form a class of compounds known as nitrosamines. Nitrosamines produce cancer in
laboratory animals. This has prompted the FDA to limit the amount of NaNO in foods.
2
The nitrites are much more stable than the acid, but nitrites, like nitrates, can explode. Nitrites, like nitrates,
are also soluble in water (AgNO is only slightly soluble).
2
Phosphorus Oxyacids and Salts
Pure orthophosphoric acid, H PO (shown inFigure 18.52), forms colorless, deliquescent crystals that melt at
3 4
42 °C. The common name of this compound is phosphoric acid, and is commercially available as a viscous
82% solution known as syrupy phosphoric acid. One use of phosphoric acid is as an additive to many soft
drinks.
One commercial method of preparing orthophosphoric acid is to treat calcium phosphate rock with
concentrated sulfuric acid:
FIGURE18.52 Orthophosphoric acid, H PO , is colorless when pure and has this molecular (left) and Lewis
3 4
structure (right).
Dilution of the products with water, followed by filtration to remove calcium sulfate, gives a dilute acid solution
contaminated with calcium dihydrogen phosphate, Ca(H PO ) , and other compounds associated with calcium
2 42
phosphate rock. It is possible to prepare pure orthophosphoric acid by dissolving P O in water.
4 10
The action of water on P O , PCl , PBr , or PI forms phosphorous acid, H PO (shown inFigure 18.53). The
4 6 3 3 3 3 3
best method for preparing pure phosphorous acid is by hydrolyzing phosphorus trichloride:
Heating the resulting solution expels the hydrogen chloride and leads to the evaporation of water. When
sufficient water evaporates, white crystals of phosphorous acid will appear upon cooling. The crystals are
deliquescent, very soluble in water, and have an odor like that of garlic. The solid melts at 70.1 °C and
decomposes at about 200 °C by disproportionation into phosphine and orthophosphoric acid:
PAGE: 924
910 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
FIGURE18.53 In a molecule of phosphorous acid, H PO , only the two hydrogen atoms bonded to an oxygen atom
3 3
are acidic.
Phosphorous acid forms only two series of salts, which contain the dihydrogen phosphite ion, or the
hydrogen phosphate ion, respectively. It is not possible to replace the third atom of hydrogen
because it is not very acidic, as it is not easy to ionize the P-H bond.
Sulfur Oxyacids and Salts
The preparation of sulfuric acid, H SO (shown inFigure 18.54), begins with the oxidation of sulfur to sulfur
2 4
trioxide and then converting the trioxide to sulfuric acid. Pure sulfuric acid is a colorless, oily liquid that
freezes at 10.5 °C. It fumes when heated because the acid decomposes to water and sulfur trioxide. The heating
process causes the loss of more sulfur trioxide than water, until reaching a concentration of 98.33% acid. Acid
of this concentration boils at 338 °C without further change in concentration (a constant boiling solution) and
is commercially concentrated H SO . The amount of sulfuric acid used in industry exceeds that of any other
2 4
manufactured compound.
FIGURE18.54 Sulfuric acid has a tetrahedral molecular structure.
The strong affinity of concentrated sulfuric acid for water makes it a good dehydrating agent. It is possible to
dry gases and immiscible liquids that do not react with the acid by passing them through the acid.
Sulfuric acid is a strong diprotic acid that ionizes in two stages. In aqueous solution, the first stage is
essentially complete. The secondary ionization is not nearly so complete, and is a moderately strong
acid (about 25% ionized in solution of a salt:K = 1.2 10−2).
a
Being a diprotic acid, sulfuric acid forms both sulfates, such as Na SO , and hydrogen sulfates, such as
2 4
NaHSO . Most sulfates are soluble in water; however, the sulfates of barium, strontium, calcium, and lead are
4
only slightly soluble in water.
Among the important sulfates are Na SO ⋅10H O and Epsom salts, MgSO ⋅7H O. Because the ion is an
2 4 2 4 2
acid, hydrogen sulfates, such as NaHSO , exhibit acidic behavior, and this compound is the primary ingredient
4
in some household cleansers.
Hot, concentrated sulfuric acid is an oxidizing agent. Depending on its concentration, the temperature, and the
strength of the reducing agent, sulfuric acid oxidizes many compounds and, in the process, undergoes
reduction to SO , S, H S or S2−.
2 2 ,
Sulfur dioxide dissolves in water to form a solution of sulfurous acid, as expected for the oxide of a nonmetal.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 925
18.9 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen 911
Sulfurous acid is unstable, and it is not possible to isolate anhydrous H SO . Heating a solution of sulfurous
2 3
acid expels the sulfur dioxide. Like other diprotic acids, sulfurous acid ionizes in two steps: The hydrogen
sulfite ion, and the sulfite ion, form. Sulfurous acid is a moderately strong acid. Ionization is
about 25% in the first stage, but it is much less in the second (K = 1.2 10−2andK = 6.2 10−8).
a1 a2
In order to prepare solid sulfite and hydrogen sulfite salts, it is necessary to add a stoichiometric amount of a
base to a sulfurous acid solution and then evaporate the water. These salts also form from the reaction of SO
2
with oxides and hydroxides. Heating solid sodium hydrogen sulfite forms sodium sulfite, sulfur dioxide, and
water:
Strong oxidizing agents can oxidize sulfurous acid. Oxygen in the air oxidizes it slowly to the more stable
sulfuric acid:
Solutions of sulfites are also very susceptible to air oxidation to produce sulfates. Thus, solutions of sulfites
always contain sulfates after exposure to air.
Halogen Oxyacids and Their Salts
The compounds HXO, HXO , HXO , and HXO , where X represents Cl, Br, or I, are the hypohalous, halous, halic,
2 3 4
and perhalic acids, respectively. The strengths of these acids increase from the hypohalous acids, which are
very weak acids, to the perhalic acids, which are very strong.Table 18.2lists the known acids, and, where
known, their pK values are given in parentheses.
a
Oxyacids of the Halogens
Name Fluorine Chlorine Bromine Iodine
hypohalous HOF HOCl (7.5) HOBr (8.7) HOI (11)
halous HClO (2.0)
2
halic HClO HBrO HIO (0.8)
3 3 3
perhalic HClO HBrO HIO (1.6)
4 4 4
paraperhalic H IO (1.6)
5 6
TABLE18.2
The only known oxyacid of fluorine is the very unstable hypofluorous acid, HOF, which is prepared by the
reaction of gaseous fluorine with ice:
The compound is very unstable and decomposes above −40 °C. This compound does not ionize in water, and
there are no known salts. It is uncertain whether the name hypofluorous acid is even appropriate for HOF; a
more appropriate name might be hydrogen hypofluorite.
The reactions of chlorine and bromine with water are analogous to that of fluorine with ice, but these reactions
do not go to completion, and mixtures of the halogen and the respective hypohalous and hydrohalic acids
result. Other than HOF, the hypohalous acids only exist in solution. The hypohalous acids are all very weak
acids; however, HOCl is a stronger acid than HOBr, which, in turn, is stronger than HOI.
The addition of base to solutions of the hypohalous acids produces solutions of salts containing the basic
PAGE: 926
912 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
hypohalite ions, OX−. It is possible to isolate these salts as solids. All of the hypohalites are unstable with
respect to disproportionation in solution, but the reaction is slow for hypochlorite. Hypobromite and
hypoiodite disproportionate rapidly, even in the cold:
Sodium hypochlorite is an inexpensive bleach (Clorox) and germicide. The commercial preparation involves
the electrolysis of cold, dilute, aqueous sodium chloride solutions under conditions where the resulting
chlorine and hydroxide ion can react. The net reaction is:
The only definitely known halous acid is chlorous acid, HClO , obtained by the reaction of barium chlorite with
2
dilute sulfuric acid:
Filtering the insoluble barium sulfate leaves a solution of HClO . Chlorous acid is not stable; it slowly
2
decomposes in solution to yield chlorine dioxide, hydrochloric acid, and water. Chlorous acid reacts with bases
to give salts containing the chlorite ion (shown inFigure 18.55). Sodium chlorite finds an extensive application
in the bleaching of paper because it is a strong oxidizing agent and does not damage the paper.
FIGURE18.55 Chlorite ions, are produced when chlorous acid reacts with bases.
Chloric acid, HClO , and bromic acid, HBrO , are stable only in solution. The reaction of iodine with
3 3
concentrated nitric acid produces stable white iodic acid, HIO :
3
It is possible to obtain the lighter halic acids from their barium salts by reaction with dilute sulfuric acid. The
reaction is analogous to that used to prepare chlorous acid. All of the halic acids are strong acids and very
active oxidizing agents. The acids react with bases to form salts containing chlorate ions (shown inFigure
18.56). Another preparative method is the electrochemical oxidation of a hot solution of a metal halide to form
the appropriate metal chlorates. Sodium chlorate is a weed killer; potassium chlorate is used as an oxidizing
agent.
FIGURE18.56 Chlorate ions, are produced when halic acids react with bases.
Perchloric acid, HClO , forms when treating a perchlorate, such as potassium perchlorate, with sulfuric acid
4
under reduced pressure. The HClO can be distilled from the mixture:
4
Dilute aqueous solutions of perchloric acid are quite stable thermally, but concentrations above 60% are
unstable and dangerous. Perchloric acid and its salts are powerful oxidizing agents, as the very electronegative
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 927
18.10 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Sulfur 913
chlorine is more stable in a lower oxidation state than 7+. Serious explosions have occurred when heating
concentrated solutions with easily oxidized substances. However, its reactions as an oxidizing agent are slow
when perchloric acid is cold and dilute. The acid is among the strongest of all acids. Most salts containing the
perchlorate ion (shown inFigure 18.57) are soluble. It is possible to prepare them from reactions of bases with
perchloric acid and, commercially, by the electrolysis of hot solutions of their chlorides.
FIGURE18.57 Perchlorate ions, can be produced when perchloric acid reacts with a base or by
electrolysis of hot solutions of their chlorides.
Perbromate salts are difficult to prepare, and the best syntheses currently involve the oxidation of bromates in
basic solution with fluorine gas followed by acidification. There are few, if any, commercial uses of this acid or
its salts.
There are several different acids containing iodine in the 7+-oxidation state; they include metaperiodic acid,
HIO , and paraperiodic acid, H IO . These acids are strong oxidizing agents and react with bases to form the
4 5 6
appropriate salts.
18.10 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Sulfur
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and uses of sulfur
Sulfur exists in nature as elemental deposits as well as sulfides of iron, zinc, lead, and copper, and sulfates of
sodium, calcium, barium, and magnesium. Hydrogen sulfide is often a component of natural gas and occurs in
many volcanic gases, like those shown inFigure 18.58. Sulfur is a constituent of many proteins and is essential
for life.
FIGURE18.58 Volcanic gases contain hydrogen sulfide. (credit: Daniel Julie/Wikimedia Commons)
TheFrasch process, illustrated inFigure 18.59, is important in the mining of free sulfur from enormous
PAGE: 928
914 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
underground deposits in Texas and Louisiana. Superheated water (170 °C and 10 atm pressure) is forced down
the outermost of three concentric pipes to the underground deposit. The hot water melts the sulfur. The
innermost pipe conducts compressed air into the liquid sulfur. The air forces the liquid sulfur, mixed with air,
to flow up through the outlet pipe. Transferring the mixture to large settling vats allows the solid sulfur to
separate upon cooling. This sulfur is 99.5% to 99.9% pure and requires no purification for most uses.
FIGURE18.59 The Frasch process is used to mine sulfur from underground deposits.
Larger amounts of sulfur also come from hydrogen sulfide recovered during the purification of natural gas.
Sulfur exists in several allotropic forms. The stable form at room temperature contains eight-membered rings,
and so the true formula is S . However, chemists commonly use S to simplify the coefficients in chemical
8
equations; we will follow this practice in this book.
Like oxygen, which is also a member of group 16, sulfur exhibits a distinctly nonmetallic behavior. It oxidizes
metals, giving a variety of binary sulfides in which sulfur exhibits a negative oxidation state (2−). Elemental
sulfur oxidizes less electronegative nonmetals, and more electronegative nonmetals, such as oxygen and the
halogens, will oxidize it. Other strong oxidizing agents also oxidize sulfur. For example, concentrated nitric
acid oxidizes sulfur to the sulfate ion, with the concurrent formation of nitrogen(IV) oxide:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 929
18.11 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens 915
The chemistry of sulfur with an oxidation state of 2− is similar to that of oxygen. Unlike oxygen, however, sulfur
forms many compounds in which it exhibits positive oxidation states.
18.11 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the preparation, properties, and uses of halogens
• Describe the properties, preparation, and uses of halogen compounds
The elements in group 17 are the halogens. These are the elements fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and
astatine. These elements are too reactive to occur freely in nature, but their compounds are widely distributed.
Chlorides are the most abundant; although fluorides, bromides, and iodides are less common, they are
reasonably available. In this section, we will examine the occurrence, preparation, and properties of halogens.
Next, we will examine halogen compounds with the representative metals followed by an examination of the
interhalogens. This section will conclude with some applications of halogens.
Occurrence and Preparation
All of the halogens occur in seawater as halide ions. The concentration of the chloride ion is 0.54M; that of the
other halides is less than 10–4M. Fluoride also occurs in minerals such as CaF , Ca(PO ) F, and Na AlF .
2 43 3 6
Chloride also occurs in the Great Salt Lake and the Dead Sea, and in extensive salt beds that contain NaCl, KCl,
or MgCl . Part of the chlorine in your body is present as hydrochloric acid, which is a component of stomach
2
acid. Bromine compounds occur in the Dead Sea and underground brines. Iodine compounds are found in
small quantities in Chile saltpeter, underground brines, and sea kelp. Iodine is essential to the function of the
thyroid gland.
The best sources of halogens (except iodine) are halide salts. It is possible to oxidize the halide ions to free
diatomic halogen molecules by various methods, depending on the ease of oxidation of the halide ion. Fluoride
is the most difficult to oxidize, whereas iodide is the easiest.
The major method for preparing fluorine is electrolytic oxidation. The most common electrolysis procedure is
to use a molten mixture of potassium hydrogen fluoride, KHF , and anhydrous hydrogen fluoride. Electrolysis
2
causes HF to decompose, forming fluorine gas at the anode and hydrogen at the cathode. It is necessary to
keep the two gases separated to prevent their explosive recombination to reform hydrogen fluoride.
Most commercial chlorine comes from the electrolysis of the chloride ion in aqueous solutions of sodium
chloride; this is the chlor-alkali process discussed previously. Chlorine is also a product of the electrolytic
production of metals such as sodium, calcium, and magnesium from their fused chlorides. It is also possible to
prepare chlorine by the chemical oxidation of the chloride ion in acid solution with strong oxidizing agents
such as manganese dioxide (MnO ) or sodium dichromate (Na Cr O ). The reaction with manganese dioxide is:
2 2 2 7
The commercial preparation of bromine involves the oxidation of bromide ion by chlorine:
Chlorine is a stronger oxidizing agent than bromine. This method is important for the production of essentially
all domestic bromine.
Some iodine comes from the oxidation of iodine chloride, ICl, or iodic acid, HlO . The commercial preparation
3
of iodine utilizes the reduction of sodium iodate, NaIO an impurity in deposits of Chile saltpeter, with sodium
3,
hydrogen sulfite:
PAGE: 930
916 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
Properties of the Halogens
Fluorine is a pale yellow gas, chlorine is a greenish-yellow gas, bromine is a deep reddish-brown liquid, and
iodine is a grayish-black crystalline solid. Liquid bromine has a high vapor pressure, and the reddish vapor is
readily visible inFigure 18.60. Iodine crystals have a noticeable vapor pressure. When gently heated, these
crystals sublime and form a beautiful deep violet vapor.
FIGURE18.60 Chlorine is a pale yellow-green gas (left), gaseous bromine is deep orange (center), and gaseous
iodine is purple (right). (Fluorine is so reactive that it is too dangerous to handle.) (credit: Sahar Atwa)
Bromine is only slightly soluble in water, but it is miscible in all proportions in less polar (or nonpolar) solvents
such as chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, and carbon disulfide, forming solutions that vary from yellow to
reddish-brown, depending on the concentration.
Iodine is soluble in chloroform, carbon tetrachloride, carbon disulfide, and many hydrocarbons, giving violet
solutions of I molecules. Iodine dissolves only slightly in water, giving brown solutions. It is quite soluble in
2
aqueous solutions of iodides, with which it forms brown solutions. These brown solutions result because
iodine molecules have empty valencedorbitals and can act as weak Lewis acids towards the iodide ion. The
equation for the reversible reaction of iodine (Lewis acid) with the iodide ion (Lewis base) to form triiodide ion,
is:
The easier it is to oxidize the halide ion, the more difficult it is for the halogen to act as an oxidizing agent.
Fluorine generally oxidizes an element to its highest oxidation state, whereas the heavier halogens may not.
For example, when excess fluorine reacts with sulfur, SF forms. Chlorine gives SCl and bromine, S Br .
6 2 2 2
Iodine does not react with sulfur.
Fluorine is the most powerful oxidizing agent of the known elements. It spontaneously oxidizes most other
elements; therefore, the reverse reaction, the oxidation of fluorides, is very difficult to accomplish. Fluorine
reacts directly and forms binary fluorides with all of the elements except the lighter noble gases (He, Ne, and
Ar). Fluorine is such a strong oxidizing agent that many substances ignite on contact with it. Drops of water
inflame in fluorine and form O , OF , H O , O , and HF. Wood and asbestos ignite and burn in fluorine gas.
2 2 2 2 3
Most hot metals burn vigorously in fluorine. However, it is possible to handle fluorine in copper, iron, or nickel
containers because an adherent film of the fluoride salt passivates their surfaces. Fluorine is the only element
that reacts directly with the noble gas xenon.
Although it is a strong oxidizing agent, chlorine is less active than fluorine. Mixing chlorine and hydrogen in
the dark makes the reaction between them to be imperceptibly slow. Exposure of the mixture to light causes
the two to react explosively. Chlorine is also less active towards metals than fluorine, and oxidation reactions
usually require higher temperatures. Molten sodium ignites in chlorine. Chlorine attacks most nonmetals (C,
N , and O are notable exceptions), forming covalent molecular compounds. Chlorine generally reacts with
2 2
compounds that contain only carbon and hydrogen (hydrocarbons) by adding to multiple bonds or by
substitution.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 931
18.11 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens 917
In cold water, chlorine undergoes a disproportionation reaction:
Half the chlorine atoms oxidize to the 1+ oxidation state (hypochlorous acid), and the other half reduce to the
1− oxidation state (chloride ion). This disproportionation is incomplete, so chlorine water is an equilibrium
mixture of chlorine molecules, hypochlorous acid molecules, hydronium ions, and chloride ions. When
exposed to light, this solution undergoes a photochemical decomposition:
The nonmetal chlorine is more electronegative than any other element except fluorine, oxygen, and nitrogen.
In general, very electronegative elements are good oxidizing agents; therefore, we would expect elemental
chlorine to oxidize all of the other elements except for these three (and the nonreactive noble gases). Its
oxidizing property, in fact, is responsible for its principal use. For example, phosphorus(V) chloride, an
important intermediate in the preparation of insecticides and chemical weapons, is manufactured by
oxidizing the phosphorus with chlorine:
A great deal of chlorine is also used to oxidize, and thus to destroy, organic or biological materials in water
purification and in bleaching.
The chemical properties of bromine are similar to those of chlorine, although bromine is the weaker oxidizing
agent and its reactivity is less than that of chlorine.
Iodine is the least reactive of the halogens. It is the weakest oxidizing agent, and the iodide ion is the most
easily oxidized halide ion. Iodine reacts with metals, but heating is often required. It does not oxidize other
halide ions.
Compared with the other halogens, iodine reacts only slightly with water. Traces of iodine in water react with a
mixture of starch and iodide ion, forming a deep blue color. This reaction is a very sensitive test for the
presence of iodine in water.
Halides of the Representative Metals
Thousands of salts of the representative metals have been prepared. The binary halides are an important
subclass of salts. A salt is an ionic compound composed of cations and anions, other than hydroxide or oxide
ions. In general, it is possible to prepare these salts from the metals or from oxides, hydroxides, or carbonates.
We will illustrate the general types of reactions for preparing salts through reactions used to prepare binary
halides.
The binary compounds of a metal with the halogens are thehalides. Most binary halides are ionic. However,
mercury, the elements of group 13 with oxidation states of 3+, tin(IV), and lead(IV) form covalent binary
halides.
The direct reaction of a metal and a halogen produce the halide of the metal. Examples of these oxidation-
reduction reactions include:
LINK TO LEARNING
Reactions of the alkali metals with elemental halogens are very exothermic and often quite violent. Under
controlled conditions, they provide exciting demonstrations for budding students of chemistry. You can view
theinitial heating(http://openstax.org/l/16sodium)of the sodium that removes the coating of sodium
hydroxide, sodium peroxide, and residual mineral oil to expose the reactive surface. The reaction with
chlorine gas then proceeds very nicely.
PAGE: 932
918 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
If a metal can exhibit two oxidation states, it may be necessary to control the stoichiometry in order to obtain
the halide with the lower oxidation state. For example, preparation of tin(II) chloride requires a 1:1 ratio of Sn
to Cl , whereas preparation of tin(IV) chloride requires a 1:2 ratio:
2
The active representative metals—those that are easier to oxidize than hydrogen—react with gaseous hydrogen
halides to produce metal halides and hydrogen. The reaction of zinc with hydrogen fluoride is:
The active representative metals also react with solutions of hydrogen halides to form hydrogen and solutions
of the corresponding halides. Examples of such reactions include:
Hydroxides, carbonates, and some oxides react with solutions of the hydrogen halides to form solutions of
halide salts. It is possible to prepare additional salts by the reaction of these hydroxides, carbonates, and
oxides with aqueous solution of other acids:
A few halides and many of the other salts of the representative metals are insoluble. It is possible to prepare
these soluble salts by metathesis reactions that occur when solutions of soluble salts are mixed (seeFigure
18.61). Metathesis reactions are examined in the chapter on the stoichiometry of chemical reactions.
FIGURE18.61 Solid HgI forms when solutions of KI and Hg(NO ) are mixed. (credit: Sahar Atwa)
2 3 2
Several halides occur in large quantities in nature. The ocean and underground brines contain many halides.
For example, magnesium chloride in the ocean is the source of magnesium ions used in the production of
magnesium. Large underground deposits of sodium chloride, like the salt mine shown inFigure 18.62, occur
in many parts of the world. These deposits serve as the source of sodium and chlorine in almost all other
compounds containing these elements. The chlor-alkali process is one example.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 933
18.11 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens 919
FIGURE18.62 Underground deposits of sodium chloride are found throughout the world and are often mined. This
is a tunnel in the Kłodawa salt mine in Poland. (credit: Jarek Zok)
Interhalogens
Compounds formed from two or more different halogens areinterhalogens. Interhalogen molecules consist of
one atom of the heavier halogen bonded by single bonds to an odd number of atoms of the lighter halogen. The
structures of IF , IF , and IF are illustrated inFigure 18.63. Formulas for other interhalogens, each of which
3 5 7
comes from the reaction of the respective halogens, are inTable 18.3.
FIGURE18.63 The structure of IF is T-shaped (left), IF is square pyramidal (center), and IF is pentagonal
3 5 7
bipyramidal (right).
Note fromTable 18.3that fluorine is able to oxidize iodine to its maximum oxidation state, 7+, whereas
bromine and chlorine, which are more difficult to oxidize, achieve only the 5+-oxidation state. A 7+-oxidation
state is the limit for the halogens. Because smaller halogens are grouped about a larger one, the maximum
number of smaller atoms possible increases as the radius of the larger atom increases. Many of these
compounds are unstable, and most are extremely reactive. The interhalogens react like their component
halides; halogen fluorides, for example, are stronger oxidizing agents than are halogen chlorides.
The ionic polyhalides of the alkali metals, such as KI , KICl , KICl , CsIBr , and CsBrCl , which contain an
3 2 4 2 2
anion composed of at least three halogen atoms, are closely related to the interhalogens. As seen previously,
the formation of the polyhalide anion is responsible for the solubility of iodine in aqueous solutions
PAGE: 934
920 18 • Representative Metals, Metalloids, and Nonmetals
containing an iodide ion.
Interhalogens
YX YX YX YX
3 5 7
ClF(g) ClF (g) ClF (g)
3 5
BrF(g) BrF (l) BrF (l)
3 5
BrCl(g)
IF(s) IF (s) IF (l) IF (g)
3 5 7
ICl(l) ICl (s)
3
IBr(s)
TABLE18.3
Applications
The fluoride ion and fluorine compounds have many important uses. Compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and
fluorine are replacing Freons (compounds of carbon, chlorine, and fluorine) as refrigerants. Teflon is a
polymer composed of –CF CF – units. Fluoride ion is added to water supplies and to some toothpastes as SnF
2 2 2
or NaF to fight tooth decay. Fluoride partially converts teeth from Ca (PO ) (OH) into Ca (PO ) F.
5 43 5 43
Chlorine is important to bleach wood pulp and cotton cloth. The chlorine reacts with water to form
hypochlorous acid, which oxidizes colored substances to colorless ones. Large quantities of chlorine are
important in chlorinating hydrocarbons (replacing hydrogen with chlorine) to produce compounds such as
tetrachloride (CCl ), chloroform (CHCl ), and ethyl chloride (C H Cl), and in the production of polyvinyl
4 3 2 5
chloride (PVC) and other polymers. Chlorine is also important to kill the bacteria in community water supplies.
Bromine is important in the production of certain dyes, and sodium and potassium bromides are used as
sedatives. At one time, light-sensitive silver bromide was a component of photographic film.
Iodine in alcohol solution with potassium iodide is an antiseptic (tincture of iodine). Iodide salts are essential
for the proper functioning of the thyroid gland; an iodine deficiency may lead to the development of a goiter.
Iodized table salt contains 0.023% potassium iodide. Silver iodide is useful in the seeding of clouds to induce
rain; it was important in the production of photographic film and iodoform, CHI , is an antiseptic.
3
18.12 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of the Noble Gases
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the properties, preparation, and uses of the noble gases
The elements in group 18 are the noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon). They earned
the name “noble” because they were assumed to be nonreactive since they have filled valence shells. In 1962,
Dr. NeilBartlettat the University of British Columbia proved this assumption to be false.
These elements are present in the atmosphere in small amounts. Some natural gas contains 1–2% helium by
mass. Helium is isolated from natural gas by liquefying the condensable components, leaving only helium as a
gas. The United States possesses most of the world’s commercial supply of this element in its helium-bearing
gas fields. Argon, neon, krypton, and xenon come from the fractional distillation of liquid air. Radon comes
from other radioactive elements. More recently, it was observed that this radioactive gas is present in very
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 935
18.12 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of the Noble Gases 921
small amounts in soils and minerals. Its accumulation in well-insulated, tightly sealed buildings, however,
constitutes a health hazard, primarily lung cancer.
The boiling points and melting points of the noble gases are extremely low relative to those of other substances
of comparable atomic or molecular masses. This is because only weak London dispersion forces are present,
and these forces can hold the atoms together only when molecular motion is very slight, as it is at very low
temperatures. Helium is the only substance known that does not solidify on cooling at normal pressure. It
remains liquid close to absolute zero (0.001 K) at ordinary pressures, but it solidifies under elevated pressure.
Helium is used for filling balloons and lighter-than-air craft because it does not burn, making it safer to use
than hydrogen. Helium at high pressures is not a narcotic like nitrogen. Thus, mixtures of oxygen and helium
are important for divers working under high pressures. Using a helium-oxygen mixture avoids the disoriented
mental state known as nitrogen narcosis, the so-called rapture of the deep. Helium is important as an inert
atmosphere for the melting and welding of easily oxidizable metals and for many chemical processes that are
sensitive to air.
Liquid helium (boiling point, 4.2 K) is an important coolant to reach the low temperatures necessary for
cryogenic research, and it is essential for achieving the low temperatures necessary to produce
superconduction in traditional superconducting materials used in powerful magnets and other devices. This
cooling ability is necessary for the magnets used for magnetic resonance imaging, a common medical
diagnostic procedure. The other common coolant is liquid nitrogen (boiling point, 77 K), which is significantly
cheaper.
Neon is a component of neon lamps and signs. Passing an electric spark through a tube containing neon at low
pressure generates the familiar red glow of neon. It is possible to change the color of the light by mixing argon
or mercury vapor with the neon or by utilizing glass tubes of a special color.
Argon was useful in the manufacture of gas-filled electric light bulbs, where its lower heat conductivity and
chemical inertness made it preferable to nitrogen for inhibiting the vaporization of the tungsten filament and
prolonging the life of the bulb. Fluorescent tubes commonly contain a mixture of argon and mercury vapor.
Argon is the third most abundant gas in dry air.
Krypton-xenon flash tubes are used to take high-speed photographs. An electric discharge through such a tube
gives a very intense light that lasts only of a second. Krypton forms a difluoride, KrF , which is
2
thermally unstable at room temperature.
Stable compounds of xenon form when xenon reacts with fluorine. Xenon difluoride, XeF , forms after heating
2
an excess of xenon gas with fluorine gas and then cooling. The material forms colorless crystals, which are
stable at room temperature in a dry atmosphere. Xenon tetrafluoride, XeF , and xenon hexafluoride, XeF , are
4 6
prepared in an analogous manner, with a stoichiometric amount of fluorine and an excess of fluorine,
respectively. Compounds with oxygen are prepared by replacing fluorine atoms in the xenon fluorides with
oxygen.
When XeF reacts with water, a solution of XeO results and the xenon remains in the 6+-oxidation state:
6 3
Dry, solid xenon trioxide, XeO , is extremely explosive—it will spontaneously detonate. Both XeF and XeO
3 6 3
disproportionate in basic solution, producing xenon, oxygen, and salts of the perxenate ion, in which
xenon reaches its maximum oxidation sate of 8+.
Radon apparently forms RnF —evidence of this compound comes from radiochemical tracer techniques.
2
Unstable compounds of argon form at low temperatures, but stable compounds of helium and neon are not
known.
PAGE: 936
922 18 • Key Terms
Key Terms
acid anhydride compound that reacts with water hydrogen halide binary compound formed
to form an acid or acidic solution between hydrogen and the halogens: HF, HCl,
alkaline earth metal any of the metals (beryllium, HBr, and HI
magnesium, calcium, strontium, barium, and hydrogen sulfate ion
radium) occupying group 2 of the periodic table; hydrogen sulfite ion
they are reactive, divalent metals that form basic hydrogenation addition of hydrogen (H ) to reduce
2
oxides a compound
allotropes two or more forms of the same element, hydroxide compound of a metal with the
in the same physical state, with different hydroxide ion OH−or the group −OH
chemical structures interhalogen compound formed from two or more
amorphous solid material such as a glass that does different halogens
not have a regular repeating component to its metal (representative) atoms of the metallic
three-dimensional structure; a solid but not a elements of groups 1, 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 16,
crystal which form ionic compounds by losing electrons
base anhydride metal oxide that behaves as a base from their outersorporbitals
towards acids metalloid element that has properties that are
bicarbonate anion salt of the hydrogen carbonate between those of metals and nonmetals; these
ion, elements are typically semiconductors
bismuth heaviest member of group 15; a less nitrate ion; salt of nitric acid
reactive metal than other representative metals nitrogen fixation formation of nitrogen
borate compound containing boron-oxygen bonds, compounds from molecular nitrogen
typically with clusters or chains as a part of the Ostwald process industrial process used to
chemical structure convert ammonia into nitric acid
carbonate salt of the anion often formed oxide binary compound of oxygen with another
by the reaction of carbon dioxide with bases element or group, typically containing O2−ions or
chemical reduction method of preparing a the group –O– or =O
representative metal using a reducing agent ozone allotrope of oxygen; O 3
chlor-alkali process electrolysis process for the passivation metals with a protective nonreactive
synthesis of chlorine and sodium hydroxide film of oxide or other compound that creates a
disproportionation reaction chemical reaction barrier for chemical reactions; physical or
where a single reactant is simultaneously chemical removal of the passivating film allows
reduced and oxidized; it is both the reducing the metals to demonstrate their expected
agent and the oxidizing agent chemical reactivity
Downs cell electrochemical cell used for the peroxide molecule containing two oxygen atoms
commercial preparation of metallic sodium (and bonded together or as the anion,
chlorine) from molten sodium chloride photosynthesis process whereby light energy
Frasch process important in the mining of free promotes the reaction of water and carbon
sulfur from enormous underground deposits dioxide to form carbohydrates and oxygen; this
Haber process main industrial process used to allows photosynthetic organisms to store energy
produce ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen; Pidgeon process chemical reduction process used
involves the use of an iron catalyst and elevated to produce magnesium through the thermal
temperatures and pressures reaction of magnesium oxide with silicon
halide compound containing an anion of a group polymorph variation in crystalline structure that
17 element in the 1− oxidation state (fluoride, F−; results in different physical properties for the
chloride, Cl−; bromide, Br−; and iodide, I−) resulting compound
Hall–Héroult cell electrolysis apparatus used to representative element element where thesandp
isolate pure aluminum metal from a solution of orbitals are filling
alumina in molten cryolite representative metal metal among the
hydrogen carbonate salt of carbonic acid, H CO representative elements
2 3
(containing the anion in which one silicate compound containing silicon-oxygen
hydrogen atom has been replaced; an acid bonds, with silicate tetrahedra connected in
carbonate; also known asbicarbonate ion rings, sheets, or three-dimensional networks,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 937
18 • Summary 923
depending on the other elements involved in the sulfite ion
formation of the compounds superoxide oxide containing the anion
sulfate ion
Summary
18.1Periodicity properties characteristic of both metals and
nonmetals. The structures of these elements are
This section focuses on the periodicity of the
similar in many ways to those of nonmetals, but the
representative elements. These are the elements
elements are electrical semiconductors.
where the electrons are entering thesandporbitals.
The representative elements occur in groups 1, 2, 18.4Structure and General Properties of the
and 12–18. These elements are representative Nonmetals
metals, metalloids, and nonmetals. The alkali metals
Nonmetals have structures that are very different
(group 1) are very reactive, readily form ions with a
from those of the metals, primarily because they
charge of 1+ to form ionic compounds that are
have greater electronegativity and electrons that are
usually soluble in water, and react vigorously with
more tightly bound to individual atoms. Most
water to form hydrogen gas and a basic solution of
nonmetal oxides are acid anhydrides, meaning that
the metal hydroxide. The outermost electrons of the
they react with water to form acidic solutions.
alkaline earth metals (group 2) are more difficult to
Molecular structures are common for most of the
remove than the outer electron of the alkali metals,
nonmetals, and several have multiple allotropes
leading to the group 2 metals being less reactive
with varying physical properties.
than those in group 1. These elements easily form
compounds in which the metals exhibit an oxidation 18.5Occurrence, Preparation, and
state of 2+. Zinc, cadmium, and mercury (group 12) Compounds of Hydrogen
commonly exhibit the group oxidation state of 2+
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the
(although mercury also exhibits an oxidation state of
universe and its chemistry is truly unique. Although
1+ in compounds that contain Aluminum,
it has some chemical reactivity that is similar to that
gallium, indium, and thallium (group 13) are easier
of the alkali metals, hydrogen has many of the same
to oxidize than is hydrogen. Aluminum, gallium, and
chemical properties of a nonmetal with a relatively
indium occur with an oxidation state 3+ (however,
thallium also commonly occurs as the Tl+ion). Tin low electronegativity. It forms ionic hydrides with
active metals, covalent compounds in which it has
and lead form stable divalent cations and covalent
an oxidation state of 1− with less electronegative
compounds in which the metals exhibit the 4+-
elements, and covalent compounds in which it has
oxidation state.
an oxidation state of 1+ with more electronegative
18.2Occurrence and Preparation of the nonmetals. It reacts explosively with oxygen,
Representative Metals fluorine, and chlorine, less readily with bromine,
and much less readily with iodine, sulfur, and
Because of their chemical reactivity, it is necessary
nitrogen. Hydrogen reduces the oxides of metals
to produce the representative metals in their pure
with lower reduction potentials than chromium to
forms by reduction from naturally occurring
form the metal and water. The hydrogen halides are
compounds. Electrolysis is important in the
all acidic when dissolved in water.
production of sodium, potassium, and aluminum.
Chemical reduction is the primary method for the 18.6Occurrence, Preparation, and
isolation of magnesium, zinc, and tin. Similar Properties of Carbonates
procedures are important for the other
The usual method for the preparation of the
representative metals.
carbonates of the alkali and alkaline earth metals is
18.3Structure and General Properties of the by reaction of an oxide or hydroxide with carbon
Metalloids dioxide. Other carbonates form by precipitation.
Metal carbonates or hydrogen carbonates such as
The elements boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic,
limestone (CaCO ), the antacid Tums (CaCO ), and
3 3
antimony, and tellurium separate the metals from
baking soda (NaHCO ) are common examples.
3
the nonmetals in the periodic table. These elements,
Carbonates and hydrogen carbonates decompose in
called metalloids or sometimes semimetals, exhibit
PAGE: 938
924 18 • Exercises
the presence of acids and most decompose on The hydroxides have many commercial uses.
heating.
All nonmetals except fluorine form multiple oxides.
18.7Occurrence, Preparation, and Nearly all of the nonmetal oxides are acid
Properties of Nitrogen anhydrides. The acidity of oxyacids requires that the
hydrogen atoms bond to the oxygen atoms in the
Nitrogen exhibits oxidation states ranging from 3−
molecule rather than to the other nonmetal atom.
to 5+. Because of the stability of the N≡N triple
Generally, the strength of the oxyacid increases with
bond, it requires a great deal of energy to make
the number of oxygen atoms bonded to the
compounds from molecular nitrogen. Active metals
nonmetal atom and not to a hydrogen.
such as the alkali metals and alkaline earth metals
can reduce nitrogen to form metal nitrides. Nitrogen 18.10Occurrence, Preparation, and
oxides and nitrogen hydrides are also important Properties of Sulfur
substances.
Sulfur (group 16) reacts with almost all metals and
18.8Occurrence, Preparation, and readily forms the sulfide ion, S2−, in which it has as
Properties of Phosphorus oxidation state of 2−. Sulfur reacts with most
nonmetals.
Phosphorus (group 15) commonly exhibits oxidation
states of 3− with active metals and of 3+ and 5+ with 18.11Occurrence, Preparation, and
more electronegative nonmetals. The halogens and Properties of Halogens
oxygen will oxidize phosphorus. The oxides are
The halogens form halides with less electronegative
phosphorus(V) oxide, P O , and phosphorus(III)
4 10 elements. Halides of the metals vary from ionic to
oxide, P O . The two common methods for
4 6 covalent; halides of nonmetals are covalent.
preparing orthophosphoric acid, H PO , are either
3 4 Interhalogens form by the combination of two or
the reaction of a phosphate with sulfuric acid or the
more different halogens.
reaction of water with phosphorus(V) oxide.
Orthophosphoric acid is a triprotic acid that forms All of the representative metals react directly with
three types of salts. elemental halogens or with solutions of the
hydrohalic acids (HF, HCl, HBr, and HI) to produce
18.9Occurrence, Preparation, and
representative metal halides. Other laboratory
Compounds of Oxygen
preparations involve the addition of aqueous
Oxygen is one of the most reactive elements. This hydrohalic acids to compounds that contain such
reactivity, coupled with its abundance, makes the basic anions, such as hydroxides, oxides, or
chemistry of oxygen very rich and well understood. carbonates.
Compounds of the representative metals with 18.12Occurrence, Preparation, and
oxygen exist in three categories (1) oxides, (2) Properties of the Noble Gases
peroxides and superoxides, and (3) hydroxides.
The most significant property of the noble gases
Heating the corresponding hydroxides, nitrates, or
(group 18) is their inactivity. They occur in low
carbonates is the most common method for
concentrations in the atmosphere. They find uses as
producing oxides. Heating the metal or metal oxide
inert atmospheres, neon signs, and as coolants. The
in oxygen may lead to the formation of peroxides
three heaviest noble gases react with fluorine to
and superoxides. The soluble oxides dissolve in
form fluorides. The xenon fluorides are the best
water to form solutions of hydroxides. Most metals
characterized as the starting materials for a few
oxides are base anhydrides and react with acids. The
other noble gas compounds.
hydroxides of the representative metals react with
acids in acid-base reactions to form salts and water.
Exercises
18.1Periodicity
1. How do alkali metals differ from alkaline earth metals in atomic structure and general properties?
2. Why does the reactivity of the alkali metals decrease from cesium to lithium?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 939
18 • Exercises 925
3. Predict the formulas for the nine compounds that may form when each species in column 1 of the table reacts
with each species in column 2.
1 2
Na I
Sr Se
Al O
4. Predict the best choice in each of the following. You may wish to review the chapter on electronic structure
for relevant examples.
(a) the most metallic of the elements Al, Be, and Ba
(b) the most covalent of the compounds NaCl, CaCl , and BeCl
2 2
(c) the lowest first ionization energy among the elements Rb, K, and Li
(d) the smallest among Al, Al+, and Al3+
(e) the largest among Cs+, Ba2+, and Xe
5. Sodium chloride and strontium chloride are both white solids. How could you distinguish one from the
other?
6. The reaction of quicklime, CaO, with water produces slaked lime, Ca(OH) , which is widely used in the
2
construction industry to make mortar and plaster. The reaction of quicklime and water is highly
exothermic:
(a) What is the enthalpy of reaction per gram of quicklime that reacts?
(b) How much heat, in kilojoules, is associated with the production of 1 ton of slaked lime?
7. Write a balanced equation for the reaction of elemental strontium with each of the following:
(a) oxygen
(b) hydrogen bromide
(c) hydrogen
(d) phosphorus
(e) water
8. How many moles of ionic species are present in 1.0 L of a solution marked 1.0Mmercury(I) nitrate?
9. What is the mass of fish, in kilograms, that one would have to consume to obtain a fatal dose of mercury, if
the fish contains 30 parts per million of mercury by weight? (Assume that all the mercury from the fish
ends up as mercury(II) chloride in the body and that a fatal dose is 0.20 g of HgCl .) How many pounds of
2
fish is this?
10. The elements sodium, aluminum, and chlorine are in the same period.
(a) Which has the greatest electronegativity?
(b) Which of the atoms is smallest?
(c) Write the Lewis structure for the simplest covalent compound that can form between aluminum and
chlorine.
(d) Will the oxide of each element be acidic, basic, or amphoteric?
11. Does metallic tin react with HCl?
12. What is tin pest, also known as tin disease?
13. Compare the nature of the bonds in PbCl to that of the bonds in PbCl .
2 4
14. Is the reaction of rubidium with water more or less vigorous than that of sodium? How does the rate of
reaction of magnesium compare?
18.2Occurrence and Preparation of the Representative Metals
15. Write an equation for the reduction of cesium chloride by elemental calcium at high temperature.
PAGE: 940
926 18 • Exercises
16. Why is it necessary to keep the chlorine and sodium, resulting from the electrolysis of sodium chloride,
separate during the production of sodium metal?
17. Give balanced equations for the overall reaction in the electrolysis of molten lithium chloride and for the
reactions occurring at the electrodes. You may wish to review the chapter on electrochemistry for relevant
examples.
18. The electrolysis of molten sodium chloride or of aqueous sodium chloride produces chlorine.
Calculate the mass of chlorine produced from 3.00 kg sodium chloride in each case. You may wish to
review the chapter on electrochemistry for relevant examples.
19. What mass, in grams, of hydrogen gas forms during the complete reaction of 10.01 g of calcium with
water?
20. How many grams of oxygen gas are necessary to react completely with 3.01 1021atoms of magnesium to
yield magnesium oxide?
21. Magnesium is an active metal; it burns in the form of powder, ribbons, and filaments to provide flashes of
brilliant light. Why is it possible to use magnesium in construction?
22. Why is it possible for an active metal like aluminum to be useful as a structural metal?
23. Describe the production of metallic aluminum by electrolytic reduction.
24. What is the common ore of tin and how is tin separated from it?
25. A chemist dissolves a 1.497-g sample of a type of metal (an alloy of Sn, Pb, Sb, and Cu) in nitric acid, and
metastannic acid, H SnO , is precipitated. She heats the precipitate to drive off the water, which leaves
2 3
0.4909 g of tin(IV) oxide. What was the percentage of tin in the original sample?
26. Consider the production of 100 kg of sodium metal using a current of 50,000 A, assuming a 100% yield.
(a) How long will it take to produce the 100 kg of sodium metal?
(b) What volume of chlorine at 25 °C and 1.00 atm forms?
27. What mass of magnesium forms when 100,000 A is passed through a MgCl melt for 1.00 h if the yield of
2
magnesium is 85% of the theoretical yield?
18.3Structure and General Properties of the Metalloids
28. Give the hybridization of the metalloid and the molecular geometry for each of the following compounds
or ions. You may wish to review the chapters on chemical bonding and advanced covalent bonding for
relevant examples.
(a) GeH
4
(b) SbF
3
(c) Te(OH)
6
(d) H Te
2
(e) GeF
2
(f) TeCl
4
(g)
(h) SbCl
5
(i) TeF
6
29. Write a Lewis structure for each of the following molecules or ions. You may wish to review the chapter on
chemical bonding.
(a) H BPH
3 3
(b)
(c) BBr
3
(d) B(CH )
33
(e) B(OH)
3
30. Describe the hybridization of boron and the molecular structure about the boron in each of the following:
(a) H BPH
3 3
(b)
(c) BBr
3
(d) B(CH )
33
(e) B(OH)
3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 941
18 • Exercises 927
31. Using only the periodic table, write the complete electron configuration for silicon, including any empty
orbitals in the valence shell. You may wish to review the chapter on electronic structure.
32. Write a Lewis structure for each of the following molecules and ions:
(a) (CH ) SiH
33
(b)
(c) Si H
2 6
(d) Si(OH)
4
(e)
33. Describe the hybridization of silicon and the molecular structure of the following molecules and ions:
(a) (CH ) SiH
33
(b)
(c) Si H
2 6
(d) Si(OH)
4
(e)
34. Describe the hybridization and the bonding of a silicon atom in elemental silicon.
35. Classify each of the following molecules as polar or nonpolar. You may wish to review the chapter on
chemical bonding.
(a) SiH
4
(b) Si H
2 6
(c) SiCl H
3
(d) SiF
4
(e) SiCl F
2 2
36. Silicon reacts with sulfur at elevated temperatures. If 0.0923 g of silicon reacts with sulfur to give 0.3030 g
of silicon sulfide, determine the empirical formula of silicon sulfide.
37. Name each of the following compounds:
(a) TeO
2
(b) Sb S
2 3
(c) GeF
4
(d) SiH
4
(e) GeH
4
38. Write a balanced equation for the reaction of elemental boron with each of the following (most of these
reactions require high temperature):
(a) F
2
(b) O
2
(c) S
(d) Se
(e) Br
2
39. Why is boron limited to a maximum coordination number of four in its compounds?
40. Write a formula for each of the following compounds:
(a) silicon dioxide
(b) silicon tetraiodide
(c) silane
(d) silicon carbide
(e) magnesium silicide
41. From the data given inAppendix G, determine the standard enthalpy change and the standard free energy
change for each of the following reactions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
42. A hydride of silicon prepared by the reaction of Mg Si with acid exerted a pressure of 306 torr at 26 °C in a
2
bulb with a volume of 57.0 mL. If the mass of the hydride was 0.0861 g, what is its molecular mass? What
is the molecular formula for the hydride?
PAGE: 942
928 18 • Exercises
43. Suppose you discovered a diamond completely encased in a silicate rock. How would you chemically free
the diamond without harming it?
18.4Structure and General Properties of the Nonmetals
44. Carbon forms a number of allotropes, two of which are graphite and diamond. Silicon has a diamond
structure. Why is there no allotrope of silicon with a graphite structure?
45. Nitrogen in the atmosphere exists as very stable diatomic molecules. Why does phosphorus form less
stable P molecules instead of P molecules?
4 2
46. Write balanced chemical equations for the reaction of the following acid anhydrides with water:
(a) SO
3
(b) N O
2 3
(c) Cl O
2 7
(d) P O
4 10
(e) NO
2
47. Determine the oxidation number of each element in each of the following compounds:
(a) HCN
(b) OF
2
(c) AsCl
3
48. Determine the oxidation state of sulfur in each of the following:
(a) SO
3
(b) SO
2
(c)
49. Arrange the following in order of increasing electronegativity: F; Cl; O; and S.
50. Why does white phosphorus consist of tetrahedral P molecules while nitrogen consists of diatomic N
4 2
molecules?
18.5Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Hydrogen
51. Why does hydrogen not exhibit an oxidation state of 1− when bonded to nonmetals?
52. The reaction of calcium hydride, CaH , with water can be characterized as a Lewis acid-base reaction:
2
Identify the Lewis acid and the Lewis base among the reactants. The reaction is also an oxidation-
reduction reaction. Identify the oxidizing agent, the reducing agent, and the changes in oxidation number
that occur in the reaction.
53. In drawing Lewis structures, we learn that a hydrogen atom forms only one bond in a covalent compound.
Why?
54. What mass of CaH is necessary to react with water to provide enough hydrogen gas to fill a balloon at 20
2
°C and 0.8 atm pressure with a volume of 4.5 L? The balanced equation is:
55. What mass of hydrogen gas results from the reaction of 8.5 g of KH with water?
18.6Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Carbonates
56. Carbon forms the ion, yet silicon does not form an analogous ion. Why?
57. Complete and balance the following chemical equations:
(a) hardening of plaster containing slaked lime
(b) removal of sulfur dioxide from the flue gas of power plants
(c) the reaction of baking powder that produces carbon dioxide gas and causes bread to rise
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 943
18 • Exercises 929
58. Heating a sample of Na CO ⋅xH O weighing 4.640 g until the removal of the water of hydration leaves
2 3 2
1.720 g of anhydrous Na CO . What is the formula of the hydrated compound?
2 3
18.7Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Nitrogen
59. Write the Lewis structures for each of the following:
(a) NH2−
(b) N F
2 4
(c)
(d) NF
3
(e)
60. For each of the following, indicate the hybridization of the nitrogen atom (for the central nitrogen).
(a) N F
2 4
(b)
(c) NF
3
(d)
61. Explain how ammonia can function both as a Brønsted base and as a Lewis base.
62. Determine the oxidation state of nitrogen in each of the following. You may wish to review the chapter on
chemical bonding for relevant examples.
(a) NCl
3
(b) ClNO
(c) N O
2 5
(d) N O
2 3
(e)
(f) N O
2 4
(g) N O
2
(h)
(i) HNO
2
(j) HNO
3
63. For each of the following, draw the Lewis structure, predict the ONO bond angle, and give the
hybridization of the nitrogen. You may wish to review the chapters on chemical bonding and advanced
theories of covalent bonding for relevant examples.
(a) NO
2
(b)
(c)
64. How many grams of gaseous ammonia will the reaction of 3.0 g hydrogen gas and 3.0 g of nitrogen gas
produce?
65. Although PF and AsF are stable, nitrogen does not form NF molecules. Explain this difference among
5 5 5
members of the same group.
66. The equivalence point for the titration of a 25.00-mL sample of CsOH solution with 0.1062MHNO is at
3
35.27 mL. What is the concentration of the CsOH solution?
18.8Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Phosphorus
67. Write the Lewis structure for each of the following. You may wish to review the chapter on chemical
bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) PH
3
(b)
(c) P H
2 4
(d)
(e) PF
5
PAGE: 944
930 18 • Exercises
68. Describe the molecular structure of each of the following molecules or ions listed. You may wish to review
the chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) PH
3
(b)
(c) P H
2 4
(d)
69. Complete and balance each of the following chemical equations. (In some cases, there may be more than
one correct answer.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
70. Describe the hybridization of phosphorus in each of the following compounds: P O , P O , PH I (an ionic
4 10 4 6 4
compound), PBr , H PO , H PO , PH , and P H . You may wish to review the chapter on advanced theories
3 3 4 3 3 3 2 4
of covalent bonding.
71. What volume of 0.200MNaOH is necessary to neutralize the solution produced by dissolving 2.00 g of
PCl is an excess of water? Note that when H PO is titrated under these conditions, only one proton of the
3 3 3
acid molecule reacts.
72. How much POCl can form from 25.0 g of PCl and the appropriate amount of H O?
3 5 2
73. How many tons of Ca (PO ) are necessary to prepare 5.0 tons of phosphorus if the yield is 90%?
3 42
74. Write equations showing the stepwise ionization of phosphorous acid.
75. Draw the Lewis structures and describe the geometry for the following:
(a)
(b) PF
5
(c)
(d) POF
3
76. Why does phosphorous acid form only two series of salts, even though the molecule contains three
hydrogen atoms?
77. Assign an oxidation state to phosphorus in each of the following:
(a) NaH PO
2 3
(b) PF
5
(c) P O
4 6
(d) K PO
3 4
(e) Na P
3
(f) Na P O
4 2 7
78. Phosphoric acid, one of the acids used in some cola drinks, is produced by the reaction of phosphorus(V)
oxide, an acidic oxide, with water. Phosphorus(V) oxide is prepared by the combustion of phosphorus.
(a) Write the empirical formula of phosphorus(V) oxide.
(b) What is the molecular formula of phosphorus(V) oxide if the molar mass is about 280.
(c) Write balanced equations for the production of phosphorus(V) oxide and phosphoric acid.
(d) Determine the mass of phosphorus required to make 1.00 104kg of phosphoric acid, assuming a
yield of 98.85%.
18.9Occurrence, Preparation, and Compounds of Oxygen
79. Predict the product of burning francium in air.
80. Using equations, describe the reaction of water with potassium and with potassium oxide.
81. Write balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:
(a) zinc metal heated in a stream of oxygen gas
(b) zinc carbonate heated until loss of mass stops
(c) zinc carbonate added to a solution of acetic acid, CH CO H
3 2
(d) zinc added to a solution of hydrobromic acid
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 945
18 • Exercises 931
82. Write balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:
(a) cadmium burned in air
(b) elemental cadmium added to a solution of hydrochloric acid
(c) cadmium hydroxide added to a solution of acetic acid, CH CO H
3 2
83. Illustrate the amphoteric nature of aluminum hydroxide by citing suitable equations.
84. Write balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:
(a) metallic aluminum burned in air
(b) elemental aluminum heated in an atmosphere of chlorine
(c) aluminum heated in hydrogen bromide gas
(d) aluminum hydroxide added to a solution of nitric acid
85. Write balanced chemical equations for the following reactions:
(a) sodium oxide added to water
(b) cesium carbonate added to an excess of an aqueous solution of HF
(c) aluminum oxide added to an aqueous solution of HClO
4
(d) a solution of sodium carbonate added to solution of barium nitrate
(e) titanium metal produced from the reaction of titanium tetrachloride with elemental sodium
86. What volume of 0.250MH SO solution is required to neutralize a solution that contains 5.00 g of CaCO ?
2 4 3
87. Which is the stronger acid, HClO or HBrO ? Why?
4 4
88. Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction of an excess of oxygen with each of the following.
Remember that oxygen is a strong oxidizing agent and tends to oxidize an element to its maximum
oxidation state.
(a) Mg
(b) Rb
(c) Ga
(d) C H
2 2
(e) CO
89. Which is the stronger acid, H SO or H SeO ? Why? You may wish to review the chapter on acid-base
2 4 2 4
equilibria.
18.10Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Sulfur
90. Explain why hydrogen sulfide is a gas at room temperature, whereas water, which has a lower molecular
mass, is a liquid.
91. Give the hybridization and oxidation state for sulfur in SO , in SO , and in H SO .
2 3 2 4
92. Which is the stronger acid, NaHSO or NaHSO ?
3 4
93. Determine the oxidation state of sulfur in SF , SO F , and KHS.
6 2 2
94. Which is a stronger acid, sulfurous acid or sulfuric acid? Why?
95. Oxygen forms double bonds in O , but sulfur forms single bonds in S . Why?
2 8
96. Give the Lewis structure of each of the following:
(a) SF
4
(b) K SO
2 4
(c) SO Cl
2 2
(d) H SO
2 3
(e) SO
3
97. Write two balanced chemical equations in which sulfuric acid acts as an oxidizing agent.
98. Explain why sulfuric acid, H SO , which is a covalent molecule, dissolves in water and produces a solution
2 4
that contains ions.
99. How many grams of Epsom salts (MgSO ⋅7H O) will form from 5.0 kg of magnesium?
4 2
18.11Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Halogens
100. What does it mean to say that mercury(II) halides are weak electrolytes?
101. Why is SnCl not classified as a salt?
4
PAGE: 946
932 18 • Exercises
102. The following reactions are all similar to those of the industrial chemicals. Complete and balance the
equations for these reactions:
(a) reaction of a weak base and a strong acid
(b) preparation of a soluble silver salt for silver plating
(c) preparation of strontium hydroxide by electrolysis of a solution of strontium chloride
103. Which is the stronger acid, HClO or HBrO ? Why?
3 3
104. What is the hybridization of iodine in IF and IF ?
3 5
105. Predict the molecular geometries and draw Lewis structures for each of the following. You may wish to
review the chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) IF
5
(b)
(c) PCl
5
(d) SeF
4
(e) ClF
3
106. Which halogen has the highest ionization energy? Is this what you would predict based on what you have
learned about periodic properties?
107. Name each of the following compounds:
(a) BrF
3
(b) NaBrO
3
(c) PBr
5
(d) NaClO
4
(e) KClO
108. Explain why, at room temperature, fluorine and chlorine are gases, bromine is a liquid, and iodine is a
solid.
109. What is the oxidation state of the halogen in each of the following?
(a) H IO
5 6
(b)
(c) ClO
2
(d) ICl
3
(e) F
2
110. Physiological saline concentration—that is, the sodium chloride concentration in our bodies—is
approximately 0.16M. A saline solution for contact lenses is prepared to match the physiological
concentration. If you purchase 25 mL of contact lens saline solution, how many grams of sodium
chloride have you bought?
18.12Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of the Noble Gases
111. Give the hybridization of xenon in each of the following. You may wish to review the chapter on the
advanced theories of covalent bonding.
(a) XeF
2
(b) XeF
4
(c) XeO
3
(d) XeO
4
(e) XeOF
4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 947
18 • Exercises 933
112. What is the molecular structure of each of the following molecules? You may wish to review the chapter
on chemical bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) XeF
2
(b) XeF
4
(c) XeO
3
(d) XeO
4
(e) XeOF
4
113. Indicate whether each of the following molecules is polar or nonpolar. You may wish to review the
chapter on chemical bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) XeF
2
(b) XeF
4
(c) XeO
3
(d) XeO
4
(e) XeOF
4
114. What is the oxidation state of the noble gas in each of the following? You may wish to review the chapter
on chemical bonding and molecular geometry.
(a) XeO F
2 2
(b) KrF
2
(c)
(d)
(e) XeO
3
115. A mixture of xenon and fluorine was heated. A sample of the white solid that formed reacted with
hydrogen to yield 81 mL of xenon (at STP) and hydrogen fluoride, which was collected in water, giving a
solution of hydrofluoric acid. The hydrofluoric acid solution was titrated, and 68.43 mL of 0.3172M
sodium hydroxide was required to reach the equivalence point. Determine the empirical formula for the
white solid and write balanced chemical equations for the reactions involving xenon.
116. Basic solutions of Na XeO are powerful oxidants. What mass of Mn(NO ) •6H O reacts with 125.0 mL of
4 6 32 2
a 0.1717Mbasic solution of Na XeO that contains an excess of sodium hydroxide if the products
4 6
include Xe and solution of sodium permanganate?
PAGE: 948
934 18 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 949
CHAPTER 19
Transition Metals and Coordination
Chemistry
Figure19.1 Transition metals often form vibrantly colored complexes. The minerals malachite (green), azurite
(blue), and proustite (red) are some examples. (credit left: modification of work by James St. John; credit middle:
modification of work by Stephanie Clifford; credit right: modification of work by Terry Wallace)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds
19.2Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals
19.3Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds
INTRODUCTION We have daily contact with many transition metals. Iron occurs everywhere—from the rings
in your spiral notebook and the cutlery in your kitchen to automobiles, ships, buildings, and in the hemoglobin
in your blood. Titanium is useful in the manufacture of lightweight, durable products such as bicycle frames,
artificial hips, and jewelry. Chromium is useful as a protective plating on plumbing fixtures and automotive
detailing.
In addition to being used in their pure elemental forms, many compounds containing transition metals have
numerous other applications. Silver nitrate is used to create mirrors, zirconium silicate provides friction in
automotive brakes, and many important cancer-fighting agents, like the drug cisplatin and related species, are
platinum compounds.
The variety of properties exhibited by transition metals is due to their complex valence shells. Unlike most
main group metals where one oxidation state is normally observed, the valence shell structure of transition
metals means that they usually occur in several different stable oxidation states. In addition, electron
transitions in these elements can correspond with absorption of photons in the visible electromagnetic
spectrum, leading to colored compounds. Because of these behaviors, transition metals exhibit a rich and
fascinating chemistry.
19.1 Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their
Compounds
Transition metals are defined as those elements that have (or readily form) partially filleddorbitals. As shown
inFigure 19.2, thed-block elementsin groups 3–11 are transition elements. Thef-block elements, also
calledinner transition metals(the lanthanides and actinides), also meet this criterion because thedorbital is
partially occupied before theforbitals. Thedorbitals fill with the copper family (group 11); for this reason, the
PAGE: 950
936 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
next family (group 12) are technically not transition elements. However, the group 12 elements do display
some of the same chemical properties and are commonly included in discussions of transition metals. Some
chemists do treat the group 12 elements as transition metals.
FIGURE19.2 The transition metals are located in groups 3–11 of the periodic table. The inner transition metals
are in the two rows below the body of the table.
Thed-block elements are divided into thefirst transition series(the elements Sc through Cu), thesecond
transition series(the elements Y through Ag), and thethird transition series(the element La and the
elements Hf through Au). Actinium, Ac, is the first member of thefourth transition series, which also includes
Rf through Rg.
Thef-block elements are the elements Ce through Lu, which constitute thelanthanide series(orlanthanoid
series), and the elements Th through Lr, which constitute theactinide series(oractinoid series). Because
lanthanum behaves very much like the lanthanide elements, it is considered a lanthanide element, even
though its electron configuration makes it the first member of the third transition series. Similarly, the
behavior of actinium means it is part of the actinide series, although its electron configuration makes it the
first member of the fourth transition series.
EXAMPLE 19.1
Valence Electrons in Transition Metals
Review how to write electron configurations, covered in the chapter on electronic structure and periodic
properties of elements. Recall that for the transition and inner transition metals, it is necessary to remove thes
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 951
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 937
electrons before thedorfelectrons. Then, for each ion, give the electron configuration:
(a) cerium(III)
(b) lead(II)
(c) Ti2+
(d) Am3+
(e) Pd2+
For the examples that are transition metals, determine to which series they belong.
Solution
For ions, thes-valence electrons are lost prior to thedorfelectrons.
(a) Ce3+[Xe]4f1; Ce3+is an inner transition element in the lanthanide series.
(b) Pb2+[Xe]6s25d104f14; the electrons are lost from theporbital. This is a main group element.
(c) titanium(II) [Ar]3d2; first transition series
(d) americium(III) [Rn]5f6; actinide
(e) palladium(II) [Kr]4d8; second transition series
Check Your Learning
Give an example of an ion from the first transition series with nodelectrons.
Answer:
V5+is one possibility. Other examples include Sc3+, Ti4+, Cr6+, and Mn7+.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Uses of Lanthanides in Devices
Lanthanides (elements 57–71) are fairly abundant in the earth’s crust, despite their historic
characterization asrare earth elements. Thulium, the rarest naturally occurring lanthanoid, is more
common in the earth’s crust than silver (4.5 10−5% versus 0.79 10−5% by mass). There are 17 rare
earth elements, consisting of the 15 lanthanoids plus scandium and yttrium. They are called rare because
they were once difficult to extract economically, so it was rare to have a pure sample; due to similar
chemical properties, it is difficult to separate any one lanthanide from the others. However, newer
separation methods, such as ion exchange resins similar to those found in home water softeners, make the
separation of these elements easier and more economical. Most ores that contain these elements have low
concentrations of all the rare earth elements mixed together.
The commercial applications of lanthanides are growing rapidly. For example, europium is important in
flat screen displays found in computer monitors, cell phones, and televisions. Neodymium is useful in
laptop hard drives and in the processes that convert crude oil into gasoline (Figure 19.3). Holmium is found
in dental and medical equipment. In addition, many alternative energy technologies rely heavily on
lanthanoids. Neodymium and dysprosium are key components of hybrid vehicle engines and the magnets
used in wind turbines.
PAGE: 952
938 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.3 (a) Europium is used in display screens for televisions, computer monitors, and cell phones. (b)
Neodymium magnets are commonly found in computer hard drives. (credit b: modification of work by “KUERT
Datenrettung”/Flickr)
As the demand for lanthanide materials has increased faster than supply, prices have also increased. In
2008, dysprosium cost $110/kg; by 2014, the price had increased to $470/kg. Increasing the supply of
lanthanoid elements is one of the most significant challenges facing the industries that rely on the optical
and magnetic properties of these materials.
The transition elements have many properties in common with other metals. They are almost all hard, high-
melting solids that conduct heat and electricity well. They readily form alloys and lose electrons to form stable
cations. In addition, transition metals form a wide variety of stablecoordination compounds, in which the
central metal atom or ion acts as a Lewis acid and accepts one or more pairs of electrons. Many different
molecules and ions can donate lone pairs to the metal center, serving as Lewis bases. In this chapter, we shall
focus primarily on the chemical behavior of the elements of the first transition series.
Properties of the Transition Elements
Transition metals demonstrate a wide range of chemical behaviors. As can be seen from their reduction
potentials (seeAppendix H), some transition metals are strong reducing agents, whereas others have very low
reactivity. For example, the lanthanides all form stable 3+ aqueous cations. The driving force for such
oxidations is similar to that of alkaline earth metals such as Be or Mg, forming Be2+and Mg2+. On the other
hand, materials like platinum and gold have much higher reduction potentials. Their ability to resist oxidation
makes them useful materials for constructing circuits and jewelry.
Ions of the lighterd-block elements, such as Cr3+, Fe3+, and Co2+, form colorful hydrated ions that are stable in
water. However, ions in the period just below these (Mo3+, Ru3+, and Ir2+) are unstable and react readily with
oxygen from the air. The majority of simple, water-stable ions formed by the heavierd-block elements are
oxyanions such as and
Ruthenium, osmium, rhodium, iridium, palladium, and platinum are theplatinum metals. With difficulty,
they form simple cations that are stable in water, and, unlike the earlier elements in the second and third
transition series, they do not form stable oxyanions.
Both thed- andf-block elements react with nonmetals to form binary compounds; heating is often required.
These elements react with halogens to form a variety of halides ranging in oxidation state from 1+ to 6+. On
heating, oxygen reacts with all of the transition elements except palladium, platinum, silver, and gold. The
oxides of these latter metals can be formed using other reactants, but they decompose upon heating. The
f-block elements, the elements of group 3, and the elements of the first transition series except copper react
with aqueous solutions of acids, forming hydrogen gas and solutions of the corresponding salts.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 953
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 939
Transition metals can form compounds with a wide range of oxidation states. Some of the observed oxidation
states of the elements of the first transition series are shown inFigure 19.4. As we move from left to right
across the first transition series, we see that the number of common oxidation states increases at first to a
maximum towards the middle of the table, then decreases. The values in the table are typical values; there are
other known values, and it is possible to synthesize new additions. For example, in 2014, researchers were
successful in synthesizing a new oxidation state of iridium (9+).
FIGURE19.4 Transition metals of the first transition series can form compounds with varying oxidation states.
For the elements scandium through manganese (the first half of the first transition series), the highest
oxidation state corresponds to the loss of all of the electrons in both thesanddorbitals of their valence shells.
The titanium(IV) ion, for example, is formed when the titanium atom loses its two 3dand two 4selectrons.
These highest oxidation states are the most stable forms of scandium, titanium, and vanadium. However, it is
not possible to continue to remove all of the valence electrons from metals as we continue through the series.
Iron is known to form oxidation states from 2+ to 6+, with iron(II) and iron(III) being the most common. Most of
the elements of the first transition series form ions with a charge of 2+ or 3+ that are stable in water, although
those of the early members of the series can be readily oxidized by air.
The elements of the second and third transition series generally are more stable in higher oxidation states
than are the elements of the first series. In general, the atomic radius increases down a group, which leads to
the ions of the second and third series being larger than are those in the first series. Removing electrons from
orbitals that are located farther from the nucleus is easier than removing electrons close to the nucleus. For
example, molybdenum and tungsten, members of group 6, are limited mostly to an oxidation state of 6+ in
aqueous solution. Chromium, the lightest member of the group, forms stable Cr3+ions in water and, in the
absence of air, less stable Cr2+ions. The sulfide with the highest oxidation state for chromium is Cr S , which
2 3
contains the Cr3+ion. Molybdenum and tungsten form sulfides in which the metals exhibit oxidation states of
4+ and 6+.
EXAMPLE 19.2
Activity of the Transition Metals
Which is the strongest oxidizing agent in acidic solution: dichromate ion, which contains chromium(VI),
permanganate ion, which contains manganese(VII), or titanium dioxide, which contains titanium(IV)?
Solution
First, we need to look up the reduction half reactions (inAppendix L) for each oxide in the specified oxidation
state:
A larger reduction potential means that it is easier to reduce the reactant. Permanganate, with the largest
reduction potential, is the strongest oxidizer under these conditions. Dichromate is next, followed by titanium
dioxide as the weakest oxidizing agent (the hardest to reduce) of this set.
Check Your Learning
Predict what reaction (if any) will occur between HCl and Co(s), and between HBr and Pt(s). You will need to use
PAGE: 954
940 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
the standard reduction potentials fromAppendix L.
Answer:
no reaction because Pt(s) will not be oxidized by H+
Preparation of the Transition Elements
Ancient civilizations knew about iron, copper, silver, and gold. The time periods in human history known as
the Bronze Age and Iron Age mark the advancements in which societies learned to isolate certain metals and
use them to make tools and goods. Naturally occurring ores of copper, silver, and gold can contain high
concentrations of these metals in elemental form (Figure 19.5). Iron, on the other hand, occurs on earth almost
exclusively in oxidized forms, such as rust (Fe O ). The earliest known iron implements were made from iron
2 3
meteorites. Surviving iron artifacts dating from approximately 4000 to 2500 BC are rare, but all known
examples contain specific alloys of iron and nickel that occur only in extraterrestrial objects, not on earth. It
took thousands of years of technological advances before civilizations developed ironsmelting, the ability to
extract a pure element from its naturally occurring ores and for iron tools to become common.
FIGURE19.5 Transition metals occur in nature in various forms. Examples include (a) a nugget of copper, (b) a
deposit of gold, and (c) an ore containing oxidized iron. (credit a: modification of work by http://images-of-
elements.com/copper-2.jpg; credit c: modification of work by http://images-of-elements.com/iron-ore.jpg)
Generally, the transition elements are extracted from minerals found in a variety of ores. However, the ease of
their recovery varies widely, depending on the concentration of the element in the ore, the identity of the other
elements present, and the difficulty of reducing the element to the free metal.
In general, it is not difficult to reduce ions of thed-block elements to the free element. Carbon is a sufficiently
strong reducing agent in most cases. However, like the ions of the more active main group metals, ions of the
f-block elements must be isolated by electrolysis or by reduction with an active metal such as calcium.
We shall discuss the processes used for the isolation of iron, copper, and silver because these three processes
illustrate the principal means of isolating most of thed-block metals. In general, each of these processes
involves three principal steps: preliminary treatment, smelting, and refining.
1. Preliminary treatment. In general, there is an initial treatment of the ores to make them suitable for the
extraction of the metals. This usually involves crushing or grinding the ore, concentrating the metal-
bearing components, and sometimes treating these substances chemically to convert them into
compounds that are easier to reduce to the metal.
2. Smelting. The next step is the extraction of the metal in the molten state, a process called smelting, which
includes reduction of the metallic compound to the metal. Impurities may be removed by the addition of a
compound that forms a slag—a substance with a low melting point that can be readily separated from the
molten metal.
3. Refining. The final step in the recovery of a metal is refining the metal. Low boiling metals such as zinc and
mercury can be refined by distillation. When fused on an inclined table, low melting metals like tin flow
away from higher-melting impurities. Electrolysis is another common method for refining metals.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 955
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 941
Isolation of Iron
The early application of iron to the manufacture of tools and weapons was possible because of the wide
distribution of iron ores and the ease with which iron compounds in the ores could be reduced by carbon. For a
long time, charcoal was the form of carbon used in the reduction process. The production and use of iron
became much more widespread about 1620, when coke was introduced as the reducing agent. Coke is a form
of carbon formed by heating coal in the absence of air to remove impurities.
The first step in the metallurgy of iron is usually roasting the ore (heating the ore in air) to remove water,
decomposing carbonates into oxides, and converting sulfides into oxides. The oxides are then reduced in a
blast furnace that is 80–100 feet high and about 25 feet in diameter (Figure 19.6) in which the roasted ore,
coke, and limestone (impure CaCO ) are introduced continuously into the top. Molten iron and slag are
3
withdrawn at the bottom. The entire stock in a furnace may weigh several hundred tons.
FIGURE19.6 Within a blast furnace, different reactions occur in different temperature zones. Carbon monoxide is
generated in the hotter bottom regions and rises upward to reduce the iron oxides to pure iron through a series of
reactions that take place in the upper regions.
Near the bottom of a furnace are nozzles through which preheated air is blown into the furnace. As soon as the
air enters, the coke in the region of the nozzles is oxidized to carbon dioxide with the liberation of a great deal
of heat. The hot carbon dioxide passes upward through the overlying layer of white-hot coke, where it is
reduced to carbon monoxide:
The carbon monoxide serves as the reducing agent in the upper regions of the furnace. The individual
reactions are indicated inFigure 19.6.
The iron oxides are reduced in the upper region of the furnace. In the middle region, limestone (calcium
carbonate) decomposes, and the resulting calcium oxide combines with silica and silicates in the ore to form
PAGE: 956
942 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
slag. The slag is mostly calcium silicate and contains most of the commercially unimportant components of
the ore:
Just below the middle of the furnace, the temperature is high enough to melt both the iron and the slag. They
collect in layers at the bottom of the furnace; the less dense slag floats on the iron and protects it from
oxidation. Several times a day, the slag and molten iron are withdrawn from the furnace. The iron is
transferred to casting machines or to a steelmaking plant (Figure 19.7).
FIGURE19.7 Molten iron is shown being cast as steel. (credit: Clint Budd)
Much of the iron produced is refined and converted into steel.Steelis made from iron by removing impurities
and adding substances such as manganese, chromium, nickel, tungsten, molybdenum, and vanadium to
produce alloys with properties that make the material suitable for specific uses. Most steels also contain small
but definite percentages of carbon (0.04%–2.5%). However, a large part of the carbon contained in iron must
be removed in the manufacture of steel; otherwise, the excess carbon would make the iron brittle.
LINK TO LEARNING
You can watch an animation ofsteelmaking(http://openstax.org/l/16steelmaking)that walks you through the
process.
Isolation of Copper
The most important ores of copper contain copper sulfides (such as covellite, CuS), although copper oxides
(such as tenorite, CuO) and copper hydroxycarbonates [such as malachite, Cu (OH) CO ] are sometimes found.
2 2 3
In the production of copper metal, the concentrated sulfide ore is roasted to remove part of the sulfur as sulfur
dioxide. The remaining mixture, which consists of Cu S, FeS, FeO, and SiO , is mixed with limestone, which
2 2
serves as a flux (a material that aids in the removal of impurities), and heated. Molten slag forms as the iron
and silica are removed by Lewis acid-base reactions:
In these reactions, the silicon dioxide behaves as a Lewis acid, which accepts a pair of electrons from the Lewis
base (the oxide ion).
Reduction of the Cu S that remains after smelting is accomplished by blowing air through the molten material.
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 957
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 943
The air converts part of the Cu S into Cu O. As soon as copper(I) oxide is formed, it is reduced by the
2 2
remaining copper(I) sulfide to metallic copper:
The copper obtained in this way is called blister copper because of its characteristic appearance, which is due
to the air blisters it contains (Figure 19.8). This impure copper is cast into large plates, which are used as
anodes in the electrolytic refining of the metal (which is described in the chapter on electrochemistry).
FIGURE19.8 Blister copper is obtained during the conversion of copper-containing ore into pure copper. (credit:
“Tortie tude”/Wikimedia Commons)
Isolation of Silver
Silver sometimes occurs in large nuggets (Figure 19.9) but more frequently in veins and related deposits. At
one time, panning was an effective method of isolating both silver and gold nuggets. Due to their low reactivity,
these metals, and a few others, occur in deposits as nuggets. The discovery of platinum was due to Spanish
explorers in Central America mistaking platinum nuggets for silver. When the metal is not in the form of
nuggets, it often useful to employ a process calledhydrometallurgyto separate silver from its ores. Hydrology
involves the separation of a metal from a mixture by first converting it into soluble ions and then extracting
and reducing them to precipitate the pure metal. In the presence of air, alkali metal cyanides readily form the
soluble dicyanoargentate(I) ion, from silver metal or silver-containing compounds such as Ag S
2
and AgCl. Representative equations are:
PAGE: 958
944 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.9 Naturally occurring free silver may be found as nuggets (a) or in veins (b). (credit a: modification of
work by “Teravolt”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by James St. John)
The silver is precipitated from the cyanide solution by the addition of either zinc or iron(II) ions, which serves
as the reducing agent:
EXAMPLE 19.3
Refining Redox
One of the steps for refining silver involves converting silver into dicyanoargenate(I) ions:
Explain why oxygen must be present to carry out the reaction. Why does the reaction not occur as:
Solution
The charges, as well as the atoms, must balance in reactions. The silver atom is being oxidized from the 0
oxidation state to the 1+ state. Whenever something loses electrons, something must also gain electrons (be
reduced) to balance the equation. Oxygen is a good oxidizing agent for these reactions because it can gain
electrons to go from the 0 oxidation state to the 2− state.
Check Your Learning
During the refining of iron, carbon must be present in the blast furnace. Why is carbon necessary to convert
iron oxide into iron?
Answer:
The carbon is converted into CO, which is the reducing agent that accepts electrons so that iron(III) can be
reduced to iron(0).
Transition Metal Compounds
The bonding in the simple compounds of the transition elements ranges from ionic to covalent. In their lower
oxidation states, the transition elements form ionic compounds; in their higher oxidation states, they form
covalent compounds or polyatomic ions. The variation in oxidation states exhibited by the transition elements
gives these compounds a metal-based, oxidation-reduction chemistry. The chemistry of several classes of
compounds containing elements of the transition series follows.
Halides
Anhydrous halides of each of the transition elements can be prepared by the direct reaction of the metal with
halogens. For example:
Heating a metal halide with additional metal can be used to form a halide of the metal with a lower oxidation
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 959
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 945
state:
The stoichiometry of the metal halide that results from the reaction of the metal with a halogen is determined
by the relative amounts of metal and halogen and by the strength of the halogen as an oxidizing agent.
Generally, fluorine forms fluoride-containing metals in their highest oxidation states. The other halogens may
not form analogous compounds.
In general, the preparation of stable water solutions of the halides of the metals of the first transition series is
by the addition of a hydrohalic acid to carbonates, hydroxides, oxides, or other compounds that contain basic
anions. Sample reactions are:
Most of the first transition series metals also dissolve in acids, forming a solution of the salt and hydrogen gas.
For example:
The polarity of bonds with transition metals varies based not only upon the electronegativities of the atoms
involved but also upon the oxidation state of the transition metal. Remember that bond polarity is a continuous
spectrum with electrons being shared evenly (covalent bonds) at one extreme and electrons being transferred
completely (ionic bonds) at the other. No bond is ever 100% ionic, and the degree to which the electrons are
evenly distributed determines many properties of the compound. Transition metal halides with low oxidation
numbers form more ionic bonds. For example, titanium(II) chloride and titanium(III) chloride (TiCl and TiCl )
2 3
have high melting points that are characteristic of ionic compounds, but titanium(IV) chloride (TiCl ) is a
4
volatile liquid, consistent with having covalent titanium-chlorine bonds. All halides of the heavierd-block
elements have significant covalent characteristics.
The covalent behavior of the transition metals with higher oxidation states is exemplified by the reaction of the
metal tetrahalides with water. Like covalent silicon tetrachloride, both the titanium and vanadium tetrahalides
react with water to give solutions containing the corresponding hydrohalic acids and the metal oxides:
Oxides
As with the halides, the nature of bonding in oxides of the transition elements is determined by the oxidation
state of the metal. Oxides with low oxidation states tend to be more ionic, whereas those with higher oxidation
states are more covalent. These variations in bonding are because the electronegativities of the elements are
not fixed values. The electronegativity of an element increases with increasing oxidation state. Transition
metals in low oxidation states have lower electronegativity values than oxygen; therefore, these metal oxides
are ionic. Transition metals in very high oxidation states have electronegativity values close to that of oxygen,
which leads to these oxides being covalent.
The oxides of the first transition series can be prepared by heating the metals in air. These oxides are Sc O ,
2 3
TiO , V O , Cr O , Mn O , Fe O , Co O , NiO, and CuO.
2 2 5 2 3 3 4 3 4 3 4
Alternatively, these oxides and other oxides (with the metals in different oxidation states) can be produced by
heating the corresponding hydroxides, carbonates, or oxalates in an inert atmosphere. Iron(II) oxide can be
prepared by heating iron(II) oxalate, and cobalt(II) oxide is produced by heating cobalt(II) hydroxide:
With the exception of CrO and Mn O , transition metal oxides are not soluble in water. They can react with
3 2 7
acids and, in a few cases, with bases. Overall, oxides of transition metals with the lowest oxidation states are
basic (and react with acids), the intermediate ones are amphoteric, and the highest oxidation states are
PAGE: 960
946 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
primarily acidic. Basic metal oxides at a low oxidation state react with aqueous acids to form solutions of salts
and water. Examples include the reaction of cobalt(II) oxide accepting protons from nitric acid, and
scandium(III) oxide accepting protons from hydrochloric acid:
The oxides of metals with oxidation states of 4+ are amphoteric, and most are not soluble in either acids or
bases. Vanadium(V) oxide, chromium(VI) oxide, and manganese(VII) oxide are acidic. They react with solutions
of hydroxides to form salts of the oxyanions and For example, the complete ionic
equation for the reaction of chromium(VI) oxide with a strong base is given by:
Chromium(VI) oxide and manganese(VII) oxide react with water to form the acids H CrO and HMnO ,
2 4 4
respectively.
Hydroxides
When a soluble hydroxide is added to an aqueous solution of a salt of a transition metal of the first transition
series, a gelatinous precipitate forms. For example, adding a solution of sodium hydroxide to a solution of
cobalt sulfate produces a gelatinous pink or blue precipitate of cobalt(II) hydroxide. The net ionic equation is:
In this and many other cases, these precipitates are hydroxides containing the transition metal ion, hydroxide
ions, and water coordinated to the transition metal. In other cases, the precipitates are hydrated oxides
composed of the metal ion, oxide ions, and water of hydration:
These substances do not contain hydroxide ions. However, both the hydroxides and the hydrated oxides react
with acids to form salts and water. When precipitating a metal from solution, it is necessary to avoid an excess
of hydroxide ion, as this may lead to complex ion formation as discussed later in this chapter. The precipitated
metal hydroxides can be separated for further processing or for waste disposal.
Carbonates
Many of the elements of the first transition series form insoluble carbonates. It is possible to prepare these
carbonates by the addition of a soluble carbonate salt to a solution of a transition metal salt. For example,
nickel carbonate can be prepared from solutions of nickel nitrate and sodium carbonate according to the
following net ionic equation:
The reactions of the transition metal carbonates are similar to those of the active metal carbonates. They react
with acids to form metals salts, carbon dioxide, and water. Upon heating, they decompose, forming the
transition metal oxides.
Other Salts
In many respects, the chemical behavior of the elements of the first transition series is very similar to that of
the main group metals. In particular, the same types of reactions that are used to prepare salts of the main
group metals can be used to prepare simple ionic salts of these elements.
A variety of salts can be prepared from metals that are more active than hydrogen by reaction with the
corresponding acids: Scandium metal reacts with hydrobromic acid to form a solution of scandium bromide:
The common compounds that we have just discussed can also be used to prepare salts. The reactions involved
include the reactions of oxides, hydroxides, or carbonates with acids. For example:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 961
19.1 • Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds 947
Substitution reactions involving soluble salts may be used to prepare insoluble salts. For example:
In our discussion of oxides in this section, we have seen that reactions of the covalent oxides of the transition
elements with hydroxides form salts that contain oxyanions of the transition elements.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
High Temperature Superconductors
Asuperconductoris a substance that conducts electricity with no resistance. This lack of resistance means
that there is no energy loss during the transmission of electricity. This would lead to a significant reduction in
the cost of electricity.
Most currently used, commercial superconducting materials, such as NbTi and Nb Sn, do not become
3
superconducting until they are cooled below 23 K (−250 °C). This requires the use of liquid helium, which has a
boiling temperature of 4 K and is expensive and difficult to handle. The cost of liquid helium has deterred the
widespread application of superconductors.
One of the most exciting scientific discoveries of the 1980s was the characterization of compounds that exhibit
superconductivity at temperatures above 90 K. (Compared to liquid helium, 90 K is a high temperature.)
Typical among the high-temperature superconducting materials are oxides containing yttrium (or one of
several rare earth elements), barium, and copper in a 1:2:3 ratio. The formula of the ionic yttrium compound is
YBa Cu O .
2 3 7
The new materials become superconducting at temperatures close to 90 K (Figure 19.10), temperatures that
can be reached by cooling with liquid nitrogen (boiling temperature of 77 K). Not only are liquid nitrogen-
cooled materials easier to handle, but the cooling costs are also about 1000 times lower than for liquid helium.
Further advances during the same period included materials that became superconducting at even higher
temperatures and with a wider array of materials. The DuPont team led by Uma Chowdry and Arthur Sleight
identified Bismouth-Strontium-Copper-Oxides that became superconducting at temperatures as high as 110 K
and, importantly, did not contain rare earth elements. Advances continued through the subsequent decades
until, in 2020, a team led by Ranga Dias at University of Rochester announced the development of a room-
temperature superconductor, opening doors to widespread applications. More research and development is
needed to realize the potential of these materials, but the possibilities are very promising.
FIGURE19.10 The resistance of the high-temperature superconductor YBa Cu O varies with temperature. Note
2 3 7
how the resistance falls to zero below 92 K, when the substance becomes superconducting.
PAGE: 962
948 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
Although the brittle, fragile nature of these materials presently hampers their commercial applications, they
have tremendous potential that researchers are hard at work improving their processes to help realize.
Superconducting transmission lines would carry current for hundreds of miles with no loss of power due to
resistance in the wires. This could allow generating stations to be located in areas remote from population
centers and near the natural resources necessary for power production. The first project demonstrating the
viability of high-temperature superconductor power transmission was established in New York in 2008.
Researchers are also working on using this technology to develop other applications, such as smaller and more
powerful microchips. In addition, high-temperature superconductors can be used to generate magnetic fields
for applications such as medical devices, magnetic levitation trains, and containment fields for nuclear fusion
reactors (Figure 19.11).
FIGURE19.11 (a) This magnetic levitation train (or maglev) uses superconductor technology to move along its
tracks. (b) A magnet can be levitated using a dish like this as a superconductor. (credit a: modification of work by
Alex Needham; credit b: modification of work by Kevin Jarrett)
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch how ahigh-temperature superconductor(http://openstax.org/l/16supercond)levitates around a
magnetic racetrack in the video.
19.2 Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the defining traits of coordination compounds
• Describe the structures of complexes containing monodentate and polydentate ligands
• Use standard nomenclature rules to name coordination compounds
• Explain and provide examples of geometric and optical isomerism
• Identify several natural and technological occurrences of coordination compounds
The hemoglobin in your blood, the chlorophyll in green plants, vitamin B-12, and the catalyst used in the
manufacture of polyethylene all contain coordination compounds. Ions of the metals, especially the transition
metals, are likely to form complexes. Many of these compounds are highly colored (Figure 19.12). In the
remainder of this chapter, we will consider the structure and bonding of these remarkable compounds.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 963
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 949
FIGURE19.12 Metal ions that contain partially filleddsubshell usually form colored complex ions; ions with
emptydsubshell (d0) or with filleddsubshells (d10) usually form colorless complexes. This figure shows, from left
to right, solutions containing [M(H O) ]n+ions withM= Sc3+(d0), Cr3+(d3), Co2+(d7), Ni2+(d8), Cu2+(d9), and Zn2+(d10).
2 6
(credit: Sahar Atwa)
Remember that in most main group element compounds, the valence electrons of the isolated atoms combine
to form chemical bonds that satisfy the octet rule. For instance, the four valence electrons of carbon overlap
with electrons from four hydrogen atoms to form CH . The one valence electron leaves sodium and adds to the
4
seven valence electrons of chlorine to form the ionic formula unit NaCl (Figure 19.13). Transition metals do not
normally bond in this fashion. They primarily form coordinate covalent bonds, a form of the Lewis acid-base
interaction in which both of the electrons in the bond are contributed by a donor (Lewis base) to an electron
acceptor (Lewis acid). The Lewis acid in coordination complexes, often called acentral metalion (or atom), is
often a transition metal or inner transition metal, although main group elements can also formcoordination
compounds. The Lewis base donors, calledligands, can be a wide variety of chemicals—atoms, molecules, or
ions. The only requirement is that they have one or more electron pairs, which can be donated to the central
metal. Most often, this involves adonor atomwith a lone pair of electrons that can form a coordinate bond to
the metal.
FIGURE19.13 (a) Covalent bonds involve the sharing of electrons, and ionic bonds involve the transferring of
electrons associated with each bonding atom, as indicated by the colored electrons. (b) However, coordinate
covalent bonds involve electrons from a Lewis base being donated to a metal center. The lone pairs from six water
molecules form bonds to the scandium ion to form an octahedral complex. (Only the donated pairs are shown.)
Thecoordination sphereconsists of the central metal ion or atom plus its attached ligands. Brackets in a
formula enclose the coordination sphere; species outside the brackets are not part of the coordination sphere.
Thecoordination numberof the central metal ion or atom is the number of donor atoms bonded to it. The
coordination number for the silver ion in [Ag(NH ) ]+is two (Figure 19.14). For the copper(II) ion in [CuCl ]2−,
32 4
the coordination number is four, whereas for the cobalt(II) ion in [Co(H O) ]2+the coordination number is six.
2 6
Each of these ligands ismonodentate, from the Greek for “one toothed,” meaning that they connect with the
central metal through only one atom. In this case, the number of ligands and the coordination number are
equal.
PAGE: 964
950 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.14 The complexes (a) [Ag(NH ) ]+, (b) [Cu(Cl) ]2−, and (c) [Co(H O) ]2+have coordination numbers of
3 2 4 2 6
two, four, and six, respectively. The geometries of these complexes are the same as we have seen with VSEPR
theory for main group elements: linear, tetrahedral, and octahedral.
Many other ligands coordinate to the metal in more complex fashions.Bidentate ligandsare those in which
two atoms coordinate to the metal center. For example, ethylenediamine (en, H NCH CH NH ) contains two
2 2 2 2
nitrogen atoms, each of which has a lone pair and can serve as a Lewis base (Figure 19.15). Both of the atoms
can coordinate to a single metal center. In the complex [Co(en) ]3+, there are three bidentate en ligands, and the
3
coordination number of the cobalt(III) ion is six. The most common coordination numbers are two, four, and
six, but examples of all coordination numbers from 1 to 15 are known.
FIGURE19.15 (a) The ethylenediamine (en) ligand contains two atoms with lone pairs that can coordinate to the
metal center. (b) The cobalt(III) complex contains three of these ligands, each forming two bonds to
the cobalt ion.
Any ligand that bonds to a central metal ion by more than one donor atom is apolydentate ligand(or “many
teeth”) because it can bite into the metal center with more than one bond. The termchelate(pronounced
“KEY-late”) from the Greek for “claw” is also used to describe this type of interaction. Many polydentate ligands
arechelating ligands, and a complex consisting of one or more of these ligands and a central metal is a
chelate. A chelating ligand is also known as a chelating agent. A chelating ligand holds the metal ion rather like
a crab’s claw would hold a marble.Figure 19.15showed one example of a chelate. The heme complex in
hemoglobin is another important example (Figure 19.16). It contains a polydentate ligand with four donor
atoms that coordinate to iron.
FIGURE19.16 The single ligand heme contains four nitrogen atoms that coordinate to iron in hemoglobin to form a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 965
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 951
chelate.
Polydentate ligands are sometimes identified with prefixes that indicate the number of donor atoms in the
ligand. As we have seen, ligands with one donor atom, such as NH , Cl−, and H O, are monodentate ligands.
3 2
Ligands with two donor groups are bidentate ligands. Ethylenediamine, H NCH CH NH , and the anion of the
2 2 2 2
acid glycine, (Figure 19.17) are examples of bidentate ligands. Tridentate ligands, tetradentate
ligands, pentadentate ligands, and hexadentate ligands contain three, four, five, and six donor atoms,
respectively. The ligand in heme (Figure 19.16) is a tetradentate ligand.
FIGURE19.17 Each of the anionic ligands shown attaches in a bidentate fashion to platinum(II), with both a
nitrogen and oxygen atom coordinating to the metal.
The Naming of Complexes
The nomenclature of the complexes is patterned after a system suggested by Alfred Werner, a Swiss chemist
and Nobel laureate, whose outstanding work more than 100 years ago laid the foundation for a clearer
understanding of these compounds. The following five rules are used for naming complexes:
1. If a coordination compound is ionic, name the cation first and the anion second, in accordance with the
usual nomenclature.
2. Name the ligands first, followed by the central metal. Name the ligands alphabetically. Negative ligands
(anions) have names formed by adding -oto the stem name of the group. For examples, seeTable 19.1. For
most neutral ligands, the name of the molecule is used. The four common exceptions areaqua(H O),
2
ammine(NH ),carbonyl(CO), andnitrosyl(NO). For example, name [Pt(NH ) Cl ] as
3 32 4
diamminetetrachloroplatinum(IV).
Examples of Anionic Ligands
Anionic Ligand Name
F− fluoro
Cl− chloro
Br− bromo
I− iodo
CN− cyano
nitrato
OH− hydroxo
O2– oxo
oxalato
carbonato
TABLE19.1
PAGE: 966
952 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
3. If more than one ligand of a given type is present, the number is indicated by the prefixesdi- (for two),tri-
(for three),tetra- (for four),penta- (for five), andhexa- (for six). Sometimes, the prefixesbis- (for two),tris-
(for three), andtetrakis- (for four) are used when the name of the ligand already includesdi-,tri-, ortetra-,
or when the ligand name begins with a vowel. For example, the ion bis(bipyridyl)osmium(II) uses bis- to
signify that there are two ligands attached to Os, and each bipyridyl ligand contains two pyridine groups
(C H N).
5 4
When the complex is either a cation or a neutral molecule, the name of the central metal atom is spelled
exactly like the name of the element and is followed by a Roman numeral in parentheses to indicate its
oxidation state (Table 19.2andTable 19.3). When the complex is an anion, the suffix -ate is added to the stem
of the name of the metal, followed by the Roman numeral designation of its oxidation state (Table 19.4).
Sometimes, the Latin name of the metal is used when the English name is clumsy. For example,ferrateis used
instead ofironate,plumbateinsteadleadate, andstannateinstead oftinate. The oxidation state of the metal is
determined based on the charges of each ligand and the overall charge of the coordination compound. For
example, in [Cr(H O) Cl ]Br, the coordination sphere (in brackets) has a charge of 1+ to balance the bromide
2 4 2
ion. The water ligands are neutral, and the chloride ligands are anionic with a charge of 1− each. To determine
the oxidation state of the metal, we set the overall charge equal to the sum of the ligands and the metal: +1 = −2
+x, so the oxidation state (x) is equal to 3+.
Examples in Which the Complex Is a Cation
[Co(NH ) ]Cl hexaamminecobalt(III) chloride
36 3
[Pt(NH ) Cl ]2+ tetraamminedichloroplatinum(IV) ion
34 2
[Ag(NH ) ]+ diamminesilver(I) ion
32
[Cr(H O) Cl ]Cl tetraaquadichlorochromium(III) chloride
2 4 2
[Co(H NCH CH NH ) ] (SO ) tris(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III) sulfate
2 2 2 232 43
TABLE19.2
Examples in Which the Complex Is Neutral
[Pt(NH ) Cl ] diamminetetrachloroplatinum(IV)
32 4
[Ni(H NCH CH NH ) Cl ] dichlorobis(ethylenediamine)nickel(II)
2 2 2 22 2
TABLE19.3
Examples in Which the Complex Is an Anion
[PtCl ]2− hexachloroplatinate(IV) ion
6
Na [SnCl ] sodium hexachlorostannate(IV)
2 6
TABLE19.4
LINK TO LEARNING
Do you think you understand naming coordination complexes? You can look over more examples and test
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 967
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 953
yourself withonline quizzes(http://openstax.org/l/16namingcomps)at the University of Sydney’s site.
EXAMPLE 19.4
Coordination Numbers and Oxidation States
Determine the name of the following complexes and give the coordination number of the central metal atom.
(a) Na [PtCl ]
2 6
(b) K [Fe(C O ) ]
3 2 43
(c) [Co(NH ) Cl]Cl
35 2
Solution
(a) There are two Na+ions, so the coordination sphere has a negative two charge: [PtCl ]2−. There are six
6
anionic chloride ligands, so −2 = −6 +x, and the oxidation state of the platinum is 4+. The name of the complex
is sodium hexachloroplatinate(IV), and the coordination number is six. (b) The coordination sphere has a
charge of 3− (based on the potassium) and the oxalate ligands each have a charge of 2−, so the metal oxidation
state is given by −3 = −6 +x, and this is an iron(III) complex. The name is potassium trisoxalatoferrate(III) (note
that tris is used instead of tri because the ligand name starts with a vowel). Because oxalate is a bidentate
ligand, this complex has a coordination number of six. (c) In this example, the coordination sphere has a
cationic charge of 2+. The NH ligand is neutral, but the chloro ligand has a charge of 1−. The oxidation state is
3
found by +2 = −1 +xand is 3+, so the complex is pentaamminechlorocobalt(III) chloride and the coordination
number is six.
Check Your Learning
The complex potassium dicyanoargenate(I) is used to make antiseptic compounds. Give the formula and
coordination number.
Answer:
K[Ag(CN) ]; coordination number two
2
The Structures of Complexes
The most common structures of the complexes in coordination compounds are octahedral, tetrahedral, and
square planar (seeFigure 19.18). For transition metal complexes, the coordination number determines the
geometry around the central metal ion.Table 19.5compares coordination numbers to the molecular
geometry:
FIGURE19.18 These are geometries of some complexes with coordination numbers of seven and eight.
PAGE: 968
954 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
Coordination Numbers and Molecular Geometry
Coordination Number Molecular Geometry Example
2 linear [Ag(NH ) ]+
32
3 trigonal planar [Cu(CN) ]2−
3
4 tetrahedral(d0ord10), low oxidation states for M [Ni(CO) ]
4
4 square planar (d8) [Ni(CN) ]2−
4
5 trigonal bipyramidal [CoCl ]2−
5
5 square pyramidal [VO(CN) ]2−
4
6 octahedral [CoCl ]3−
6
7 pentagonal bipyramid [ZrF ]3−
7
8 square antiprism [ReF ]2−
8
8 dodecahedron [Mo(CN) ]4−
8
9 and above more complicated structures [ReH ]2−
9
TABLE19.5
Unlike main group atoms in which both the bonding and nonbonding electrons determine the molecular
shape, the nonbondingd-electrons do not change the arrangement of the ligands. Octahedral complexes have
a coordination number of six, and the six donor atoms are arranged at the corners of an octahedron around
the central metal ion. Examples are shown inFigure 19.19. The chloride and nitrate anions in [Co(H O) ]Cl
2 6 2
and [Cr(en) ](NO ) , and the potassium cations in K [PtCl ], are outside the brackets and are not bonded to the
3 33 2 6
metal ion.
FIGURE19.19 Many transition metal complexes adopt octahedral geometries, with six donor atoms forming bond
angles of 90° about the central atom with adjacent ligands. Note that only ligands within the coordination sphere
affect the geometry around the metal center.
For transition metals with a coordination number of four, two different geometries are possible: tetrahedral or
square planar. Unlike main group elements, where these geometries can be predicted from VSEPR theory, a
more detailed discussion of transition metal orbitals (discussed in the section on Crystal Field Theory) is
required to predict which complexes will be tetrahedral and which will be square planar. In tetrahedral
complexes such as [Zn(CN) ]2−(Figure 19.20), each of the ligand pairs forms an angle of 109.5°. In square
4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 969
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 955
planar complexes, such as [Pt(NH ) Cl ], each ligand has two other ligands at 90° angles (called thecis
32 2
positions) and one additional ligand at an 180° angle, in thetransposition.
FIGURE19.20 Transition metals with a coordination number of four can adopt a tetrahedral geometry (a) as in
K [Zn(CN) ] or a square planar geometry (b) as shown in [Pt(NH ) Cl ].
2 4 3 2 2
Isomerism in Complexes
Isomers are different chemical species that have the same chemical formula. Transition metal complexes
often exist asgeometric isomers, in which the same atoms are connected through the same types of bonds but
with differences in their orientation in space. Coordination complexes with two different ligands in thecisand
transpositions from a ligand of interest form isomers. For example, the octahedral [Co(NH ) Cl ]+ion has two
34 2
isomers. In thecisconfiguration, the two chloride ligands are adjacent to each other (Figure 19.21). The other
isomer, thetransconfiguration, has the two chloride ligands directly across from one another.
FIGURE19.21 Thecisandtransisomers of [Co(H O) Cl ]+contain the same ligands attached to the same metal
2 4 2
ion, but the spatial arrangement causes these two compounds to have very different properties.
Different geometric isomers of a substance are different chemical compounds. They exhibit different
properties, even though they have the same formula. For example, the two isomers of [Co(NH ) Cl ]NO differ
34 2 3
in color; thecisform is violet, and thetransform is green. Furthermore, these isomers have different dipole
moments, solubilities, and reactivities. As an example of how the arrangement in space can influence the
molecular properties, consider the polarity of the two [Co(NH ) Cl ]NO isomers. Remember that the polarity
34 2 3
of a molecule or ion is determined by the bond dipoles (which are due to the difference in electronegativity of
the bonding atoms) and their arrangement in space. In one isomer,cischloride ligands cause more electron
density on one side of the molecule than on the other, making it polar. For thetransisomer, each ligand is
directly across from an identical ligand, so the bond dipoles cancel out, and the molecule is nonpolar.
EXAMPLE 19.5
Geometric Isomers
Identify which geometric isomer of [Pt(NH ) Cl ] is shown inFigure 19.20. Draw the other geometric isomer
32 2
and give its full name.
Solution
In theFigure 19.20, the two chlorine ligands occupycispositions. The other form is shown inFigure 19.22.
When naming specific isomers, the descriptor is listed in front of the name. Therefore, this complex is
trans-diamminedichloroplatinum(II).
PAGE: 970
956 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.22 Thetransisomer of [Pt(NH ) Cl ] has each ligand directly across from an adjacent ligand.
3 2 2
Check Your Learning
Draw the iontrans-diaqua-trans-dibromo-trans-dichlorocobalt(II).
Answer:
Another important type of isomers areoptical isomers, orenantiomers, in which two objects are exact mirror
images of each other but cannot be lined up so that all parts match. This means that optical isomers are
nonsuperimposable mirror images. A classic example of this is a pair of hands, in which the right and left hand
are mirror images of one another but cannot be superimposed. Optical isomers are very important in organic
and biochemistry because living systems often incorporate one specific optical isomer and not the other.
Unlike geometric isomers, pairs of optical isomers have identical properties (boiling point, polarity, solubility,
etc.). Optical isomers differ only in the way they affect polarized light and how they react with other optical
isomers. For coordination complexes, many coordination compounds such as [M(en) ]n+[in which Mn+is a
3
central metal ion such as iron(III) or cobalt(II)] form enantiomers, as shown inFigure 19.23. These two isomers
will react differently with other optical isomers. For example, DNA helices are optical isomers, and the form
that occurs in nature (right-handed DNA) will bind to only one isomer of [M(en) ]n+and not the other.
3
FIGURE19.23 The complex [M(en) ]n+(Mn+= a metal ion, en = ethylenediamine) has a nonsuperimposable mirror
3
image.
The [Co(en) Cl ]+ion exhibits geometric isomerism (cis/trans), and itscisisomer exists as a pair of optical
2 2
isomers (Figure 19.24).
FIGURE19.24 Three isomeric forms of [Co(en) Cl ]+exist. Thetransisomer, formed when the chlorines are
2 2
positioned at a 180° angle, has very different properties from thecisisomers. The mirror images of thecisisomer
form a pair of optical isomers, which have identical behavior except when reacting with other enantiomers.
Linkage isomersoccur when the coordination compound contains a ligand that can bind to the transition
metal center through two different atoms. For example, the CN ligand can bind through the carbon atom
(cyano) or through the nitrogen atom (isocyano). Similarly, SCN− can be bound through the sulfur or nitrogen
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 971
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 957
atom, affording two distinct compounds ([Co(NH ) SCN]2+or [Co(NH ) NCS]2+).
35 35
Ionization isomers(orcoordination isomers) occur when one anionic ligand in the inner coordination sphere
is replaced with the counter ion from the outer coordination sphere. A simple example of two ionization
isomers are [CoCl ][Br] and [CoCl Br][Cl].
6 5
Coordination Complexes in Nature and Technology
Chlorophyll, the green pigment in plants, is a complex that contains magnesium (Figure 19.25). This is an
example of a main group element in a coordination complex. Plants appear green because chlorophyll absorbs
red and purple light; the reflected light consequently appears green. The energy resulting from the absorption
of light is used in photosynthesis.
FIGURE19.25 (a) Chlorophyll comes in several different forms, which all have the same basic structure around the
magnesium center. (b) Copper phthalocyanine blue, a square planar copper complex, is present in some blue dyes.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Transition Metal Catalysts
One of the most important applications of transition metals is as industrial catalysts. As you recall from the
chapter on kinetics, a catalyst increases the rate of reaction by lowering the activation energy and is
regenerated in the catalytic cycle. Over 90% of all manufactured products are made with the aid of one or
more catalysts. The ability to bind ligands and change oxidation states makes transition metal catalysts
well suited for catalytic applications. Vanadium oxide is used to produce 230,000,000 tons of sulfuric acid
worldwide each year, which in turn is used to make everything from fertilizers to cans for food. Plastics are
made with the aid of transition metal catalysts, along with detergents, fertilizers, paints, and more (see
Figure 19.26). Very complicated pharmaceuticals are manufactured with catalysts that are selective,
reacting with one specific bond out of a large number of possibilities. Catalysts allow processes to be more
economical and more environmentally friendly. Developing new catalysts and better understanding of
existing systems are important areas of current research.
PAGE: 972
958 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.26 (a) Detergents, (b) paints, and (c) fertilizers are all made using transition metal catalysts. (credit
a: modification of work by “Mr. Brian”/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by Ewen Roberts; credit c:
modification of work by “osseous”/Flickr)
Portrait of a Chemist
Deanna D’Alessandro
Dr. Deanna D’Alessandro develops new metal-containing materials that demonstrate unique electronic,
optical, and magnetic properties. Her research combines the fields of fundamental inorganic and physical
chemistry with materials engineering. She is working on many different projects that rely on transition
metals. For example, one type of compound she is developing captures carbon dioxide waste from power
plants and catalytically converts it into useful products (seeFigure 19.27).
FIGURE19.27 Catalytic converters change carbon dioxide emissions from power plants into useful products,
and, like the one shown here, are also found in cars.
Another project involves the development of porous, sponge-like materials that are “photoactive.” The
absorption of light causes the pores of the sponge to change size, allowing gas diffusion to be controlled.
This has many potential useful applications, from powering cars with hydrogen fuel cells to making better
electronics components. Although not a complex, self-darkening sunglasses are an example of a
photoactive substance.
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16DeannaD)to learn more about this research and listen to Dr.
D’Alessandro (shown inFigure 19.28) describe what it is like being a research chemist.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 973
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 959
FIGURE19.28 Dr. Deanna D’Alessandro is a functional materials researcher. Her work combines the inorganic
and physical chemistry fields with engineering, working with transition metals to create new systems to power
cars and convert energy (credit: image courtesy of Deanna D'Alessandro).
Many other coordination complexes are also brightly colored. The square planar copper(II) complex
phthalocyanine blue (fromFigure 19.25) is one of many complexes used as pigments or dyes. This complex is
used in blue ink, blue jeans, and certain blue paints.
The structure of heme (Figure 19.29), the iron-containing complex in hemoglobin, is very similar to that in
chlorophyll. In hemoglobin, the red heme complex is bonded to a large protein molecule (globin) by the
attachment of the protein to the heme ligand. Oxygen molecules are transported by hemoglobin in the blood by
being bound to the iron center. When the hemoglobin loses its oxygen, the color changes to a bluish red.
Hemoglobin will only transport oxygen if the iron is Fe2+; oxidation of the iron to Fe3+prevents oxygen
transport.
PAGE: 974
960 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.29 Hemoglobin contains four protein subunits, each of which has an iron center attached to a heme
ligand (shown in red), which is coordinated to a globin protein. Each subunit is shown in a different color.
Complexing agents often are used for water softening because they tie up such ions as Ca2+, Mg2+, and Fe2+,
which make water hard. Many metal ions are also undesirable in food products because these ions can
catalyze reactions that change the color of food. Coordination complexes are useful as preservatives. For
example, the ligand EDTA, (HO CCH ) NCH CH N(CH CO H) , coordinates to metal ions through six donor
2 22 2 2 2 2 2
atoms and prevents the metals from reacting (Figure 19.30). This ligand also is used to sequester metal ions in
paper production, textiles, and detergents, and has pharmaceutical uses.
FIGURE19.30 The ligand EDTA binds tightly to a variety of metal ions by forming hexadentate complexes.
Complexing agents that tie up metal ions are also used as drugs. British Anti-Lewisite (BAL),
HSCH CH(SH)CH OH, is a drug developed during World War I as an antidote for the arsenic-based war gas
2 2
Lewisite. BAL is now used to treat poisoning by heavy metals, such as arsenic, mercury, thallium, and
chromium. The drug is a ligand and functions by making a water-soluble chelate of the metal; the kidneys
eliminate this metal chelate (Figure 19.31). Another polydentate ligand, enterobactin, which is isolated from
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 975
19.2 • Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals 961
certain bacteria, is used to form complexes of iron and thereby to control the severe iron buildup found in
patients suffering from blood diseases such as Cooley’s anemia, who require frequent transfusions. As the
transfused blood breaks down, the usual metabolic processes that remove iron are overloaded, and excess iron
can build up to fatal levels. Enterobactin forms a water-soluble complex with excess iron, and the body can
safely eliminate this complex.
FIGURE19.31 Coordination complexes are used as drugs. (a) British Anti-Lewisite is used to treat heavy metal
poisoning by coordinating metals (M), and enterobactin (b) allows excess iron in the blood to be removed.
EXAMPLE 19.6
Chelation Therapy
Ligands like BAL and enterobactin are important in medical treatments for heavy metal poisoning. However,
chelation therapies can disrupt the normal concentration of ions in the body, leading to serious side effects, so
researchers are searching for new chelation drugs. One drug that has been developed is dimercaptosuccinic
acid (DMSA), shown inFigure 19.32. Identify which atoms in this molecule could act as donor atoms.
FIGURE19.32 Dimercaptosuccinic acid is used to treat heavy metal poisoning.
Solution
All of the oxygen and sulfur atoms have lone pairs of electrons that can be used to coordinate to a metal center,
so there are six possible donor atoms. Geometrically, only two of these atoms can be coordinated to a metal at
once. The most common binding mode involves the coordination of one sulfur atom and one oxygen atom,
forming a five-member ring with the metal.
Check Your Learning
Some alternative medicine practitioners recommend chelation treatments for ailments that are not clearly
related to heavy metals, such as cancer and autism, although the practice is discouraged by many scientific
1
organizations. Identify at least two biologically important metals that could be disrupted by chelation therapy.
1 National Council against Health Fraud,NCAHF Policy Statement on Chelation Therapy, (Peabody, MA, 2002).
PAGE: 976
962 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
Answer:
Ca, Fe, Zn, and Cu
Ligands are also used in the electroplating industry. When metal ions are reduced to produce thin metal
coatings, metals can clump together to form clusters and nanoparticles. When metal coordination complexes
are used, the ligands keep the metal atoms isolated from each other. It has been found that many metals plate
out as a smoother, more uniform, better-looking, and more adherent surface when plated from a bath
containing the metal as a complex ion. Thus, complexes such as [Ag(CN) ]−and [Au(CN) ]−are used extensively
2 2
in the electroplating industry.
In 1965, scientists at Michigan State University discovered that there was a platinum complex that inhibited
cell division in certain microorganisms. Later work showed that the complex was
cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II), [Pt(NH ) (Cl) ], and that thetransisomer was not effective. The inhibition
32 2
of cell division indicated that this square planar compound could be an anticancer agent. In 1978, the US Food
and Drug Administration approved this compound, known as cisplatin, for use in the treatment of certain
forms of cancer. Since that time, many similar platinum compounds have been developed for the treatment of
cancer. In all cases, these are thecisisomers and never thetransisomers. The diammine (NH ) portion is
32
retained with other groups, replacing the dichloro [(Cl) ] portion. The newer drugs include carboplatin,
2
oxaliplatin, and satraplatin.
19.3 Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline the basic premise of crystal field theory (CFT)
• Identify molecular geometries associated with various d-orbital splitting patterns
• Predict electron configurations of split d orbitals for selected transition metal atoms or ions
• Explain spectral and magnetic properties in terms of CFT concepts
The behavior of coordination compounds cannot be adequately explained by the same theories used for main
group element chemistry. The observed geometries of coordination complexes are not consistent with
hybridized orbitals on the central metal overlapping with ligand orbitals, as would be predicted by valence
bond theory. The observed colors indicate that thedorbitals often occur at different energy levels rather than
all being degenerate, that is, of equal energy, as are the threeporbitals. To explain the stabilities, structures,
colors, and magnetic properties of transition metal complexes, a different bonding model has been developed.
Just as valence bond theory explains many aspects of bonding in main group chemistry, crystal field theory is
useful in understanding and predicting the behavior of transition metal complexes.
Crystal Field Theory
To explain the observed behavior of transition metal complexes (such as how colors arise), a model involving
electrostatic interactions between the electrons from the ligands and the electrons in the unhybridizedd
orbitals of the central metal atom has been developed. This electrostatic model iscrystal field theory(CFT). It
allows us to understand, interpret, and predict the colors, magnetic behavior, and some structures of
coordination compounds of transition metals.
CFT focuses on the nonbonding electrons on the central metal ion in coordination complexes not on the metal-
ligand bonds. Like valence bond theory, CFT tells only part of the story of the behavior of complexes. However,
it tells the part that valence bond theory does not. In its pure form, CFT ignores any covalent bonding between
ligands and metal ions. Both the ligand and the metal are treated as infinitesimally small point charges.
All electrons are negative, so the electrons donated from the ligands will repel the electrons of the central
metal. Let us consider the behavior of the electrons in the unhybridizeddorbitals in an octahedral complex.
The fivedorbitals consist of lobe-shaped regions and are arranged in space, as shown inFigure 19.33. In an
octahedral complex, the six ligands coordinate along the axes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 977
19.3 • Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds 963
FIGURE19.33 The directional characteristics of the fivedorbitals are shown here. The shaded portions indicate
the phase of the orbitals. The ligands (L) coordinate along the axes. For clarity, the ligands have been omitted from
the orbital so that the axis labels could be shown.
In an uncomplexed metal ion in the gas phase, the electrons are distributed among the fivedorbitals in accord
with Hund's rule because the orbitals all have the same energy. However, when ligands coordinate to a metal
ion, the energies of thedorbitals are no longer the same.
In octahedral complexes, the lobes in two of the fivedorbitals, the and orbitals, point toward the
ligands (Figure 19.33). These two orbitals are called thee orbitals(the symbol actually refers to the symmetry
g
of the orbitals, but we will use it as a convenient name for these two orbitals in an octahedral complex). The
other three orbitals, thed ,d , andd orbitals, have lobes that point between the ligands and are called the
xy xz yz
t orbitals(again, the symbol really refers to the symmetry of the orbitals). As six ligands approach the metal
2g
ion along the axes of the octahedron, their point charges repel the electrons in thedorbitals of the metal ion.
However, the repulsions between the electrons in thee orbitals (the and orbitals) and the ligands
g
are greater than the repulsions between the electrons in thet orbitals (thed ,d , andd orbitals) and the
2g zy xz yz
ligands. This is because the lobes of thee orbitals point directly at the ligands, whereas the lobes of thet
g 2g
orbitals point between them. Thus, electrons in thee orbitals of the metal ion in an octahedral complex have
g
higher potential energies than those of electrons in thet orbitals. The difference in energy may be
2g
represented as shown inFigure 19.34.
FIGURE19.34 In octahedral complexes, thee orbitals are destabilized (higher in energy) compared to thet
g 2g
orbitals because the ligands interact more strongly with thedorbitals at which they are pointed directly.
The difference in energy between thee and thet orbitals is called thecrystal field splittingand is
g 2g
symbolized byΔ , where oct stands for octahedral.
oct
The magnitude of Δ depends on many factors, including the nature of the six ligands located around the
oct
central metal ion, the charge on the metal, and whether the metal is using 3d, 4d, or 5dorbitals. Different
ligands produce different crystal field splittings. The increasing crystal field splitting produced by ligands is
expressed in thespectrochemical series, a short version of which is given here:
PAGE: 978
964 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
In this series, ligands on the left cause small crystal field splittings and areweak-field ligands, whereas those
on the right cause larger splittings and arestrong-field ligands. Thus, the Δ value for an octahedral complex
oct
with iodide ligands (I−) is much smaller than the Δ value for the same metal with cyanide ligands (CN−).
oct
Electrons in thedorbitals follow the aufbau (“filling up”) principle, which says that the orbitals will be filled to
give the lowest total energy, just as in main group chemistry. When two electrons occupy the same orbital, the
like charges repel each other. The energy needed to pair up two electrons in a single orbital is called the
pairing energy (P). Electrons will always singly occupy each orbital in a degenerate set before pairing. P is
similar in magnitude to Δ . When electrons fill thedorbitals, the relative magnitudes of Δ and P determine
oct oct
which orbitals will be occupied.
In [Fe(CN) ]4−, the strong field of six cyanide ligands produces a large Δ . Under these conditions, the
6 oct
electrons require less energy to pair than they require to be excited to thee orbitals (Δ > P). The six 3d
g oct
electrons of the Fe2+ion pair in the threet orbitals (Figure 19.35). Complexes in which the electrons are
2g
paired because of the large crystal field splitting are calledlow-spin complexesbecause the number of
unpaired electrons (spins) is minimized.
FIGURE19.35 Iron(II) complexes have six electrons in the 5dorbitals. In the absence of a crystal field, the
orbitals are degenerate. For coordination complexes with strong-field ligands such as [Fe(CN) ]4−, Δ is greater
6 oct
than P, and the electrons pair in the lower energyt orbitals before occupying theegorbitals. With weak-field
2g
ligands such as H O, the ligand field splitting is less than the pairing energy, Δ less than P, so the electrons occupy
2 oct
alldorbitals singly before any pairing occurs.
In [Fe(H O) ]2+, on the other hand, the weak field of the water molecules produces only a small crystal field
2 6
splitting (Δ < P). Because it requires less energy for the electrons to occupy thee orbitals than to pair
oct g
together, there will be an electron in each of the five 3dorbitals before pairing occurs. For the sixdelectrons on
the iron(II) center in [Fe(H O) ]2+, there will be one pair of electrons and four unpaired electrons (Figure
2 6
19.35). Complexes such as the [Fe(H O) ]2+ion, in which the electrons are unpaired because the crystal field
2 6
splitting is not large enough to cause them to pair, are calledhigh-spin complexesbecause the number of
unpaired electrons (spins) is maximized.
A similar line of reasoning shows why the [Fe(CN) ]3−ion is a low-spin complex with only one unpaired
6
electron, whereas both the [Fe(H O) ]3+and [FeF ]3−ions are high-spin complexes with five unpaired electrons.
2 6 6
EXAMPLE 19.7
High- and Low-Spin Complexes
Predict the number of unpaired electrons.
(a) K [CrI ]
3 6
(b) [Cu(en) (H O) ]Cl
2 2 2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 979
19.3 • Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds 965
(c) Na [Co(NO ) ]
3 26
Solution
The complexes are octahedral.
(a) Cr3+has ad3configuration. These electrons will all be unpaired.
(b) Cu2+isd9, so there will be one unpaired electron.
(c) Co3+hasd6valence electrons, so the crystal field splitting will determine how many are paired. Nitrite is a
strong-field ligand, so the complex will be low spin. Six electrons will go in thet orbitals, leaving 0 unpaired.
2g
Check Your Learning
The size of the crystal field splitting only influences the arrangement of electrons when there is a choice
between pairing electrons and filling the higher-energy orbitals. For whichd-electron configurations will there
be a difference between high- and low-spin configurations in octahedral complexes?
Answer:
d4,d5,d6, andd7
EXAMPLE 19.8
CFT for Other Geometries
CFT is applicable to molecules in geometries other than octahedral. In octahedral complexes, remember that
the lobes of thee set point directly at the ligands. For tetrahedral complexes, thedorbitals remain in place,
g
but now we have only four ligands located between the axes (Figure 19.36). None of the orbitals points directly
at the tetrahedral ligands. However, thee set (along the Cartesian axes) overlaps with the ligands less than
g
does thet set. By analogy with the octahedral case, predict the energy diagram for thedorbitals in a
2g
tetrahedral crystal field. To avoid confusion, the octahedrale set becomes a tetrahedraleset, and the
g
octahedralt set becomes at set.
2g 2
FIGURE19.36 This diagram shows the orientation of the tetrahedral ligands with respect to the axis system for the
orbitals.
Solution
Since CFT is based on electrostatic repulsion, the orbitals closer to the ligands will be destabilized and raised
in energy relative to the other set of orbitals. The splitting is less than for octahedral complexes because the
overlap is less, so Δ is usually small
tet
PAGE: 980
966 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
Check Your Learning
Explain how many unpaired electrons a tetrahedrald4ion will have.
Answer:
4; because Δ is small, all tetrahedral complexes are high spin and the electrons go into thet orbitals before
tet 2
pairing
The other common geometry is square planar. It is possible to consider a square planar geometry as an
octahedral structure with a pair oftransligands removed. The removed ligands are assumed to be on the
z-axis. This changes the distribution of thedorbitals, as orbitals on or near thez-axis become more stable, and
those on or near thex-ory-axes become less stable. This results in the octahedralt and thee sets splitting
2g g
and gives a more complicated pattern, as depicted below:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 981
19.3 • Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds 967
Magnetic Moments of Molecules and Ions
Experimental evidence of magnetic measurements supports the theory of high- and low-spin complexes.
Remember that molecules such as O that contain unpaired electrons are paramagnetic. Paramagnetic
2
substances are attracted to magnetic fields. Many transition metal complexes have unpaired electrons and
hence are paramagnetic. Molecules such as N and ions such as Na+and [Fe(CN) ]4−that contain no unpaired
2 6
electrons are diamagnetic. Diamagnetic substances have a slight tendency to be repelled by magnetic fields.
When an electron in an atom or ion is unpaired, the magnetic moment due to its spin makes the entire atom or
ion paramagnetic. The size of the magnetic moment of a system containing unpaired electrons is related
directly to the number of such electrons: the greater the number of unpaired electrons, the larger the magnetic
moment. Therefore, the observed magnetic moment is used to determine the number of unpaired electrons
present. The measured magnetic moment of low-spind6[Fe(CN) ]4−confirms that iron is diamagnetic,
6
PAGE: 982
968 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
whereas high-spind6[Fe(H O) ]2+has four unpaired electrons with a magnetic moment that confirms this
2 6
arrangement.
Colors of Transition Metal Complexes
When atoms or molecules absorb light at the proper frequency, their electrons are excited to higher-energy
orbitals. For many main group atoms and molecules, the absorbed photons are in the ultraviolet range of the
electromagnetic spectrum, which cannot be detected by the human eye. For coordination compounds, the
energy difference between thedorbitals often allows photons in the visible range to be absorbed.
The human eye perceives a mixture of all the colors, in the proportions present in sunlight, as white light.
Complementary colors, those located across from each other on a color wheel, are also used in color vision.
The eye perceives a mixture of two complementary colors, in the proper proportions, as white light. Likewise,
when a color is missing from white light, the eye sees its complement. For example, when red photons are
absorbed from white light, the eyes see the color green. When violet photons are removed from white light, the
eyes see lemon yellow. The blue color of the [Cu(NH ) ]2+ion results because this ion absorbs orange and red
34
light, leaving the complementary colors of blue and green (Figure 19.37).
FIGURE19.37 (a) An object is black if it absorbs all colors of light. If it reflects all colors of light, it is white. An
object has a color if it absorbs all colors except one, such as this yellow strip. The strip also appears yellow if it
absorbs the complementary color from white light (in this case, indigo). (b) Complementary colors are located
directly across from one another on the color wheel. (c) A solution of [Cu(NH ) ]2+ions absorbs red and orange light,
3 4
so the transmitted light appears as the complementary color, blue.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 983
19.3 • Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds 969
EXAMPLE 19.9
Colors of Complexes
The octahedral complex [Ti(H O) ]3+has a singledelectron. To excite this electron from the ground statet
2 6 2g
orbital to thee orbital, this complex absorbs light from 450 to 600 nm. The maximum absorbance
g
corresponds to Δ and occurs at 499 nm. Calculate the value of Δ in Joules and predict what color the
oct oct
solution will appear.
Solution
Using Planck's equation (refer to the section on electromagnetic energy), we calculate:
Because the complex absorbs 600 nm (orange) through 450 (blue), the indigo, violet, and red wavelengths will
be transmitted, and the complex will appear purple.
Check Your Learning
A complex that appears green, absorbs photons of what wavelengths?
Answer:
red, 620–800 nm
Small changes in the relative energies of the orbitals that electrons are transitioning between can lead to
drastic shifts in the color of light absorbed. Therefore, the colors of coordination compounds depend on many
factors. As shown inFigure 19.38, different aqueous metal ions can have different colors. In addition, different
oxidation states of one metal can produce different colors, as shown for the vanadium complexes in the link
below.
FIGURE19.38 The partially filleddorbitals of the stable ions Cr3+(aq), Fe3+(aq), and Co2+(aq) (left, center and
right, respectively) give rise to various colors. (credit: Sahar Atwa)
The specific ligands coordinated to the metal center also influence the color of coordination complexes. For
example, the iron(II) complex [Fe(H O) ]SO appears blue-green because the high-spin complex absorbs
2 6 4
photons in the red wavelengths (Figure 19.39). In contrast, the low-spin iron(II) complex K [Fe(CN) ] appears
4 6
pale yellow because it absorbs higher-energy violet photons.
PAGE: 984
970 19 • Transition Metals and Coordination Chemistry
FIGURE19.39 Both (a) hexaaquairon(II) sulfate and (b) potassium hexacyanoferrate(II) containd6iron(II)
octahedral metal centers, but they absorb photons in different ranges of the visible spectrum.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch thisvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16vanadium)of the reduction of vanadium complexes to observe the
colorful effect of changing oxidation states.
In general, strong-field ligands cause a large split in the energies ofdorbitals of the central metal atom (large
Δ ). Transition metal coordination compounds with these ligands are yellow, orange, or red because they
oct
absorb higher-energy violet or blue light. On the other hand, coordination compounds of transition metals with
weak-field ligands are often blue-green, blue, or indigo because they absorb lower-energy yellow, orange, or
red light.
A coordination compound of the Cu+ion has ad10configuration, and all thee orbitals are filled. To excite an
g
electron to a higher level, such as the 4porbital, photons of very high energy are necessary. This energy
corresponds to very short wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. No visible light is absorbed, so
the eye sees no change, and the compound appears white or colorless. A solution containing [Cu(CN) ]−, for
2
example, is colorless. On the other hand, octahedral Cu2+complexes have a vacancy in thee orbitals, and
g
electrons can be excited to this level. The wavelength (energy) of the light absorbed corresponds to the visible
part of the spectrum, and Cu2+complexes are almost always colored—blue, blue-green violet, or yellow (Figure
19.40). Although CFT successfully describes many properties of coordination complexes, molecular orbital
explanations (beyond the introductory scope provided here) are required to understand fully the behavior of
coordination complexes.
FIGURE19.40 (a) Copper(I) complexes withd10configurations such as CuI tend to be colorless, whereas (b)d9
copper(II) complexes such as Cu(NO ) ·5H O are brightly colored.
3 2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 985
19 • Key Terms 971
Key Terms
actinide series (also, actinoid series) actinium and the periodic table
the elements in the second row or thef-block, first transition series transition elements in the
atomic numbers 89–103 fourth period of the periodic table (first row of the
bidentate ligand ligand that coordinates to one d-block), atomic numbers 21–29
central metal through coordinate bonds from two fourth transition series transition elements in the
different atoms seventh period of the periodic table (fourth row of
central metal ion or atom to which one or more thed-block), atomic numbers 89 and 104–111
ligands is attached through coordinate covalent geometric isomers isomers that differ in the way
bonds in which atoms are oriented in space relative to
chelate complex formed from a polydentate ligand each other, leading to different physical and
attached to a central metal chemical properties
chelating ligand ligand that attaches to a central high-spin complex complex in which the electrons
metal ion by bonds from two or more donor maximize the total electron spin by singly
atoms populating all of the orbitals before pairing two
cisconfiguration configuration of a geometrical electrons into the lower-energy orbitals
isomer in which two similar groups are on the hydrometallurgy process in which a metal is
same side of an imaginary reference line on the separated from a mixture by first converting it
molecule into soluble ions, extracting the ions, and then
coordination compound stable compound in reducing the ions to precipitate the pure metal
which the central metal atom or ion acts as a ionization isomer (or coordination isomer) isomer
Lewis acid and accepts one or more pairs of in which an anionic ligand is replaced by the
electrons counter ion in the inner coordination sphere
coordination compound substance consisting of lanthanide series (also, lanthanoid series)
atoms, molecules, or ions attached to a central lanthanum and the elements in the first row or
atom through Lewis acid-base interactions thef-block, atomic numbers 57–71
coordination number number of coordinate ligand ion or neutral molecule attached to the
covalent bonds to the central metal atom in a central metal ion in a coordination compound
complex or the number of closest contacts to an linkage isomer coordination compound that
atom in a crystalline form possesses a ligand that can bind to the transition
coordination sphere central metal atom or ion metal in two different ways (CN−vs. NC−)
plus the attached ligands of a complex low-spin complex complex in which the electrons
crystal field splitting (Δ ) difference in energy minimize the total electron spin by pairing in the
oct
between thet ande sets ortandesets of lower-energy orbitals before populating the
2g g
orbitals higher-energy orbitals
crystal field theory model that explains the monodentate ligand that attaches to a central
energies of the orbitals in transition metals in metal through just one coordinate covalent bond
terms of electrostatic interactions with the optical isomer (also, enantiomer) molecule that is
ligands but does not include metal ligand a nonsuperimposable mirror image with identical
bonding chemical and physical properties, except when it
d-block element one of the elements in groups reacts with other optical isomers
3–11 with valence electrons indorbitals pairing energy (P) energy required to place two
donor atom atom in a ligand with a lone pair of electrons with opposite spins into a single orbital
electrons that forms a coordinate covalent bond platinum metals group of six transition metals
to a central metal consisting of ruthenium, osmium, rhodium,
e orbitals set of twodorbitals that are oriented on iridium, palladium, and platinum that tend to
g
the Cartesian axes for coordination complexes; in occur in the same minerals and demonstrate
octahedral complexes, they are higher in energy similar chemical properties
than thet orbitals polydentate ligand ligand that is attached to a
2g
f-block element (also, inner transition element) central metal ion by bonds from two or more
one of the elements with atomic numbers 58–71 donor atoms, named with prefixes specifying how
or 90–103 that have valence electrons inf many donors are present (e.g., hexadentate = six
orbitals; they are frequently shown offset below coordinate bonds formed)
PAGE: 986
972 19 • Summary
rare earth element collection of 17 elements crystal field splittings
including the lanthanides, scandium, and yttrium superconductor material that conducts electricity
that often occur together and have similar with no resistance
chemical properties, making separation difficult t orbitals set of threedorbitals aligned between
2g
second transition series transition elements in the Cartesian axes for coordination complexes; in
the fifth period of the periodic table (second row octahedral complexes, they are lowered in energy
of thed-block), atomic numbers 39–47 compared to thee orbitals according to CFT
g
smelting process of extracting a pure metal from a third transition series transition elements in the
molten ore sixth period of the periodic table (third row of the
spectrochemical series ranking of ligands d-block), atomic numbers 57 and 72–79
according to the magnitude of the crystal field transconfiguration configuration of a geometrical
splitting they induce isomer in which two similar groups are on
steel material made from iron by removing opposite sides of an imaginary reference line on
impurities in the iron and adding substances that the molecule
produce alloys with properties suitable for weak-field ligand ligand that causes small crystal
specific uses field splittings
strong-field ligand ligand that causes larger
Summary
19.1Occurrence, Preparation, and which a central metal atom or ion is bonded to one
Properties of Transition Metals and Their or more ligands by coordinate covalent bonds.
Compounds Ligands with more than one donor atom are called
polydentate ligands and form chelates. The common
The transition metals are elements with partially
geometries found in complexes are tetrahedral and
filleddorbitals, located in thed-block of the periodic
square planar (both with a coordination number of
table. The reactivity of the transition elements varies
four) and octahedral (with a coordination number of
widely from very active metals such as scandium
six).Cisandtransconfigurations are possible in
and iron to almost inert elements, such as the
some octahedral and square planar complexes. In
platinum metals. The type of chemistry used in the
addition to these geometrical isomers, optical
isolation of the elements from their ores depends
isomers (molecules or ions that are mirror images
upon the concentration of the element in its ore and
but not superimposable) are possible in certain
the difficulty of reducing ions of the elements to the
octahedral complexes. Coordination complexes have
metals. Metals that are more active are more difficult
a wide variety of uses including oxygen transport in
to reduce.
blood, water purification, and pharmaceutical use.
Transition metals exhibit chemical behavior typical
19.3Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties
of metals. For example, they oxidize in air upon
of Coordination Compounds
heating and react with elemental halogens to form
halides. Those elements that lie above hydrogen in Crystal field theory treats interactions between the
the activity series react with acids, producing salts electrons on the metal and the ligands as a simple
and hydrogen gas. Oxides, hydroxides, and electrostatic effect. The presence of the ligands near
carbonates of transition metal compounds in low the metal ion changes the energies of the metald
oxidation states are basic. Halides and other salts orbitals relative to their energies in the free ion. Both
are generally stable in water, although oxygen must the color and the magnetic properties of a complex
be excluded in some cases. Most transition metals can be attributed to this crystal field splitting. The
form a variety of stable oxidation states, allowing magnitude of the splitting (Δ oct ) depends on the
them to demonstrate a wide range of chemical nature of the ligands bonded to the metal. Strong-
reactivity. field ligands produce large splitting and favor low-
spin complexes, in which thet orbitals are
2g
19.2Coordination Chemistry of Transition
completely filled before any electrons occupy thee
g
Metals
orbitals. Weak-field ligands favor formation of high-
The transition elements and main group elements spin complexes. Thet 2g and thee g orbitals are singly
can form coordination compounds, or complexes, in occupied before any are doubly occupied.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 987
19 • Exercises 973
Exercises
19.1Occurrence, Preparation, and Properties of Transition Metals and Their Compounds
1. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements:
(a) Sc
(b) Ti
(c) Cr
(d) Fe
(e) Ru
2. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements and its ions:
(a) Ti
(b) Ti2+
(c) Ti3+
(d) Ti4+
3. Write the electron configurations for each of the following elements and its 3+ ions:
(a) La
(b) Sm
(c) Lu
4. Why are the lanthanoid elements not found in nature in their elemental forms?
5. Which of the following elements is most likely to be used to prepare La by the reduction of La O : Al, C, or
2 3
Fe? Why?
6. Which of the following is the strongest oxidizing agent: or
7. Which of the following elements is most likely to form an oxide with the formula MO : Zr, Nb, or Mo?
3
8. The following reactions all occur in a blast furnace. Which of these are redox reactions?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
9. Why is the formation of slag useful during the smelting of iron?
10. Would you expect an aqueous manganese(VII) oxide solution to have a pH greater or less than 7.0? Justify
your answer.
11. Iron(II) can be oxidized to iron(III) by dichromate ion, which is reduced to chromium(III) in acid solution.
A 2.5000-g sample of iron ore is dissolved and the iron converted into iron(II). Exactly 19.17 mL of 0.0100
MNa Cr O is required in the titration. What percentage of the ore sample was iron?
2 2 7
12. How many cubic feet of air at a pressure of 760 torr and 0 °C is required per ton of Fe O to convert that
2 3
Fe O into iron in a blast furnace? For this exercise, assume air is 19% oxygen by volume.
2 3
13. Find the potentials of the following electrochemical cell:
Cd | Cd2+,M= 0.10 ‖ Ni2+,M= 0.50 | Ni
14. A 2.5624-g sample of a pure solid alkali metal chloride is dissolved in water and treated with excess silver
nitrate. The resulting precipitate, filtered and dried, weighs 3.03707 g. What was the percent by mass of
chloride ion in the original compound? What is the identity of the salt?
15. The standard reduction potential for the reaction is
about 1.8 V. The reduction potential for the reaction is
+0.1 V. Calculate the cell potentials to show whether the complex ions, [Co(H O) ]2+and/or [Co(NH ) ]2+,
2 6 36
can be oxidized to the corresponding cobalt(III) complex by oxygen.
PAGE: 988
974 19 • Exercises
16. Predict the products of each of the following reactions. (Note: In addition to using the information in this
chapter, also use the knowledge you have accumulated at this stage of your study, including information
on the prediction of reaction products.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
17. Predict the products of each of the following reactions. (Note: In addition to using the information in this
chapter, also use the knowledge you have accumulated at this stage of your study, including information
on the prediction of reaction products.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
18. Describe the electrolytic process for refining copper.
19. Predict the products of the following reactions and balance the equations.
(a) Zn is added to a solution of Cr (SO ) in acid.
2 43
(b) FeCl is added to a solution containing an excess of in hydrochloric acid.
2
(c) Cr2+is added to in acid solution.
(d) Mn is heated with CrO .
3
(e) CrO is added to 2HNO in water.
3
(f) FeCl is added to an aqueous solution of NaOH.
3
20. What is the gas produced when iron(II) sulfide is treated with a nonoxidizing acid?
21. Predict the products of each of the following reactions and then balance the chemical equations.
(a) Fe is heated in an atmosphere of steam.
(b) NaOH is added to a solution of Fe(NO ) .
33
(c) FeSO is added to an acidic solution of KMnO .
4 4
(d) Fe is added to a dilute solution of H SO .
2 4
(e) A solution of Fe(NO ) and HNO is allowed to stand in air.
32 3
(f) FeCO is added to a solution of HClO .
3 4
(g) Fe is heated in air.
22. Balance the following equations by oxidation-reduction methods; note thatthreeelements change
oxidation state.
23. Dilute sodium cyanide solution is slowly dripped into a slowly stirred silver nitrate solution. A white
precipitate forms temporarily but dissolves as the addition of sodium cyanide continues. Use chemical
equations to explain this observation. Silver cyanide is similar to silver chloride in its solubility.
24. Predict which will be more stable, [CrO ]2−or [WO ]2−, and explain.
4 4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 989
19 • Exercises 975
25. Give the oxidation state of the metal for each of the following oxides of the first transition series. (Hint:
Oxides of formula M O are examples ofmixed valence compoundsin which the metal ion is present in
3 4
more than one oxidation state. It is possible to write these compound formulas in the equivalent format
MO·M O , to permit estimation of the metal’s two oxidation states.)
2 3
(a) Sc O
2 3
(b) TiO
2
(c) V O
2 5
(d) CrO
3
(e) MnO
2
(f) Fe O
3 4
(g) Co O
3 4
(h) NiO
(i) Cu O
2
19.2Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals
26. Indicate the coordination number for the central metal atom in each of the following coordination
compounds:
(a) [Pt(H O) Br ]
2 2 2
(b) [Pt(NH )(py)(Cl)(Br)] (py = pyridine, C H N)
3 5 5
(c) [Zn(NH ) Cl ]
32 2
(d) [Zn(NH )(py)(Cl)(Br)]
3
(e) [Ni(H O) Cl ]
2 4 2
(f) [Fe(en) (CN) ]+(en = ethylenediamine, C H N )
2 2 2 8 2
27. Give the coordination numbers and write the formulas for each of the following, including all isomers
where appropriate:
(a) tetrahydroxozincate(II) ion (tetrahedral)
(b) hexacyanopalladate(IV) ion
(c) dichloroaurate(I) ion (note thataurumis Latin for "gold")
(d) diamminedichloroplatinum(II)
(e) potassium diamminetetrachlorochromate(III)
(f) hexaamminecobalt(III) hexacyanochromate(III)
(g) dibromobis(ethylenediamine) cobalt(III) nitrate
28. Give the coordination number for each metal ion in the following compounds:
(a) [Co(CO ) ]3−(note that CO 2−is bidentate in this complex)
33 3
(b) [Cu(NH ) ]2+
34
(c) [Co(NH ) Br ] (SO )
34 22 43
(d) [Pt(NH ) ][PtCl ]
34 4
(e) [Cr(en) ](NO )
3 33
(f) [Pd(NH ) Br ] (square planar)
32 2
(g) K [Cu(Cl) ]
3 5
(h) [Zn(NH ) Cl ]
32 2
29. Sketch the structures of the following complexes. Indicate anycis,trans, and optical isomers.
(a) [Pt(H O) Br ] (square planar)
2 2 2
(b) [Pt(NH )(py)(Cl)(Br)] (square planar, py = pyridine, C H N)
3 5 5
(c) [Zn(NH ) Cl]+(tetrahedral)
33
(d) [Pt(NH ) Cl]+(square planar)
33
(e) [Ni(H O) Cl ]
2 4 2
(f) [Co(C O ) Cl ]3−(note that is the bidentate oxalate ion,
2 42 2
PAGE: 990
976 19 • Exercises
30. Draw diagrams for anycis,trans, and optical isomers that could exist for the following (en is
ethylenediamine):
(a) [Co(en) (NO )Cl]+
2 2
(b) [Co(en) Cl ]+
2 2
(c) [Pt(NH ) Cl ]
32 4
(d) [Cr(en) ]3+
3
(e) [Pt(NH ) Cl ]
32 2
31. Name each of the compounds or ions given inExercise 19.28, including the oxidation state of the metal.
32. Name each of the compounds or ions given inExercise 19.30.
33. Specify whether the following complexes have isomers.
(a) tetrahedral [Ni(CO) (Cl) ]
2 2
(b) trigonal bipyramidal [Mn(CO) NO]
4
(c) [Pt(en) Cl ]Cl
2 2 2
34. Predict whether the carbonate ligand will coordinate to a metal center as a monodentate,
bidentate, or tridentate ligand.
35. Draw the geometric, linkage, and ionization isomers for [CoCl CN][CN].
5
19.3Spectroscopic and Magnetic Properties of Coordination Compounds
36. Determine the number of unpaired electrons expected for [Fe(NO ) ]3−and for [FeF ]3−in terms of crystal
26 6
field theory.
37. Draw the crystal field diagrams for [Fe(NO ) ]4−and [FeF ]3−. State whether each complex is high spin or
26 6
low spin, paramagnetic or diamagnetic, and compare Δ to P for each complex.
oct
38. Give the oxidation state of the metal, number ofdelectrons, and the number of unpaired electrons
predicted for [Co(NH ) ]Cl .
36 3
39. The solid anhydrous solid CoCl is blue in color. Because it readily absorbs water from the air, it is used as
2
a humidity indicator to monitor if equipment (such as a cell phone) has been exposed to excessive levels of
moisture. Predict what product is formed by this reaction, and how many unpaired electrons this complex
will have.
40. Is it possible for a complex of a metal in the transition series to have six unpaired electrons? Explain.
41. How many unpaired electrons are present in each of the following?
(a) [CoF ]3−(high spin)
6
(b) [Mn(CN) ]3−(low spin)
6
(c) [Mn(CN) ]4−(low spin)
6
(d) [MnCl ]4−(high spin)
6
(e) [RhCl ]3−(low spin)
6
42. Explain how the diphosphate ion, [O P−O−PO ]4−, can function as a water softener that prevents the
3 3
precipitation of Fe2+as an insoluble iron salt.
43. For complexes of the same metal ion with no change in oxidation number, the stability increases as the
number of electrons in thet orbitals increases. Which complex in each of the following pairs of
2g
complexes is more stable?
(a) [Fe(H O) ]2+or [Fe(CN) ]4−
2 6 6
(b) [Co(NH ) ]3+or [CoF ]3−
36 6
(c) [Mn(CN) ]4−or [MnCl ]4−
6 6
44. Trimethylphosphine, P(CH ) , can act as a ligand by donating the lone pair of electrons on the phosphorus
33
atom. If trimethylphosphine is added to a solution of nickel(II) chloride in acetone, a blue compound that
has a molecular mass of approximately 270 g and contains 21.5% Ni, 26.0% Cl, and 52.5% P(CH ) can be
33
isolated. This blue compound does not have any isomeric forms. What are the geometry and molecular
formula of the blue compound?
45. Would you expect the complex [Co(en) ]Cl to have any unpaired electrons? Any isomers?
3 3
46. Would you expect the Mg [Cr(CN) ] to be diamagnetic or paramagnetic? Explain your reasoning.
3 62
47. Would you expect salts of the gold(I) ion, Au+, to be colored? Explain.
48. [CuCl ]2−is green. [Cu(H O) ]2+is blue. Which absorbs higher-energy photons? Which is predicted to have
4 2 6
a larger crystal field splitting?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 991
CHAPTER 20
Organic Chemistry
Figure20.1 All organic compounds contain carbon and most are formed by living things, although they are also
formed by geological and artificial processes. (credit left: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit left middle:
modification of work by Deb Tremper; credit right middle: modification of work by “annszyp”/Wikimedia Commons;
credit right: modification of work by George Shuklin)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
20.1Hydrocarbons
20.2Alcohols and Ethers
20.3Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters
20.4Amines and Amides
INTRODUCTION All living things on earth are formed mostly of carbon compounds. The prevalence of carbon
compounds in living things has led to the epithet “carbon-based” life. The truth is we know of no other kind of
life. Early chemists regarded substances isolated fromorganisms(plants and animals) as a different type of
matter that could not be synthesized artificially, and these substances were thus known asorganic
compounds. The widespread belief called vitalism held that organic compounds were formed by a vital force
present only in living organisms. The German chemist FriedrichWohlerwas one of the early chemists to refute
this aspect of vitalism, when, in 1828, he reported the synthesis of urea, a component of many body fluids,
from nonliving materials. Since then, it has been recognized that organic molecules obey the same natural
laws as inorganic substances, and the category of organic compounds has evolved to include both natural and
synthetic compounds that contain carbon. Some carbon-containing compounds arenotclassified as organic,
for example, carbonates and cyanides, and simple oxides, such as CO and CO . Although a single, precise
2
definition has yet to be identified by the chemistry community, most agree that a defining trait of organic
molecules is the presence of carbon as the principal element, bonded to hydrogen and other carbon atoms.
Today, organic compounds are key components of plastics, soaps, perfumes, sweeteners, fabrics,
pharmaceuticals, and many other substances that we use every day. The value to us of organic compounds
ensures that organic chemistry is an important discipline within the general field of chemistry. In this chapter,
we discuss why the element carbon gives rise to a vast number and variety of compounds, how those
compounds are classified, and the role of organic compounds in representative biological and industrial
settings.
PAGE: 992
978 20 • Organic Chemistry
20.1 Hydrocarbons
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the importance of hydrocarbons and the reason for their diversity
• Name saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons, and molecules derived from them
• Describe the reactions characteristic of saturated and unsaturated hydrocarbons
• Identify structural and geometric isomers of hydrocarbons
1
The largest database of organic compounds lists about 10 million substances, which include compounds
originating from living organisms and those synthesized by chemists. The number of potential organic
compounds has been estimated 2 at 1060—an astronomically high number. The existence of so many organic
molecules is a consequence of the ability of carbon atoms to form up to four strong bonds to other carbon
atoms, resulting in chains and rings of many different sizes, shapes, and complexities.
The simplestorganic compoundscontain only the elements carbon and hydrogen, and are called
hydrocarbons. Even though they are composed of only two types of atoms, there is a wide variety of
hydrocarbons because they may consist of varying lengths of chains, branched chains, and rings of carbon
atoms, or combinations of these structures. In addition, hydrocarbons may differ in the types of carbon-carbon
bonds present in their molecules. Many hydrocarbons are found in plants, animals, and their fossils; other
hydrocarbons have been prepared in the laboratory. We use hydrocarbons every day, mainly as fuels, such as
natural gas, acetylene, propane, butane, and the principal components of gasoline, diesel fuel, and heating oil.
The familiar plastics polyethylene, polypropylene, and polystyrene are also hydrocarbons. We can distinguish
several types of hydrocarbons by differences in the bonding between carbon atoms. This leads to differences
in geometries and in the hybridization of the carbon orbitals.
Alkanes
Alkanes, orsaturated hydrocarbons, contain only single covalent bonds between carbon atoms. Each of the
carbon atoms in an alkane hassp3hybrid orbitals and is bonded to four other atoms, each of which is either
carbon or hydrogen. The Lewis structures and models of methane, ethane, and pentane are illustrated in
Figure 20.2. Carbon chains are usually drawn as straight lines in Lewis structures, but one has to remember
that Lewis structures are not intended to indicate the geometry of molecules. Notice that the carbon atoms in
the structural models (the ball-and-stick and space-filling models) of the pentane molecule do not lie in a
straight line. Because of thesp3hybridization, the bond angles in carbon chains are close to 109.5°, giving
such chains in an alkane a zigzag shape.
The structures of alkanes and other organic molecules may also be represented in a less detailed manner by
condensed structural formulas (or simply,condensed formulas). Instead of the usual format for chemical
formulas in which each element symbol appears just once, a condensed formula is written to suggest the
bonding in the molecule. These formulas have the appearance of a Lewis structure from which most or all of
the bond symbols have been removed. Condensed structural formulas for ethane and pentane are shown at
the bottom ofFigure 20.2, and several additional examples are provided in the exercises at the end of this
chapter.
1 This is the Beilstein database, now available through the Reaxys site (www.elsevier.com/online-tools/reaxys).
2 Peplow, Mark. “Organic Synthesis: The Robo-Chemist,”Nature512 (2014): 20–2.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 993
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 979
FIGURE20.2 Pictured are the Lewis structures, ball-and-stick models, and space-filling models for molecules of
methane, ethane, and pentane.
A common method used by organic chemists to simplify the drawings of larger molecules is to use askeletal
structure(also called a line-angle structure). In this type of structure, carbon atoms are not symbolized with a
C, but represented by each end of a line or bend in a line. Hydrogen atoms are not drawn if they are attached to
a carbon. Other atoms besides carbon and hydrogen are represented by their elemental symbols.Figure 20.3
shows three different ways to draw the same structure.
FIGURE20.3 The same structure can be represented three different ways: an expanded formula, a condensed
formula, and a skeletal structure.
EXAMPLE 20.1
Drawing Skeletal Structures
Draw the skeletal structures for these two molecules:
PAGE: 994
980 20 • Organic Chemistry
Solution
Each carbon atom is converted into the end of a line or the place where lines intersect. All hydrogen atoms
attached to the carbon atoms are left out of the structure (although we still need to recognize they are there):
Check Your Learning
Draw the skeletal structures for these two molecules:
Answer:
EXAMPLE 20.2
Interpreting Skeletal Structures
Identify the chemical formula of the molecule represented here:
Solution
There are eight places where lines intersect or end, meaning that there are eight carbon atoms in the molecule.
Since we know that carbon atoms tend to make four bonds, each carbon atom will have the number of
hydrogen atoms that are required for four bonds. This compound contains 16 hydrogen atoms for a molecular
formula of C H .
8 16
Location of the hydrogen atoms:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 995
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 981
Check Your Learning
Identify the chemical formula of the molecule represented here:
Answer:
C H
9 20
All alkanes are composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms, and have similar bonds, structures, and formulas;
noncyclic alkanes all have a formula of C H . The number of carbon atoms present in an alkane has no
n 2n+2
limit. Greater numbers of atoms in the molecules will lead to stronger intermolecular attractions (dispersion
forces) and correspondingly different physical properties of the molecules. Properties such as melting point
and boiling point (Table 20.1) usually change smoothly and predictably as the number of carbon and hydrogen
atoms in the molecules change.
3
Properties of Some Alkanes
Molecular Melting Point Boiling Point Phase at Number of Structural
Alkane
Formula (°C) (°C) STP4 Isomers
methane CH –182.5 –161.5 gas 1
4
ethane C H –183.3 –88.6 gas 1
2 6
propane C H –187.7 –42.1 gas 1
3 8
butane C H –138.3 –0.5 gas 2
4 10
pentane C H –129.7 36.1 liquid 3
5 12
hexane C H –95.3 68.7 liquid 5
6 14
heptane C H –90.6 98.4 liquid 9
7 16
octane C H –56.8 125.7 liquid 18
8 18
nonane C H –53.6 150.8 liquid 35
9 20
decane C H –29.7 174.0 liquid 75
10 22
tetradecane C H 5.9 253.5 solid 1858
14 30
octadecane C H 28.2 316.1 solid 60,523
18 38
3 Physical properties for C4H10and heavier molecules are those of thenormal isomer,n-butane,n-pentane, etc.
PAGE: 996
982 20 • Organic Chemistry
Hydrocarbons with the same formula, including alkanes, can have different structures. For example, two
alkanes have the formula C H : They are calledn-butane and 2-methylpropane (or isobutane), and have the
4 10
following Lewis structures:
The compoundsn-butane and 2-methylpropane are structural isomers (the term constitutional isomers is also
commonly used). Constitutional isomers have the same molecular formula but different spatial arrangements
of the atoms in their molecules. Then-butane molecule contains anunbranched chain, meaning that no
carbon atom is bonded to more than two other carbon atoms. We use the termnormal, or the prefixn, to refer
to a chain of carbon atoms without branching. The compound 2–methylpropane has a branched chain (the
carbon atom in the center of the Lewis structure is bonded to three other carbon atoms)
Identifying isomers from Lewis structures is not as easy as it looks. Lewis structures that look different may
actually represent the same isomers. For example, the three structures inFigure 20.4all represent the same
molecule,n-butane, and hence are not different isomers. They are identical because each contains an
unbranched chain of four carbon atoms.
4 STP indicates a temperature of 0 °C and a pressure of 1 atm.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 997
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 983
FIGURE20.4 These three representations of the structure of n-butane are not isomers because they all contain
the same arrangement of atoms and bonds.
The Basics of Organic Nomenclature: Naming Alkanes
The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has devised a system of nomenclature that
begins with the names of the alkanes and can be adjusted from there to account for more complicated
structures. The nomenclature for alkanes is based on two rules:
1. To name an alkane, first identify the longest chain of carbon atoms in its structure. A two-carbon chain is
called ethane; a three-carbon chain, propane; and a four-carbon chain, butane. Longer chains are named
as follows: pentane (five-carbon chain), hexane (6), heptane (7), octane (8), nonane (9), and decane (10).
These prefixes can be seen in the names of the alkanes described inTable 20.1.
2. Add prefixes to the name of the longest chain to indicate the positions and names ofsubstituents.
Substituents are branches or functional groups that replace hydrogen atoms on a chain. The position of a
substituent or branch is identified by the number of the carbon atom it is bonded to in the chain. We
number the carbon atoms in the chain by counting from the end of the chain nearest the substituents.
Multiple substituents are named individually and placed in alphabetical order at the front of the name.
When more than one substituent is present, either on the same carbon atom or on different carbon atoms, the
substituents are listed alphabetically. Because the carbon atom numbering begins at the end closest to a
substituent, the longest chain of carbon atoms is numbered in such a way as to produce the lowest number for
the substituents. The ending-oreplaces-ideat the end of the name of an electronegative substituent (in ionic
compounds, the negatively charged ion ends with-idelike chloride; in organic compounds, such atoms are
treated as substituents and the-oending is used). The number of substituents of the same type is indicated by
the prefixesdi-(two),tri-(three),tetra-(four), and so on (for example,difluoro-indicates two fluoride
substituents).
PAGE: 998
984 20 • Organic Chemistry
EXAMPLE 20.3
Naming Halogen-substituted Alkanes
Name the molecule whose structure is shown here:
Solution
The four-carbon chain is numbered from the end with the chlorine atom. This puts the substituents on
positions 1 and 2 (numbering from the other end would put the substituents on positions 3 and 4). Four carbon
atoms means that the base name of this compound will be butane. The bromine at position 2 will be described
by adding 2-bromo-; this will come at the beginning of the name, since bromo- comes before chloro-
alphabetically. The chlorine at position 1 will be described by adding 1-chloro-, resulting in the name of the
molecule being 2-bromo-1-chlorobutane.
Check Your Learning
Name the following molecule:
Answer:
3,3-dibromo-2-iodopentane
We call a substituent that contains one less hydrogen than the corresponding alkane an alkyl group. The name
of analkyl groupis obtained by dropping the suffix-aneof the alkane name and adding-yl:
The open bonds in the methyl and ethyl groups indicate that these alkyl groups are bonded to another atom.
EXAMPLE 20.4
Naming Substituted Alkanes
Name the molecule whose structure is shown here:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 999
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 985
Solution
The longest carbon chain runs horizontally across the page and contains six carbon atoms (this makes the
base of the name hexane, but we will also need to incorporate the name of the branch). In this case, we want to
number from right to left (as shown by the blue numbers) so the branch is connected to carbon 3 (imagine the
numbers from left to right—this would put the branch on carbon 4, violating our rules). The branch attached to
position 3 of our chain contains two carbon atoms (numbered in red)—so we take our name for two carbons
eth-and attach-ylat the end to signify we are describing a branch. Putting all the pieces together, this
molecule is 3-ethylhexane.
Check Your Learning
Name the following molecule:
Answer:
4-propyloctane
Some hydrocarbons can form more than one type of alkyl group when the hydrogen atoms that would be
removed have different “environments” in the molecule. This diversity of possible alkyl groups can be
identified in the following way: The four hydrogen atoms in a methane molecule are equivalent; they all have
the same environment. They are equivalent because each is bonded to a carbon atom (the same carbon atom)
that is bonded to three hydrogen atoms. (It may be easier to see the equivalency in the ball and stick models in
Figure 20.2. Removal of any one of the four hydrogen atoms from methane forms a methyl group. Likewise, the
six hydrogen atoms in ethane are equivalent (Figure 20.2) and removing any one of these hydrogen atoms
produces an ethyl group. Each of the six hydrogen atoms is bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to two
other hydrogen atoms and a carbon atom. However, in both propane and 2–methylpropane, there are
hydrogen atoms in two different environments, distinguished by the adjacent atoms or groups of atoms:
PAGE: 1000
986 20 • Organic Chemistry
Each of the six equivalent hydrogen atoms of the first type in propane and each of the nine equivalent
hydrogen atoms of that type in 2-methylpropane (all shown in black) are bonded to a carbon atom that is
bonded to only one other carbon atom. The two purple hydrogen atoms in propane are of a second type. They
differ from the six hydrogen atoms of the first type in that they are bonded to a carbon atom bonded to two
other carbon atoms. The green hydrogen atom in 2-methylpropane differs from the other nine hydrogen atoms
in that molecule and from the purple hydrogen atoms in propane. The green hydrogen atom in
2-methylpropane is bonded to a carbon atom bonded to three other carbon atoms. Two different alkyl groups
can be formed from each of these molecules, depending on which hydrogen atom is removed. The names and
structures of these and several other alkyl groups are listed inFigure 20.5.
FIGURE20.5 This listing gives the names and formulas for various alkyl groups formed by the removal of hydrogen
atoms from different locations.
Note that alkyl groups do not exist as stable independent entities. They are always a part of some larger
molecule. The location of an alkyl group on a hydrocarbon chain is indicated in the same way as any other
substituent:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1001
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 987
Alkanes are relatively stable molecules, but heat or light will activate reactions that involve the breaking of C–H
or C–C single bonds. Combustion is one such reaction:
Alkanes burn in the presence of oxygen, a highly exothermic oxidation-reduction reaction that produces
carbon dioxide and water. As a consequence, alkanes are excellent fuels. For example, methane, CH , is the
4
principal component of natural gas. Butane, C H , used in camping stoves and lighters is an alkane. Gasoline
4 10
is a liquid mixture of continuous- and branched-chain alkanes, each containing from five to nine carbon
atoms, plus various additives to improve its performance as a fuel. Kerosene, diesel oil, and fuel oil are
primarily mixtures of alkanes with higher molecular masses. The main source of these liquid alkane fuels is
crude oil, a complex mixture that is separated by fractional distillation. Fractional distillation takes advantage
of differences in the boiling points of the components of the mixture (seeFigure 20.6). You may recall that
boiling point is a function of intermolecular interactions, which was discussed in the chapter on solutions and
colloids.
FIGURE20.6 In a column for the fractional distillation of crude oil, oil heated to about 425 °C in the furnace
vaporizes when it enters the base of the tower. The vapors rise through bubble caps in a series of trays in the tower.
As the vapors gradually cool, fractions of higher, then of lower, boiling points condense to liquids and are drawn off.
(credit left: modification of work by Luigi Chiesa)
In asubstitution reaction, another typical reaction of alkanes, one or more of the alkane’s hydrogen atoms is
replaced with a different atom or group of atoms. No carbon-carbon bonds are broken in these reactions, and
PAGE: 1002
988 20 • Organic Chemistry
the hybridization of the carbon atoms does not change. For example, the reaction between ethane and
molecular chlorine depicted here is a substitution reaction:
The C–Cl portion of the chloroethane molecule is an example of afunctional group, the part or moiety of a
molecule that imparts a specific chemical reactivity. The types of functional groups present in an organic
molecule are major determinants of its chemical properties and are used as a means of classifying organic
compounds as detailed in the remaining sections of this chapter.
LINK TO LEARNING
Want more practice naming alkanes? Watch this briefvideo tutorial(http://openstax.org/l/16alkanes)to review
the nomenclature process.
Alkenes
Organic compounds that contain one or more double or triple bonds between carbon atoms are described as
unsaturated. You have likely heard of unsaturated fats. These are complex organic molecules with long chains
of carbon atoms, which contain at least one double bond between carbon atoms. Unsaturated hydrocarbon
molecules that contain one or more double bonds are calledalkenes. Carbon atoms linked by a double bond
are bound together by two bonds, one σ bond and one π bond. Double and triple bonds give rise to a different
geometry around the carbon atom that participates in them, leading to important differences in molecular
shape and properties. The differing geometries are responsible for the different properties of unsaturated
versus saturated fats.
Ethene, C H , is the simplest alkene. Each carbon atom in ethene, commonly called ethylene, has a trigonal
2 4
planar structure. The second member of the series is propene (propylene) (Figure 20.7); the butene isomers
follow in the series. Four carbon atoms in the chain of butene allows for the formation of isomers based on the
position of the double bond, as well as a new form of isomerism.
FIGURE20.7 Expanded structures, ball-and-stick structures, and space-filling models for the alkenes ethene,
propene, and 1-butene are shown.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1003
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 989
Ethylene (the common industrial name for ethene) is a basic raw material in the production of polyethylene
and other important compounds. Over 135 million tons of ethylene were produced worldwide in 2010 for use
in the polymer, petrochemical, and plastic industries. Ethylene is produced industrially in a process called
cracking, in which the long hydrocarbon chains in a petroleum mixture are broken into smaller molecules.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Recycling Plastics
Polymers (from Greek wordspolymeaning “many” andmermeaning “parts”) are large molecules made up
of repeating units, referred to as monomers. Polymers can be natural (starch is a polymer of sugar residues
and proteins are polymers of amino acids) or synthetic [like polyethylene, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), and
polystyrene]. The variety of structures of polymers translates into a broad range of properties and uses that
make them integral parts of our everyday lives. Adding functional groups to the structure of a polymer can
result in significantly different properties (see the discussion about Kevlar later in this chapter).
An example of a polymerization reaction is shown inFigure 20.8. The monomer ethylene (C H ) is a gas at
2 4
room temperature, but when polymerized, using a transition metal catalyst, it is transformed into a solid
material made up of long chains of –CH – units called polyethylene. Polyethylene is a commodity plastic
2
used primarily for packaging (bags and films).
FIGURE20.8 The reaction for the polymerization of ethylene to polyethylene is shown.
Polyethylene is a member of one subset of synthetic polymers classified as plastics. Plastics are synthetic
organic solids that can be molded; they are typically organic polymers with high molecular masses. Most of
the monomers that go into common plastics (ethylene, propylene, vinyl chloride, styrene, and ethylene
terephthalate) are derived from petrochemicals and are not very biodegradable, making them candidate
materials for recycling. Recycling plastics helps minimize the need for using more of the petrochemical
supplies and also minimizes the environmental damage caused by throwing away these nonbiodegradable
materials.
Plastic recycling is the process of recovering waste, scrap, or used plastics, and reprocessing the material
into useful products. For example, polyethylene terephthalate (soft drink bottles) can be melted down and
used for plastic furniture, in carpets, or for other applications. Other plastics, like polyethylene (bags) and
polypropylene (cups, plastic food containers), can be recycled or reprocessed to be used again. Many areas
of the country have recycling programs that focus on one or more of the commodity plastics that have been
assigned a recycling code (seeFigure 20.9). These operations have been in effect since the 1970s and have
made the production of some plastics among the most efficient industrial operations today.
PAGE: 1004
990 20 • Organic Chemistry
FIGURE20.9 Each type of recyclable plastic is imprinted with a code for easy identification.
The name of an alkene is derived from the name of the alkane with the same number of carbon atoms. The
presence of the double bond is signified by replacing the suffix-anewith the suffix-ene.The location of the
double bondis identified by naming the smaller of the numbers of the carbon atoms participating in the
double bond:
Isomers of Alkenes
Molecules of 1-butene and 2-butene are structural isomers; the arrangement of the atoms in these two
molecules differs. As an example of arrangement differences, the first carbon atom in 1-butene is bonded to
two hydrogen atoms; the first carbon atom in 2-butene is bonded to three hydrogen atoms.
The compound 2-butene and some other alkenes also form a second type of isomer called a geometric isomer.
In a set of geometric isomers, the same types of atoms are attached to each other in the same order, but the
geometries of the two molecules differ. Geometric isomers of alkenes differ in the orientation of the groups on
either side of a bond.
Carbon atoms are free to rotate around a single bond but not around a double bond; a double bond is rigid.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1005
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 991
This makes it possible to have two isomers of 2-butene, one with both methyl groups on the same side of the
double bond and one with the methyl groups on opposite sides. When structures of butene are drawn with
120°bond angles around thesp2-hybridized carbon atoms participating in the double bond, the isomers are
apparent. The 2-butene isomer in which the two methyl groups are on the same side is called acis-isomer; the
one in which the two methyl groups are on opposite sides is called atrans-isomer (Figure 20.10). The different
geometries produce different physical properties, such as boiling point, that may make separation of the
isomers possible:
FIGURE20.10 These molecular models show the structural and geometric isomers of butene.
Alkenes are much more reactive than alkanes because the moiety is a reactive functional group. A π
bond, being a weaker bond, is disrupted much more easily than a σ bond. Thus, alkenes undergo a
characteristic reaction in which the π bond is broken and replaced by two σ bonds. This reaction is called an
addition reaction. The hybridization of the carbon atoms in the double bond in an alkene changes fromsp2to
sp3during an addition reaction. For example, halogens add to the double bond in an alkene instead of
replacing hydrogen, as occurs in an alkane:
EXAMPLE 20.5
Alkene Reactivity and Naming
Provide the IUPAC names for the reactant and product of the halogenation reaction shown here:
Solution
The reactant is a five-carbon chain that contains a carbon-carbon double bond, so the base name will be
PAGE: 1006
992 20 • Organic Chemistry
pentene. We begin counting at the end of the chain closest to the double bond—in this case, from the left—the
double bond spans carbons 2 and 3, so the name becomes 2-pentene. Since there are two carbon-containing
groups attached to the two carbon atoms in the double bond—and they are on the same side of the double
bond—this molecule is thecis-isomer, making the name of the starting alkenecis-2-pentene. The product of
the halogenation reaction will have two chlorine atoms attached to the carbon atoms that were a part of the
carbon-carbon double bond:
This molecule is now a substituted alkane and will be named as such. The base of the name will be pentane.
We will count from the end that numbers the carbon atoms where the chlorine atoms are attached as 2 and 3,
making the name of the product 2,3-dichloropentane.
Check Your Learning
Provide names for the reactant and product of the reaction shown:
Answer:
reactant: cis-3-hexene product: 3,4-dichlorohexane
Alkynes
Hydrocarbon molecules with one or more triple bonds are calledalkynes; they make up another series of
unsaturated hydrocarbons. Two carbon atoms joined by a triple bond are bound together by one σ bond and
two π bonds. Thesp-hybridized carbons involved in the triple bond have bond angles of 180°, giving these
types of bonds a linear, rod-like shape.
The simplest member of the alkyne series is ethyne, C H , commonly called acetylene. The Lewis structure for
2 2
ethyne, a linear molecule, is:
The IUPAC nomenclature for alkynes is similar to that for alkenes except that the suffix-yneis used to indicate
a triple bond in the chain. For example, is called 1-butyne.
EXAMPLE 20.6
Structure of Alkynes
Describe the geometry and hybridization of the carbon atoms in the following molecule:
Solution
Carbon atoms 1 and 4 have four single bonds and are thus tetrahedral withsp3hybridization. Carbon atoms 2
and 3 are involved in the triple bond, so they have linear geometries and would be classified assphybrids.
Check Your Learning
Identify the hybridization and bond angles at the carbon atoms in the molecule shown:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1007
20.1 • Hydrocarbons 993
Answer:
carbon 1:sp, 180°; carbon 2:sp, 180°; carbon 3:sp2, 120°; carbon 4:sp2, 120°; carbon 5:sp3, 109.5°
Chemically, the alkynes are similar to the alkenes. Since the functional group has two π bonds, alkynes
typically react even more readily, and react with twice as much reagent in addition reactions. The reaction of
acetylene with bromine is a typical example:
Acetylene and the other alkynes also burn readily. An acetylene torch takes advantage of the high heat of
combustion for acetylene.
Aromatic Hydrocarbons
Benzene, C H , is the simplest member of a large family of hydrocarbons, calledaromatic hydrocarbons.
6 6
These compounds contain ring structures and exhibit bonding that must be described using the resonance
hybrid concept of valence bond theory or the delocalization concept of molecular orbital theory. (To review
these concepts, refer to the earlier chapters on chemical bonding). The resonance structures for benzene,
C H , are:
6 6
Valence bond theory describes the benzene molecule and other planar aromatic hydrocarbon molecules as
hexagonal rings ofsp2-hybridized carbon atoms with the unhybridizedporbital of each carbon atom
perpendicular to the plane of the ring. Three valence electrons in thesp2hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom
and the valence electron of each hydrogen atom form the framework of σ bonds in the benzene molecule. The
fourth valence electron of each carbon atom is shared with an adjacent carbon atom in their unhybridizedp
orbitals to yield the π bonds. Benzene does not, however, exhibit the characteristics typical of an alkene. Each
of the six bonds between its carbon atoms is equivalent and exhibits properties that are intermediate between
those of a C–C single bond and a double bond. To represent this unique bonding, structural formulas for
benzene and its derivatives are typically drawn with single bonds between the carbon atoms and a circle
within the ring as shown inFigure 20.11.
FIGURE20.11 This condensed formula shows the unique bonding structure of benzene.
There are many derivatives of benzene. The hydrogen atoms can be replaced by many different substituents.
Aromatic compounds more readily undergo substitution reactions than addition reactions; replacement of one
PAGE: 1008
994 20 • Organic Chemistry
of the hydrogen atoms with another substituent will leave the delocalized double bonds intact. The following
are typical examples of substituted benzene derivatives:
Toluene and xylene are important solvents and raw materials in the chemical industry. Styrene is used to
produce the polymer polystyrene.
EXAMPLE 20.7
Structure of Aromatic Hydrocarbons
One possible isomer created by a substitution reaction that replaces a hydrogen atom attached to the aromatic
ring of toluene with a chlorine atom is shown here. Draw two other possible isomers in which the chlorine
atom replaces a different hydrogen atom attached to the aromatic ring:
Solution
Since the six-carbon ring with alternating double bonds is necessary for the molecule to be classified as
aromatic, appropriate isomers can be produced only by changing the positions of the chloro-substituent
relative to the methyl-substituent:
Check Your Learning
Draw three isomers of a six-membered aromatic ring compound substituted with two bromines.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1009
20.2 • Alcohols and Ethers 995
Answer:
20.2 Alcohols and Ethers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the structure and properties of alcohols
• Describe the structure and properties of ethers
• Name and draw structures for alcohols and ethers
In this section, we will learn about alcohols and ethers.
Alcohols
Incorporation of an oxygen atom into carbon- and hydrogen-containing molecules leads to new functional
groups and new families of compounds. When the oxygen atom is attached by single bonds, the molecule is
either an alcohol or ether.
Alcoholsare derivatives of hydrocarbons in which an –OH group has replaced a hydrogen atom. Although all
alcohols have one or more hydroxyl (–OH) functional groups, they do not behave like bases such as NaOH and
KOH. NaOH and KOH are ionic compounds that contain OH–ions. Alcohols are covalent molecules; the –OH
group in an alcohol molecule is attached to a carbon atom by a covalent bond.
Ethanol, CH CH OH, also called ethyl alcohol, is a particularly important alcohol for human use. Ethanol is the
3 2
alcohol produced by some species of yeast that is found in wine, beer, and distilled drinks. It has long been
prepared by humans harnessing the metabolic efforts of yeasts in fermenting various sugars:
Large quantities of ethanol are synthesized from the addition reaction of water with ethylene using an acid as a
catalyst:
Alcohols containing two or more hydroxyl groups can be made. Examples include 1,2-ethanediol (ethylene
glycol, used in antifreeze) and 1,2,3-propanetriol (glycerine, used as a solvent for cosmetics and medicines):
PAGE: 1010
996 20 • Organic Chemistry
Naming Alcohols
The name of an alcohol comes from the hydrocarbon from which it was derived. The final-ein the name of the
hydrocarbon is replaced by-ol, and the carbon atom to which the –OH group is bonded is indicated by a
5
number placed before the name.
EXAMPLE 20.8
Naming Alcohols
Consider the following example. How should it be named?
Solution
The carbon chain contains five carbon atoms. If the hydroxyl group was not present, we would have named this
molecule pentane. To address the fact that the hydroxyl group is present, we change the ending of the name to
-ol. In this case, since the –OH is attached to carbon 2 in the chain, we would name this molecule 2-pentanol.
Check Your Learning
Name the following molecule:
Answer:
2-methyl-2-pentanol
Ethers
Ethersare compounds that contain the functional group –O–. Ethers do not have a designated suffix like the
other types of molecules we have named so far. In the IUPAC system, the oxygen atom and the smaller carbon
branch are named as an alkoxy substituent and the remainder of the molecule as the base chain, as in alkanes.
As shown in the following compound, the red symbols represent the smaller alkyl group and the oxygen atom,
which would be named “methoxy.” The larger carbon branch would be ethane, making the molecule
methoxyethane. Many ethers are referred to with common names instead of the IUPAC system names. For
common names, the two branches connected to the oxygen atom are named separately and followed by
“ether.” The common name for the compound shown inExample 20.9is ethylmethyl ether:
5 The IUPAC adopted new nomenclature guidelines in 2013 that require this number to be placed as an “infix” rather than a prefix.
For example, the new name for 2-propanol would be propan-2-ol. Widespread adoption of this new nomenclature will take some
time, and students are encouraged to be familiar with both the old and new naming protocols.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1011
20.2 • Alcohols and Ethers 997
EXAMPLE 20.9
Naming Ethers
Provide the IUPAC and common name for the ether shown here:
Solution
IUPAC: The molecule is made up of an ethoxy group attached to an ethane chain, so the IUPAC name would be
ethoxyethane.
Common: The groups attached to the oxygen atom are both ethyl groups, so the common name would be
diethyl ether.
Check Your Learning
Provide the IUPAC and common name for the ether shown:
Answer:
IUPAC: 2-methoxypropane; common: isopropylmethyl ether
Ethers can be obtained from alcohols by the elimination of a molecule of water from two molecules of the
alcohol. For example, when ethanol is treated with a limited amount of sulfuric acid and heated to 140 °C,
diethyl ether and water are formed:
In the general formula for ethers, R—O—R, the hydrocarbon groups (R) may be the same or different. Diethyl
ether, the most widely used compound of this class, is a colorless, volatile liquid that is highly flammable. It was
first used in 1846 as an anesthetic, but better anesthetics have now largely taken its place. Diethyl ether and
other ethers are presently used primarily as solvents for gums, fats, waxes, and resins.Tertiary-butyl methyl
ether, C H OCH (abbreviated MTBE—italicized portions of names are not counted when ranking the groups
4 9 3
alphabetically—so butyl comes before methyl in the common name), is used as an additive for gasoline. MTBE
belongs to a group of chemicals known as oxygenates due to their capacity to increase the oxygen content of
gasoline.
LINK TO LEARNING
Want more practice naming ethers? This briefvideo review(http://openstax.org/l/16ethers)summarizes the
nomenclature for ethers.
PAGE: 1012
998 20 • Organic Chemistry
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Carbohydrates and Diabetes
Carbohydrates are large biomolecules made up of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The dietary forms of
carbohydrates are foods rich in these types of molecules, like pastas, bread, and candy. The name
“carbohydrate” comes from the formula of the molecules, which can be described by the general formula
C (H O) , which shows that they are in a sense “carbon and water” or “hydrates of carbon.” In many cases,
m 2 n
mandnhave the same value, but they can be different. The smaller carbohydrates are generally referred to
as “sugars,” the biochemical term for this group of molecules is “saccharide” from the Greek word for sugar
(Figure 20.12). Depending on the number of sugar units joined together, they may be classified as
monosaccharides (one sugar unit), disaccharides (two sugar units), oligosaccharides (a few sugars), or
polysaccharides (the polymeric version of sugars—polymers were described in the feature box earlier in
this chapter on recycling plastics). The scientific names of sugars can be recognized by the suffix-oseat
the end of the name (for instance, fruit sugar is a monosaccharide called “fructose” and milk sugar is a
disaccharide called lactose composed of two monosaccharides, glucose and galactose, connected together).
Sugars contain some of the functional groups we have discussed: Note the alcohol groups present in the
structures and how monosaccharide units are linked to form a disaccharide by formation of an ether.
FIGURE20.12 The illustrations show the molecular structures of fructose, a five-carbon monosaccharide, and
of lactose, a disaccharide composed of two isomeric, six-carbon sugars.
Organisms use carbohydrates for a variety of functions. Carbohydrates can store energy, such as the
polysaccharides glycogen in animals or starch in plants. They also provide structural support, such as the
polysaccharide cellulose in plants and the modified polysaccharide chitin in fungi and animals. The sugars
ribose and deoxyribose are components of the backbones of RNA and DNA, respectively. Other sugars play
key roles in the function of the immune system, in cell-cell recognition, and in many other biological roles.
Diabetes is a group of metabolic diseases in which a person has a high sugar concentration in their blood
(Figure 20.13). Diabetes may be caused by insufficient insulin production by the pancreas or by the body’s
cells not responding properly to the insulin that is produced. In a healthy person, insulin is produced when
it is needed and functions to transport glucose from the blood into the cells where it can be used for energy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1013
20.3 • Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters 999
The long-term complications of diabetes can include loss of eyesight, heart disease, and kidney failure.
In 2013, it was estimated that approximately 3.3% of the world’s population (~380 million people) suffered
from diabetes, resulting in over a million deaths annually. Prevention involves eating a healthy diet, getting
plenty of exercise, and maintaining a normal body weight. Treatment involves all of these lifestyle
practices and may require injections of insulin.
Even after treatment protocols were introduced, the need to continually monitor their glucose levels posed
a challenge for people with diabetes. The first tests required a doctor or lab, and therefore limited access
and frequency. Eventually, researchers developed small tablets that would react to the presence of glucose
in urine, but these still required a relatively complex process. Chemist Helen Free, who was working on
improvements to the tablets, conceived a simpler device: a small test strip. With her husband and research
partner, Alfred Free, she produced the first such product for measuring glucose; soon after, she expanded
the technology to provide test strips for other compounds and conditions. While very recent advances
(such as breath tests, discussed earlier in the text) have shown promise in replacing test strips, they have
been widely used for decades and remain a primary method today.
FIGURE20.13 Diabetes is a disease characterized by high concentrations of glucose in the blood. Treating
diabetes involves making lifestyle changes, monitoring blood-sugar levels, and sometimes insulin injections.
(credit: “Blausen Medical Communications”/Wikimedia Commons)
20.3 Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the structure and properties of aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters
Another class of organic molecules contains a carbon atom connected to an oxygen atom by a double bond,
commonly called a carbonyl group. The trigonal planar carbon in the carbonyl group can attach to two other
substituents leading to several subfamilies (aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids and esters) described in this
section.
Aldehydes and Ketones
Bothaldehydesandketonescontain acarbonyl group, a functional group with a carbon-oxygen double bond.
The names for aldehyde and ketone compounds are derived using similar nomenclature rules as for alkanes
and alcohols, and include the class-identifying suffixes-aland-one, respectively:
PAGE: 1014
1000 20 • Organic Chemistry
In an aldehyde, the carbonyl group is bonded to at least one hydrogen atom. In a ketone, the carbonyl group is
bonded to two carbon atoms:
As text, an aldehyde group is represented as –CHO; a ketone is represented as –C(O)– or –CO–.
In both aldehydes and ketones, the geometry around the carbon atom in the carbonyl group is trigonal planar;
the carbon atom exhibitssp2hybridization. Two of thesp2orbitals on the carbon atom in the carbonyl group
are used to form σ bonds to the other carbon or hydrogen atoms in a molecule. The remainingsp2hybrid
orbital forms a σ bond to the oxygen atom. The unhybridizedporbital on the carbon atom in the carbonyl
group overlaps aporbital on the oxygen atom to form the π bond in the double bond.
Like the bond in carbon dioxide, the bond of a carbonyl group is polar (recall that oxygen is
significantly more electronegative than carbon, and the shared electrons are pulled toward the oxygen atom
and away from the carbon atom). Many of the reactions of aldehydes and ketones start with the reaction
between a Lewis base and the carbon atom at the positive end of the polar bond to yield an unstable
intermediate that subsequently undergoes one or more structural rearrangements to form the final product
(Figure 20.14).
FIGURE20.14 The carbonyl group is polar, and the geometry of the bonds around the central carbon is trigonal
planar.
The importance of molecular structure in the reactivity of organic compounds is illustrated by the reactions
that produce aldehydes and ketones. We can prepare a carbonyl group by oxidation of an alcohol—for organic
molecules, oxidation of a carbon atom is said to occur when a carbon-hydrogen bond is replaced by a carbon-
oxygen bond. The reverse reaction—replacing a carbon-oxygen bond by a carbon-hydrogen bond—is a
reduction of that carbon atom. Recall that oxygen is generally assigned a –2 oxidation number unless it is
elemental or attached to a fluorine. Hydrogen is generally assigned an oxidation number of +1 unless it is
attached to a metal. Since carbon does not have a specific rule, its oxidation number is determined
algebraically by factoring the atoms it is attached to and the overall charge of the molecule or ion. In general, a
carbon atom attached to an oxygen atom will have a more positive oxidation number and a carbon atom
attached to a hydrogen atom will have a more negative oxidation number. This should fit nicely with your
understanding of the polarity of C–O and C–H bonds. The other reagents and possible products of these
reactions are beyond the scope of this chapter, so we will focus only on the changes to the carbon atoms:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1015
20.3 • Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters 1001
EXAMPLE 20.10
Oxidation and Reduction in Organic Chemistry
Methane represents the completely reduced form of an organic molecule that contains one carbon atom.
Sequentially replacing each of the carbon-hydrogen bonds with a carbon-oxygen bond would lead to an
alcohol, then an aldehyde, then a carboxylic acid (discussed later), and, finally, carbon dioxide:
What are the oxidation numbers for the carbon atoms in the molecules shown here?
Solution
In this example, we can calculate the oxidation number (review the chapter on oxidation-reduction reactions if
necessary) for the carbon atom in each case (note how this would become difficult for larger molecules with
additional carbon atoms and hydrogen atoms, which is why organic chemists use the definition dealing with
replacing C–H bonds with C–O bonds described). For CH , the carbon atom carries a –4 oxidation number (the
4
hydrogen atoms are assigned oxidation numbers of +1 and the carbon atom balances that by having an
oxidation number of –4). For the alcohol (in this case, methanol), the carbon atom has an oxidation number of
–2 (the oxygen atom is assigned –2, the four hydrogen atoms each are assigned +1, and the carbon atom
balances the sum by having an oxidation number of –2; note that compared to the carbon atom in CH , this
4
carbon atom has lost two electrons so it was oxidized); for the aldehyde, the carbon atom’s oxidation number is
0 (–2 for the oxygen atom and +1 for each hydrogen atom already balances to 0, so the oxidation number for
the carbon atom is 0); for the carboxylic acid, the carbon atom’s oxidation number is +2 (two oxygen atoms
each at –2 and two hydrogen atoms at +1); and for carbon dioxide, the carbon atom’s oxidation number is +4
(here, the carbon atom needs to balance the –4 sum from the two oxygen atoms).
Check Your Learning
Indicate whether the marked carbon atoms in the three molecules here are oxidized or reduced relative to the
marked carbon atom in ethanol:
There is no need to calculate oxidation states in this case; instead, just compare the types of atoms bonded to
the marked carbon atoms:
Answer:
(a) reduced (bond to oxygen atom replaced by bond to hydrogen atom); (b) oxidized (one bond to hydrogen
atom replaced by one bond to oxygen atom); (c) oxidized (2 bonds to hydrogen atoms have been replaced by
bonds to an oxygen atom)
Aldehydes are commonly prepared by the oxidation of alcohols whose –OH functional group is located on the
carbon atom at the end of the chain of carbon atoms in the alcohol:
PAGE: 1016
1002 20 • Organic Chemistry
Alcohols that have their –OH groups in the middle of the chain are necessary to synthesize a ketone, which
requires the carbonyl group to be bonded to two other carbon atoms:
An alcohol with its –OH group bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to no or one other carbon atom will
form an aldehyde. An alcohol with its –OH group attached to two other carbon atoms will form a ketone. If
three carbons are attached to the carbon bonded to the –OH, the molecule will not have a C–H bond to be
replaced, so it will not be susceptible to oxidation.
Formaldehyde, an aldehyde with the formula HCHO, is a colorless gas with a pungent and irritating odor. It is
sold in an aqueous solution called formalin, which contains about 37% formaldehyde by weight. Formaldehyde
causes coagulation of proteins, so it kills bacteria (and any other living organism) and stops many of the
biological processes that cause tissue to decay. Thus, formaldehyde is used for preserving tissue specimens
and embalming bodies. It is also used to sterilize soil or other materials. Formaldehyde is used in the
manufacture of Bakelite, a hard plastic having high chemical and electrical resistance.
Dimethyl ketone, CH COCH , commonly called acetone, is the simplest ketone. It is made commercially by
3 3
fermenting corn or molasses, or by oxidation of 2-propanol. Acetone is a colorless liquid. Among its many uses
are as a solvent for lacquer (including fingernail polish), cellulose acetate, cellulose nitrate, acetylene, plastics,
and varnishes; as a paint and varnish remover; and as a solvent in the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and
chemicals.
Carboxylic Acids and Esters
The odor of vinegar is caused by the presence of acetic acid, a carboxylic acid, in the vinegar. The odor of ripe
bananas and many other fruits is due to the presence of esters, compounds that can be prepared by the
reaction of a carboxylic acid with an alcohol. Because esters do not have hydrogen bonds between molecules,
they have lower vapor pressures than the alcohols and carboxylic acids from which they are derived (see
Figure 20.15).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1017
20.3 • Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters 1003
FIGURE20.15 Esters are responsible for the odors associated with various plants and their fruits.
Bothcarboxylic acidsandesterscontain a carbonyl group with a second oxygen atom bonded to the carbon
atom in the carbonyl group by a single bond. In a carboxylic acid, the second oxygen atom also bonds to a
hydrogen atom. In an ester, the second oxygen atom bonds to another carbon atom. The names for carboxylic
acids and esters include prefixes that denote the lengths of the carbon chains in the molecules and are derived
following nomenclature rules similar to those for inorganic acids and salts (see these examples):
The functional groups for an acid and for an ester are shown in red in these formulas.
The hydrogen atom in the functional group of a carboxylic acid will react with a base to form an ionic salt:
Carboxylic acids are weak acids (see the chapter on acids and bases), meaning they are not 100% ionized in
water. Generally only about 1% of the molecules of a carboxylic acid dissolved in water are ionized at any given
time. The remaining molecules are undissociated in solution.
We prepare carboxylic acids by the oxidation of aldehydes or alcohols whose –OH functional group is located
on the carbon atom at the end of the chain of carbon atoms in the alcohol:
PAGE: 1018
1004 20 • Organic Chemistry
Esters are produced by the reaction of acids with alcohols. For example, the ester ethyl acetate,
CH CO CH CH , is formed when acetic acid reacts with ethanol:
3 2 2 3
The simplest carboxylic acid is formic acid, HCO H, known since 1670. Its name comes from the Latin word
2
formicus,which means “ant”; it was first isolated by the distillation of red ants. It is partially responsible for
the pain and irritation of ant and wasp stings, and is responsible for a characteristic odor of ants that can be
sometimes detected in their nests.
Acetic acid, CH CO H, constitutes 3–6% vinegar. Cider vinegar is produced by allowing apple juice to ferment
3 2
without oxygen present. Yeast cells present in the juice carry out the fermentation reactions. The fermentation
reactions change the sugar present in the juice to ethanol, then to acetic acid. Pure acetic acid has a
penetrating odor and produces painful burns. It is an excellent solvent for many organic and some inorganic
compounds, and it is essential in the production of cellulose acetate, a component of many synthetic fibers
such as rayon.
The distinctive and attractive odors and flavors of many flowers, perfumes, and ripe fruits are due to the
presence of one or more esters (Figure 20.16). Among the most important of the natural esters are fats (such as
lard, tallow, and butter) and oils (such as linseed, cottonseed, and olive oils), which are esters of the trihydroxyl
alcohol glycerine, C H (OH) , with large carboxylic acids, such as palmitic acid, CH (CH ) CO H, stearic acid,
3 5 3 3 214 2
CH (CH ) CO H, and oleic acid, Oleic acid is an unsaturated acid; it
3 216 2
contains a double bond. Palmitic and stearic acids are saturated acids that contain no double or triple
bonds.
FIGURE20.16 Over 350 different volatile molecules (many members of the ester family) have been identified in
strawberries. (credit: Rebecca Siegel)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1019
20.4 • Amines and Amides 1005
20.4 Amines and Amides
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the structure and properties of an amine
• Describe the structure and properties of an amide
Aminesare molecules that contain carbon-nitrogen bonds. The nitrogen atom in an amine has a lone pair of
electrons and three bonds to other atoms, either carbon or hydrogen. Various nomenclatures are used to
derive names for amines, but all involve the class-identifying suffix–ineas illustrated here for a few simple
examples:
In some amines, the nitrogen atom replaces a carbon atom in an aromatic hydrocarbon. Pyridine (Figure
20.17) is one such heterocyclic amine. A heterocyclic compound contains atoms of two or more different
elements in its ring structure.
FIGURE20.17 The illustration shows one of the resonance structures of pyridine.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
DNA in Forensics and Paternity
The genetic material for all living things is a polymer of four different molecules, which are themselves a
combination of three subunits. The genetic information, the code for developing an organism, is contained in
the specific sequence of the four molecules, similar to the way the letters of the alphabet can be sequenced to
form words that convey information. The information in a DNA sequence is used to form two other types of
polymers, one of which are proteins. The proteins interact to form a specific type of organism with individual
characteristics.
A genetic molecule is called DNA, which stands for deoxyribonucleic acid. The four molecules that make up
DNA are called nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a single- or double-ringed molecule containing
nitrogen, carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen called a nitrogenous base. Each base is bonded to a five-carbon sugar
called deoxyribose. The sugar is in turn bonded to a phosphate group When new DNA is made, a
polymerization reaction occurs that binds the phosphate group of one nucleotide to the sugar group of a
second nucleotide. The nitrogenous bases of each nucleotide stick out from this sugar-phosphate backbone.
DNA is actually formed from two such polymers coiled around each other and held together by hydrogen
bonds between the nitrogenous bases. Thus, the two backbones are on the outside of the coiled pair of strands,
and the bases are on the inside. The shape of the two strands wound around each other is called a double helix
(seeFigure 20.18).
It probably makes sense that the sequence of nucleotides in the DNA of a cat differs from those of a dog. But it
is also true that the sequences of the DNA in the cells of two individual pugs differ. Likewise, the sequences of
DNA in you and a sibling differ (unless your sibling is an identical twin), as do those between you and an
unrelated individual. However, the DNA sequences of two related individuals are more similar than the
sequences of two unrelated individuals, and these similarities in sequence can be observed in various ways.
PAGE: 1020
1006 20 • Organic Chemistry
This is the principle behind DNA fingerprinting, which is a method used to determine whether two DNA
samples came from related (or the same) individuals or unrelated individuals.
FIGURE20.18 DNA is an organic molecule and the genetic material for all living organisms. (a) DNA is a double
helix consisting of two single DNA strands hydrogen bonded together at each nitrogenous base. (b) This detail
shows the hydrogen bonding (dotted lines) between nitrogenous bases on each DNA strand and the way in which
each nucleotide is joined to the next, forming a backbone of sugars and phosphate groups along each strand. (c)
This detail shows the structure of one of the four nucleotides that makes up the DNA polymer. Each nucleotide
consists of a nitrogenous base (a double-ring molecule, in this case), a five-carbon sugar (deoxyribose), and a
phosphate group.
Using similarities in sequences, technicians can determine whether a man is the father of a child (the identity
of the mother is rarely in doubt, except in the case of an adopted child and a potential birth mother). Likewise,
forensic geneticists can determine whether a crime scene sample of human tissue, such as blood or skin cells,
contains DNA that matches exactly the DNA of a suspect.
LINK TO LEARNING
Watch thisvideo animation(http://openstax.org/l/16dnapackaging)of how DNA is packaged for a visual lesson
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1021
20.4 • Amines and Amides 1007
in its structure.
Like ammonia, amines are weak bases due to the lone pair of electrons on their nitrogen atoms:
The basicity of an amine’s nitrogen atom plays an important role in much of the compound’s chemistry. Amine
functional groups are found in a wide variety of compounds, including natural and synthetic dyes, polymers,
vitamins, and medications such as penicillin and codeine. They are also found in many molecules essential to
life, such as amino acids, hormones, neurotransmitters, and DNA.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Addictive Alkaloids
Since ancient times, plants have been used for medicinal purposes. One class of substances, calledalkaloids,
found in many of these plants has been isolated and found to contain cyclic molecules with an amine
functional group. These amines are bases. They can react with H O+in a dilute acid to form an ammonium
3
salt, and this property is used to extract them from the plant:
The name alkaloid means “like an alkali.” Thus, an alkaloid reacts with acid. The free compound can be
recovered after extraction by reaction with a base:
The structures of many naturally occurring alkaloids have profound physiological and psychotropic effects in
humans. Examples of these drugs include nicotine, morphine, codeine, and heroin. The plant produces these
substances, collectively called secondary plant compounds, as chemical defenses against the numerous pests
that attempt to feed on the plant:
PAGE: 1022
1008 20 • Organic Chemistry
In these diagrams, as is common in representing structures of large organic compounds, carbon atoms in the
rings and the hydrogen atoms bonded to them have been omitted for clarity. The solid wedges indicate bonds
that extend out of the page. The dashed wedges indicate bonds that extend into the page. Notice that small
changes to a part of the molecule change the properties of morphine, codeine, and heroin. Morphine, a strong
narcotic used to relieve pain, contains two hydroxyl functional groups, located at the bottom of the molecule in
this structural formula. Changing one of these hydroxyl groups to a methyl ether group forms codeine, a less
potent drug used as a local anesthetic. If both hydroxyl groups are converted to esters of acetic acid, the
powerfully addictive drug heroin results (Figure 20.19).
FIGURE20.19 Poppies can be used in the production of opium, a plant latex that contains morphine from which
other opiates, such as heroin, can be synthesized. (credit: Karen Roe)
Amidesare molecules that contain nitrogen atoms connected to the carbon atom of a carbonyl group. Like
amines, various nomenclature rules may be used to name amides, but all include use of the class-specific
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1023
20.4 • Amines and Amides 1009
suffix-amide:
Amides can be produced when carboxylic acids react with amines or ammonia in a process called amidation.
A water molecule is eliminated from the reaction, and the amide is formed from the remaining pieces of the
carboxylic acid and the amine (note the similarity to formation of an ester from a carboxylic acid and an
alcohol discussed in the previous section):
The reaction between amines and carboxylic acids to form amides is biologically important. It is through this
reaction that amino acids (molecules containing both amine and carboxylic acid substituents) link together in
a polymer to form proteins.
HOW SCIENCES INTERCONNECT
Proteins and Enzymes
Proteins are large biological molecules made up of long chains of smaller molecules called amino acids.
Organisms rely on proteins for a variety of functions—proteins transport molecules across cell membranes,
replicate DNA, and catalyze metabolic reactions, to name only a few of their functions. The properties of
proteins are functions of the combination of amino acids that compose them and can vary greatly. Interactions
between amino acid sequences in the chains of proteins result in the folding of the chain into specific, three-
dimensional structures that determine the protein’s activity.
Amino acids are organic molecules that contain an amine functional group (–NH ), a carboxylic acid
2
functional group (–COOH), and a side chain (that is specific to each individual amino acid). Most living things
build proteins from the same 20 different amino acids. Amino acids connect by the formation of a peptide
bond, which is a covalent bond formed between two amino acids when the carboxylic acid group of one amino
acid reacts with the amine group of the other amino acid. The formation of the bond results in the production
of a molecule of water (in general, reactions that result in the production of water when two other molecules
combine are referred to as condensation reactions). The resulting bond—between the carbonyl group carbon
atom and the amine nitrogen atom is called a peptide link or peptide bond. Since each of the original amino
acids has an unreacted group (one has an unreacted amine and the other an unreacted carboxylic acid), more
peptide bonds can form to other amino acids, extending the structure. (Figure 20.20) A chain of connected
amino acids is called a polypeptide. Proteins contain at least one long polypeptide chain.
PAGE: 1024
1010 20 • Organic Chemistry
FIGURE20.20 This condensation reaction forms a dipeptide from two amino acids and leads to the formation of
water.
Enzymes are large biological molecules, mostly composed of proteins, which are responsible for the thousands
of metabolic processes that occur in living organisms. Enzymes are highly specific catalysts; they speed up the
rates of certain reactions. Enzymes function by lowering the activation energy of the reaction they are
catalyzing, which can dramatically increase the rate of the reaction. Most reactions catalyzed by enzymes have
rates that are millions of times faster than the noncatalyzed version. Like all catalysts, enzymes are not
consumed during the reactions that they catalyze. Enzymes do differ from other catalysts in how specific they
are for their substrates (the molecules that an enzyme will convert into a different product). Each enzyme is
only capable of speeding up one or a few very specific reactions or types of reactions. Since the function of
enzymes is so specific, the lack or malfunctioning of an enzyme can lead to serious health consequences. One
disease that is the result of an enzyme malfunction is phenylketonuria. In this disease, the enzyme that
catalyzes the first step in the degradation of the amino acid phenylalanine is not functional (Figure 20.21).
Untreated, this can lead to an accumulation of phenylalanine, which can lead to intellectual disabilities.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1025
20.4 • Amines and Amides 1011
FIGURE20.21 A computer rendering shows the three-dimensional structure of the enzyme phenylalanine
hydroxylase. In the disease phenylketonuria, a defect in the shape of phenylalanine hydroxylase causes it to lose its
function in breaking down phenylalanine.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Kevlar
Kevlar (Figure 20.22) is a synthetic polymer made from two monomers 1,4-phenylene-diamine and
terephthaloyl chloride (Kevlar is a registered trademark of DuPont). The material was developed by Susan
Kwolek while she worked to find a replacement for steel in tires. Kwolek's work involved synthesizing
polyamides and dissolving them in solvents, then spinning the resulting solution into fibers. One of her
solutions proved to be quite different in initial appearance and structure. And once spun, the resulting
fibers were particularly strong. From this initial discovery, Kevlar was created. The material has a high
tensile strength-to-weight ratio (it is about 5 times stronger than an equal weight of steel), making it useful
for many applications from bicycle tires to sails to body armor.
FIGURE20.22 This illustration shows the formula for polymeric Kevlar.
The material owes much of its strength to hydrogen bonds between polymer chains (refer back to the
chapter on intermolecular interactions). These bonds form between the carbonyl group oxygen atom
(which has a partial negative charge due to oxygen’s electronegativity) on one monomer and the partially
positively charged hydrogen atom in the N–H bond of an adjacent monomer in the polymer structure (see
dashed line inFigure 20.23). There is additional strength derived from the interaction between the
unhybridizedporbitals in the six-membered rings, called aromatic stacking.
PAGE: 1026
1012 20 • Organic Chemistry
FIGURE20.23 The diagram shows the polymer structure of Kevlar, with hydrogen bonds between polymer
chains represented by dotted lines.
Kevlar may be best known as a component of body armor, combat helmets, and face masks. Since the
1980s, the US military has used Kevlar as a component of the PASGT (personal armor system for ground
troops) helmet and vest. Kevlar is also used to protect armored fighting vehicles and aircraft carriers.
Civilian applications include protective gear for emergency service personnel such as body armor for
police officers and heat-resistant clothing for fire fighters. Kevlar based clothing is considerably lighter and
thinner than equivalent gear made from other materials (Figure 20.24). Beyond Kevlar, Susan Kwolek was
instrumental in the development of Nomex, a fireproof material, and was also involved in the creation of
Lycra. She became just the fourth woman inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame, and received a
number of other awards for her significant contributions to science and society.
FIGURE20.24 (a) These soldiers are sorting through pieces of a Kevlar helmet that helped absorb a grenade
blast. Kevlar is also used to make (b) canoes and (c) marine mooring lines. (credit a: modification of work by
“Cla68”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification of work by “OakleyOriginals”/Flickr; credit c: modification
of work by Casey H. Kyhl)
In addition to its better-known uses, Kevlar is also often used in cryogenics for its very low thermal
conductivity (along with its high strength). Kevlar maintains its high strength when cooled to the
temperature of liquid nitrogen (–196 °C).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1027
20.4 • Amines and Amides 1013
The table here summarizes the structures discussed in this chapter:
PAGE: 1028
1014 20 • Key Terms
Key Terms
addition reaction reaction in which a double oxygen atom
carbon-carbon bond forms a single carbon- carboxylic acid organic compound containing a
carbon bond by the addition of a reactant. Typical carbonyl group with an attached hydroxyl group
reaction for an alkene. ester organic compound containing a carbonyl
alcohol organic compound with a hydroxyl group group with an attached oxygen atom that is
(–OH) bonded to a carbon atom bonded to a carbon substituent
aldehyde organic compound containing a carbonyl ether organic compound with an oxygen atom that
group bonded to two hydrogen atoms or a is bonded to two carbon atoms
hydrogen atom and a carbon substituent functional group part of an organic molecule that
alkane molecule consisting of only carbon and imparts a specific chemical reactivity to the
hydrogen atoms connected by single (σ) bonds molecule
alkene molecule consisting of carbon and ketone organic compound containing a carbonyl
hydrogen containing at least one carbon-carbon group with two carbon substituents attached to it
double bond organic compound natural or synthetic compound
alkyl group substituent, consisting of an alkane that contains carbon
missing one hydrogen atom, attached to a larger saturated hydrocarbon molecule containing
structure carbon and hydrogen that has only single bonds
alkyne molecule consisting of carbon and between carbon atoms
hydrogen containing at least one carbon-carbon skeletal structure shorthand method of drawing
triple bond organic molecules in which carbon atoms are
amide organic molecule that features a nitrogen represented by the ends of lines and bends in
atom connected to the carbon atom in a carbonyl between lines, and hydrogen atoms attached to
group the carbon atoms are not shown (but are
amine organic molecule in which a nitrogen atom understood to be present by the context of the
is bonded to one or more alkyl group structure)
aromatic hydrocarbon cyclic molecule consisting substituent branch or functional group that
of carbon and hydrogen with delocalized replaces hydrogen atoms in a larger hydrocarbon
alternating carbon-carbon single and double chain
bonds, resulting in enhanced stability substitution reaction reaction in which one atom
carbonyl group carbon atom double bonded to an replaces another in a molecule
Summary
20.1Hydrocarbons functional group, which contains at least one atom of
an element other than carbon or hydrogen. The
Strong, stable bonds between carbon atoms produce
properties of hydrocarbon derivatives are
complex molecules containing chains, branches,
determined largely by the functional group. The –OH
and rings. The chemistry of these compounds is
group is the functional group of an alcohol. The
called organic chemistry. Hydrocarbons are organic
–R–O–R– group is the functional group of an ether.
compounds composed of only carbon and hydrogen.
The alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons—that is, 20.3Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids,
hydrocarbons that contain only single bonds. and Esters
Alkenes contain one or more carbon-carbon double
Functional groups related to the carbonyl group
bonds. Alkynes contain one or more carbon-carbon
include the –CHO group of an aldehyde, the –CO–
triple bonds. Aromatic hydrocarbons contain ring
group of a ketone, the –CO H group of a carboxylic
structures with delocalized π electron systems. 2
acid, and the –CO R group of an ester. The carbonyl
2
20.2Alcohols and Ethers group, a carbon-oxygen double bond, is the key
structure in these classes of organic molecules:
Many organic compounds that are not hydrocarbons
Aldehydes contain at least one hydrogen atom
can be thought of as derivatives of hydrocarbons. A
attached to the carbonyl carbon atom, ketones
hydrocarbon derivative can be formed by replacing
contain two carbon groups attached to the carbonyl
one or more hydrogen atoms of a hydrocarbon by a
carbon atom, carboxylic acids contain a hydroxyl
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1029
20 • Exercises 1015
group attached to the carbonyl carbon atom, and leads to two families of molecules. Compounds
esters contain an oxygen atom attached to another containing a nitrogen atom bonded in a
carbon group connected to the carbonyl carbon hydrocarbon framework are classified as amines.
atom. All of these compounds contain oxidized Compounds that have a nitrogen atom bonded to
carbon atoms relative to the carbon atom of an one side of a carbonyl group are classified as
alcohol group. amides. Amines are a basic functional group.
Amines and carboxylic acids can combine in a
20.4Amines and Amides
condensation reaction to form amides.
The addition of nitrogen into an organic framework
Exercises
20.1Hydrocarbons
1. Write the chemical formula and Lewis structure of the following, each of which contains five carbon atoms:
(a) an alkane
(b) an alkene
(c) an alkyne
2. What is the difference between the hybridization of carbon atoms’ valence orbitals in saturated and
unsaturated hydrocarbons?
3. On a microscopic level, how does the reaction of bromine with a saturated hydrocarbon differ from its
reaction with an unsaturated hydrocarbon? How are they similar?
4. On a microscopic level, how does the reaction of bromine with an alkene differ from its reaction with an
alkyne? How are they similar?
5. Explain why unbranched alkenes can form geometric isomers while unbranched alkanes cannot. Does
this explanation involve the macroscopic domain or the microscopic domain?
6. Explain why these two molecules are not isomers:
7. Explain why these two molecules are not isomers:
8. How does the carbon-atom hybridization change when polyethylene is prepared from ethylene?
9. Write the Lewis structure and molecular formula for each of the following hydrocarbons:
(a) hexane
(b) 3-methylpentane
(c)cis-3-hexene
(d) 4-methyl-1-pentene
(e) 3-hexyne
(f) 4-methyl-2-pentyne
PAGE: 1030
1016 20 • Exercises
10. Write the chemical formula, condensed formula, and Lewis structure for each of the following
hydrocarbons:
(a) heptane
(b) 3-methylhexane
(c)trans-3-heptene
(d) 4-methyl-1-hexene
(e) 2-heptyne
(f) 3,4-dimethyl-1-pentyne
11. Give the complete IUPAC name for each of the following compounds:
(a) CH CH CBr CH
3 2 2 3
(b) (CH ) CCl
33
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
12. Give the complete IUPAC name for each of the following compounds:
(a) (CH ) CHF
32
(b) CH CHClCHClCH
3 3
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
13. Butane is used as a fuel in disposable lighters. Write the Lewis structure for each isomer of butane.
14. Write Lewis structures and name the five structural isomers of hexane.
15. Write Lewis structures for thecis–transisomers of
16. Write structures for the three isomers of the aromatic hydrocarbon xylene, C H (CH ) .
6 4 32
17. Isooctane is the common name of the isomer of C H used as the standard of 100 for the gasoline octane
8 18
rating:
(a) What is the IUPAC name for the compound?
(b) Name the other isomers that contain a five-carbon chain with three methyl substituents.
18. Write Lewis structures and IUPAC names for the alkyne isomers of C H .
4 6
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1031
20 • Exercises 1017
19. Write Lewis structures and IUPAC names for all isomers of C H Cl.
4 9
20. Name and write the structures of all isomers of the propyl and butyl alkyl groups.
21. Write the structures for all the isomers of the –C H alkyl group.
5 11
22. Write Lewis structures and describe the molecular geometry at each carbon atom in the following
compounds:
(a)cis-3-hexene
(b)cis-1-chloro-2-bromoethene
(c) 2-pentyne
(d)trans-6-ethyl-7-methyl-2-octene
23. Benzene is one of the compounds used as an octane enhancer in unleaded gasoline. It is manufactured by
the catalytic conversion of acetylene to benzene:
Draw Lewis structures for these compounds, with resonance structures as appropriate, and determine the
hybridization of the carbon atoms in each.
24. Teflon is prepared by the polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene. Write the equation that describes the
polymerization using Lewis symbols.
25. Write two complete, balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
(a) 1 mol of 1-butyne reacts with 2 mol of iodine.
(b) Pentane is burned in air.
26. Write two complete, balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
(a) 2-butene reacts with chlorine.
(b) benzene burns in air.
27. What mass of 2-bromopropane could be prepared from 25.5 g of propene? Assume a 100% yield of
product.
28. Acetylene is a very weak acid; however, it will react with moist silver(I) oxide and form water and a
compound composed of silver and carbon. Addition of a solution of HCl to a 0.2352-g sample of the
compound of silver and carbon produced acetylene and 0.2822 g of AgCl.
(a) What is the empirical formula of the compound of silver and carbon?
(b) The production of acetylene on addition of HCl to the compound of silver and carbon suggests that the
carbon is present as the acetylide ion, . Write the formula of the compound showing the acetylide
ion.
29. Ethylene can be produced by the pyrolysis of ethane:
How many kilograms of ethylene is produced by the pyrolysis of 1.000 103kg of ethane, assuming a
100.0% yield?
20.2Alcohols and Ethers
30. Why do the compounds hexane, hexanol, and hexene have such similar names?
31. Write condensed formulas and provide IUPAC names for the following compounds:
(a) ethyl alcohol (in beverages)
(b) methyl alcohol (used as a solvent, for example, in shellac)
(c) ethylene glycol (antifreeze)
(d) isopropyl alcohol (used in rubbing alcohol)
(e) glycerine
PAGE: 1032
1018 20 • Exercises
32. Give the complete IUPAC name for each of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
33. Give the complete IUPAC name and the common name for each of the following compounds:
(a)
(b)
(c)
34. Write the condensed structures of both isomers with the formula C H O. Label the functional group of
2 6
each isomer.
35. Write the condensed structures of all isomers with the formula C H O . Label the functional group (or
2 6 2
groups) of each isomer.
36. Draw the condensed formulas for each of the following compounds:
(a) dipropyl ether
(b) 2,2-dimethyl-3-hexanol
(c) 2-ethoxybutane
37. MTBE, Methyltert-butyl ether, CH OC(CH ) , is used as an oxygen source in oxygenated gasolines. MTBE
3 33
is manufactured by reacting 2-methylpropene with methanol.
(a) Using Lewis structures, write the chemical equation representing the reaction.
(b) What volume of methanol, density 0.7915 g/mL, is required to produce exactly 1000 kg of MTBE,
assuming a 100% yield?
38. Write two complete balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
(a) propanol is converted to dipropyl ether
(b) propene is treated with water in dilute acid.
39. Write two complete balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
(a) 2-butene is treated with water in dilute acid
(b) ethanol is dehydrated to yield ethene
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1033
20 • Exercises 1019
20.3Aldehydes, Ketones, Carboxylic Acids, and Esters
40. Order the following molecules from least to most oxidized, based on the marked carbon atom:
41. Predict the products of oxidizing the molecules shown in this problem. In each case, identify the product
that will result from the minimal increase in oxidation state for the highlighted carbon atom:
(a)
(b)
(c)
42. Predict the products of reducing the following molecules. In each case, identify the product that will result
from the minimal decrease in oxidation state for the highlighted carbon atom:
(a)
(b)
(c)
43. Explain why it is not possible to prepare a ketone that contains only two carbon atoms.
44. How does hybridization of the substituted carbon atom change when an alcohol is converted into an
aldehyde? An aldehyde to a carboxylic acid?
45. Fatty acids are carboxylic acids that have long hydrocarbon chains attached to a carboxylate group. How
does a saturated fatty acid differ from an unsaturated fatty acid? How are they similar?
46. Write a condensed structural formula, such as CH CH , and describe the molecular geometry at each
3 3
carbon atom.
(a) propene
(b) 1-butanol
(c) ethyl propyl ether
(d)cis-4-bromo-2-heptene
(e) 2,2,3-trimethylhexane
(f) formaldehyde
PAGE: 1034
1020 20 • Exercises
47. Write a condensed structural formula, such as CH CH , and describe the molecular geometry at each
3 3
carbon atom.
(a) 2-propanol
(b) acetone
(c) dimethyl ether
(d) acetic acid
(e) 3-methyl-1-hexene
48. The foul odor of rancid butter is caused by butyric acid, CH CH CH CO H.
3 2 2 2
(a) Draw the Lewis structure and determine the oxidation number and hybridization for each carbon atom
in the molecule.
(b) The esters formed from butyric acid are pleasant-smelling compounds found in fruits and used in
perfumes. Draw the Lewis structure for the ester formed from the reaction of butyric acid with
2-propanol.
49. Write the two-resonance structures for the acetate ion.
50. Write two complete, balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures:
(a) ethanol reacts with propionic acid
(b) benzoic acid, C H CO H, is added to a solution of sodium hydroxide
6 5 2
51. Write two complete balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
(a) 1-butanol reacts with acetic acid
(b) propionic acid is poured onto solid calcium carbonate
52. Yields in organic reactions are sometimes low. What is the percent yield of a process that produces 13.0 g
of ethyl acetate from 10.0 g of CH CO H?
3 2
53. Alcohols A, B, and C all have the composition C H O. Molecules of alcohol A contain a branched carbon
4 10
chain and can be oxidized to an aldehyde; molecules of alcohol B contain a linear carbon chain and can be
oxidized to a ketone; and molecules of alcohol C can be oxidized to neither an aldehyde nor a ketone. Write
the Lewis structures of these molecules.
20.4Amines and Amides
54. Write the Lewis structures of both isomers with the formula C H N.
2 7
55. What is the molecular structure about the nitrogen atom in trimethyl amine and in the trimethyl
ammonium ion, (CH ) NH+? What is the hybridization of the nitrogen atom in trimethyl amine and in the
33
trimethyl ammonium ion?
56. Write the two resonance structures for the pyridinium ion, C H NH+.
5 5
57. Draw Lewis structures for pyridine and its conjugate acid, the pyridinium ion, C H NH+. What are the
5 5
hybridizations, electron domain geometries, and molecular geometries about the nitrogen atoms in
pyridine and in the pyridinium ion?
58. Write the Lewis structures of all isomers with the formula C H ON that contain an amide linkage.
3 7
59. Write two complete balanced equations for the following reaction, one using condensed formulas and one
using Lewis structures.
Methyl amine is added to a solution of HCl.
60. Write two complete, balanced equations for each of the following reactions, one using condensed formulas
and one using Lewis structures.
Ethylammonium chloride is added to a solution of sodium hydroxide.
61. Identify any carbon atoms that change hybridization and the change in hybridization during the reactions
inExercise 20.26.
62. Identify any carbon atoms that change hybridization and the change in hybridization during the reactions
inExercise 20.39.
63. Identify any carbon atoms that change hybridization and the change in hybridization during the reactions
inExercise 20.51.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1035
CHAPTER 21
Nuclear Chemistry
Figure21.1 Nuclear chemistry provides the basis for many useful diagnostic and therapeutic methods in medicine,
such as these positron emission tomography (PET) scans. The PET/computed tomography scan on the left shows
muscle activity. The brain scans in the center show chemical differences in dopamine signaling in the brains of
addicts and nonaddicts. The images on the right show an oncological application of PET scans to identify lymph
node metastasis.
CHAPTER OUTLINE
21.1Nuclear Structure and Stability
21.2Nuclear Equations
21.3Radioactive Decay
21.4Transmutation and Nuclear Energy
21.5Uses of Radioisotopes
21.6Biological Effects of Radiation
INTRODUCTION The chemical reactions that we have considered in previous chapters involve changes in the
electronicstructure of the species involved, that is, the arrangement of the electrons around atoms, ions, or
molecules.Nuclearstructure, the numbers of protons and neutrons within the nuclei of the atoms involved,
remains unchanged during chemical reactions.
This chapter will introduce the topic of nuclear chemistry, which began with the discovery of radioactivity in
1896 by French physicist Antoine Becquerel and has become increasingly important during the twentieth and
twenty-first centuries, providing the basis for various technologies related to energy, medicine, geology, and
many other areas.
PAGE: 1036
1022 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
21.1 Nuclear Structure and Stability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe nuclear structure in terms of protons, neutrons, and electrons
• Calculate mass defect and binding energy for nuclei
• Explain trends in the relative stability of nuclei
Nuclear chemistryis the study of reactions that involve changes in nuclear structure. The chapter on atoms,
molecules, and ions introduced the basic idea of nuclear structure, that the nucleus of an atom is composed of
protons and, with the exception of neutrons. Recall that the number of protons in the nucleus is called the
atomic number (Z) of the element, and the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons is the
mass number (A). Atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers are isotopes of the same
element. When referring to a single type of nucleus, we often use the termnuclideand identify it by the
notation where X is the symbol for the element, A is the mass number, and Z is the atomic number (for
example, Often a nuclide is referenced by the name of the element followed by a hyphen and the mass
number. For example, is called “carbon-14.”
Protons and neutrons, collectively callednucleons, are packed together tightly in a nucleus. With a radius of
about 10−15meters, a nucleus is quite small compared to the radius of the entire atom, which is about 10−10
meters. Nuclei are extremely dense compared to bulk matter, averaging 1.8 1014grams per cubic centimeter.
For example, water has a density of 1 gram per cubic centimeter, and iridium, one of the densest elements
known, has a density of 22.6 g/cm3. If the earth’s density were equal to the average nuclear density, the earth’s
radius would be only about 200 meters (earth’s actual radius is approximately 6.4 106meters, 30,000 times
larger).Example 21.1demonstrates just how great nuclear densities can be in the natural world.
EXAMPLE 21.1
Density of a Neutron Star
Neutron stars form when the core of a very massive star undergoes gravitational collapse, causing the star’s
outer layers to explode in a supernova. Composed almost completely of neutrons, they are the densest-known
stars in the universe, with densities comparable to the average density of an atomic nucleus. A neutron star in
a faraway galaxy has a mass equal to 2.4 solar masses (1 solar mass = = mass of the sun = 1.99 1030kg)
and a diameter of 26 km.
(a) What is the density of this neutron star?
(b) How does this neutron star’s density compare to the density of a uranium nucleus, which has a diameter of
about 15 fm (1 fm = 10–15m)?
Solution
We can treat both the neutron star and the U-235 nucleus as spheres. Then the density for both is given by:
(a) The radius of the neutron star is so the density of the
neutron star is:
(b) The radius of the U-235 nucleus is so the density of the U-235
nucleus is:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1037
21.1 • Nuclear Structure and Stability 1023
These values are fairly similar (same order of magnitude), but the neutron star is more than twice as dense as
the U-235 nucleus.
Check Your Learning
Find the density of a neutron star with a mass of 1.97 solar masses and a diameter of 13 km, and compare it to
the density of a hydrogen nucleus, which has a diameter of 1.75 fm (1 fm = 1 10–15m).
Answer:
The density of the neutron star is 3.4 1018kg/m3. The density of a hydrogen nucleus is 6.0 1017kg/m3. The
neutron star is 5.7 times denser than the hydrogen nucleus.
To hold positively charged protons together in the very small volume of a nucleus requires very strong
attractive forces because the positively charged protons repel one another strongly at such short distances.
The force of attraction that holds the nucleus together is thestrong nuclear force. (The strong force is one of
the four fundamental forces that are known to exist. The others are the electromagnetic force, the gravitational
force, and the nuclear weak force.) This force acts between protons, between neutrons, and between protons
and neutrons. It is very different from the electrostatic force that holds negatively charged electrons around a
positively charged nucleus (the attraction between opposite charges). Over distances less than 10−15meters
and within the nucleus, the strong nuclear force is much stronger than electrostatic repulsions between
protons; over larger distances and outside the nucleus, it is essentially nonexistent.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thiswebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16fourfund)for more information about the four fundamental forces.
Nuclear Binding Energy
As a simple example of the energy associated with the strong nuclear force, consider the helium atom
composed of two protons, two neutrons, and two electrons. The total mass of these six subatomic particles may
be calculated as:
However, mass spectrometric measurements reveal that the mass of an atom is 4.0026 amu, less than the
combined masses of its six constituent subatomic particles. This difference between the calculated and
experimentally measured masses is known as themass defectof the atom. In the case of helium, the mass
defect indicates a “loss” in mass of 4.0331 amu – 4.0026 amu = 0.0305 amu. The loss in mass accompanying
the formation of an atom from protons, neutrons, and electrons is due to the conversion of that mass into
energy that is evolved as the atom forms. Thenuclear binding energyis the energy produced when the atoms’
nucleons are bound together; this is also the energy needed to break a nucleus into its constituent protons and
neutrons. In comparison to chemical bond energies, nuclear binding energies arevastlygreater, as we will
learn in this section. Consequently, the energy changes associated with nuclear reactions are vastly greater
than are those for chemical reactions.
The conversion between mass and energy is most identifiably represented by themass-energy equivalence
equationas stated by Albert Einstein:
whereEis energy,mis mass of the matter being converted, andcis the speed of light in a vacuum. This
equation can be used to find the amount of energy that results when matter is converted into energy. Using this
PAGE: 1038
1024 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
mass-energy equivalence equation, the nuclear binding energy of a nucleus may be calculated from its mass
defect, as demonstrated inExample 21.2. A variety of units are commonly used for nuclear binding energies,
includingelectron volts (eV), with 1 eV equaling the amount of energy necessary to the move the charge of an
electron across an electric potential difference of 1 volt, making 1 eV = 1.602 10–19J.
EXAMPLE 21.2
Calculation of Nuclear Binding Energy
Determine the binding energy for the nuclide in:
(a) joules per mole of nuclei
(b) joules per nucleus
(c) MeV per nucleus
Solution
The mass defect for a nucleus is 0.0305 amu, as shown previously. Determine the binding energy in joules
per nuclide using the mass-energy equivalence equation. To accommodate the requested energy units, the
mass defect must be expressed in kilograms (recall that 1 J = 1 kg m2/s2).
(a) First, express the mass defect in g/mol. This is easily done considering thenumerical equivalenceof atomic
mass (amu) and molar mass (g/mol) that results from the definitions of the amu and mole units (refer to the
previous discussion in the chapter on atoms, molecules, and ions if needed). The mass defect is therefore
0.0305 g/mol. To accommodate the units of the other terms in the mass-energy equation, the mass must be
expressed in kg, since 1 J = 1 kg m2/s2. Converting grams into kilograms yields a mass defect of 3.05 10–5kg/
mol. Substituting this quantity into the mass-energy equivalence equation yields:
Note that this tremendous amount of energy is associated with the conversion of a very small amount of matter
(about 30 mg, roughly the mass of typical drop of water).
(b) The binding energy for a single nucleus is computed from the molar binding energy using Avogadro’s
number:
(c) Recall that 1 eV = 1.602 10–19J. Using the binding energy computed in part (b):
Check Your Learning
What is the binding energy for the nuclide (atomic mass: 18.9984 amu) in MeV per nucleus?
Answer:
148.4 MeV
Because the energy changes for breaking and forming bonds are so small compared to the energy changes for
breaking or forming nuclei, the changes in mass during all ordinary chemical reactions are virtually
undetectable. As described in the chapter on thermochemistry, the most energetic chemical reactions exhibit
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1039
21.1 • Nuclear Structure and Stability 1025
enthalpies on the order ofthousandsof kJ/mol, which is equivalent to mass differences in the nanogram range
(10–9g). On the other hand, nuclear binding energies are typically on the order ofbillionsof kJ/mol,
corresponding to mass differences in the milligram range (10–3g).
Nuclear Stability
A nucleus is stable if it cannot be transformed into another configuration without adding energy from the
outside. Of the thousands of nuclides that exist, about 250 are stable. A plot of the number of neutrons versus
the number of protons for stable nuclei reveals that the stable isotopes fall into a narrow band. This region is
known as theband of stability(also called the belt, zone, or valley of stability). The straight line inFigure 21.2
represents nuclei that have a 1:1 ratio of protons to neutrons (n:p ratio). Note that the lighter stable nuclei, in
general, have equal numbers of protons and neutrons. For example, nitrogen-14 has seven protons and seven
neutrons. Heavier stable nuclei, however, have increasingly more neutrons than protons. For example: iron-56
has 30 neutrons and 26 protons, an n:p ratio of 1.15, whereas the stable nuclide lead-207 has 125 neutrons
and 82 protons, an n:p ratio equal to 1.52. This is because larger nuclei have more proton-proton repulsions,
and require larger numbers of neutrons to provide compensating strong forces to overcome these electrostatic
repulsions and hold the nucleus together.
PAGE: 1040
1026 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.2 This plot shows the nuclides that are known to exist and those that are stable. The stable nuclides
are indicated in blue, and the unstable nuclides are indicated in green. Note that all isotopes of elements with
atomic numbers greater than 83 are unstable. The solid line is the line where n = Z.
The nuclei that are to the left or to the right of the band of stability are unstable and exhibitradioactivity. They
change spontaneously (decay) into other nuclei that are either in, or closer to, the band of stability. These
nuclear decay reactions convert one unstable isotope (orradioisotope) into another, more stable, isotope. We
will discuss the nature and products of this radioactive decay in subsequent sections of this chapter.
Several observations may be made regarding the relationship between the stability of a nucleus and its
structure. Nuclei with even numbers of protons, neutrons, or both are more likely to be stable (seeTable 21.1).
Nuclei with certain numbers of nucleons, known asmagic numbers, are stable against nuclear decay. These
numbers of protons or neutrons (2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126) make complete shells in the nucleus. These are
similar in concept to the stable electron shells observed for the noble gases. Nuclei that have magic numbers of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1041
21.1 • Nuclear Structure and Stability 1027
both protons and neutrons, such as and are called “double magic” and are particularly
stable. These trends in nuclear stability may be rationalized by considering a quantum mechanical model of
nuclear energy states analogous to that used to describe electronic states earlier in this textbook. The details of
this model are beyond the scope of this chapter.
Stable Nuclear Isotopes
Number of Stable Isotopes Proton Number Neutron Number
157 even even
53 even odd
50 odd even
5 odd odd
TABLE21.1
The relative stability of a nucleus is correlated with itsbinding energy per nucleon, the total binding energy
for the nucleus divided by the number or nucleons in the nucleus. For instance, we saw inExample 21.2that
the binding energy for a nucleus is 28.4 MeV. The binding energyper nucleonfor a nucleus is
therefore:
InExample 21.3, we learn how to calculate the binding energy per nucleon of a nuclide on the curve shown in
Figure 21.3.
FIGURE21.3 The binding energy per nucleon is largest for nuclides with mass number of approximately 56.
PAGE: 1042
1028 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
EXAMPLE 21.3
Calculation of Binding Energy per Nucleon
The iron nuclide lies near the top of the binding energy curve (Figure 21.3) and is one of the most stable
nuclides. What is the binding energy per nucleon (in MeV) for the nuclide (atomic mass of 55.9349 amu)?
Solution
As inExample 21.2, we first determine the mass defect of the nuclide, which is the difference between the
mass of 26 protons, 30 neutrons, and 26 electrons, and the observed mass of an atom:
We next calculate the binding energy for one nucleus from the mass defect using the mass-energy equivalence
equation:
We then convert the binding energy in joules per nucleus into units of MeV per nuclide:
Finally, we determine the binding energy per nucleon by dividing the total nuclear binding energy by the
number of nucleons in the atom:
Note that this is almost 25% larger than the binding energy per nucleon for
(Note also that this is the same process as inExample 21.1, but with the additional step of dividing the total
nuclear binding energy by the number of nucleons.)
Check Your Learning
What is the binding energy per nucleon in (atomic mass, 18.9984 amu)?
Answer:
7.810 MeV/nucleon
21.2 Nuclear Equations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify common particles and energies involved in nuclear reactions
• Write and balance nuclear equations
Changes of nuclei that result in changes in their atomic numbers, mass numbers, or energy states arenuclear
reactions. To describe a nuclear reaction, we use an equation that identifies the nuclides involved in the
reaction, their mass numbers and atomic numbers, and the other particles involved in the reaction.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1043
21.2 • Nuclear Equations 1029
Types of Particles in Nuclear Reactions
Many entities can be involved in nuclear reactions. The most common are protons, neutrons, alpha particles,
beta particles, positrons, and gamma rays, as shown inFigure 21.4. Protons also represented by the
symbol and neutrons are the constituents of atomic nuclei, and have been described previously.
Alpha particles also represented by the symbol are high-energy helium nuclei.Beta particles
also represented by the symbol are high-energy electrons, and gamma rays are photons of very
high-energy electromagnetic radiation.Positrons also represented by the symbol are positively
charged electrons (“anti-electrons”). The subscripts and superscripts are necessary for balancing nuclear
equations, but are usually optional in other circumstances. For example, an alpha particle is a helium nucleus
(He) with a charge of +2 and a mass number of 4, so it is symbolized This works because, in general, the
ion charge is not important in the balancing of nuclear equations.
FIGURE21.4 Although many species are encountered in nuclear reactions, this table summarizes the names,
symbols, representations, and descriptions of the most common of these.
Note that positrons are exactly like electrons, except they have the opposite charge. They are the most common
example ofantimatter, particles with the same mass but the opposite state of another property (for example,
charge) than ordinary matter. When antimatter encounters ordinary matter, both are annihilated and their
mass is converted into energy in the form ofgamma rays (γ)—and other much smaller subnuclear particles,
which are beyond the scope of this chapter—according to the mass-energy equivalence equationE=mc2, seen
in the preceding section. For example, when a positron and an electron collide, both are annihilated and two
gamma ray photons are created:
As seen in the chapter discussing light and electromagnetic radiation, gamma rays compose short wavelength,
high-energy electromagnetic radiation and are (much) more energetic than better-known X-rays that can
behave as particles in the wave-particle duality sense. Gamma rays are a type of high energy electromagnetic
radiation produced when a nucleus undergoes a transition from a higher to a lower energy state, similar to
how a photon is produced by an electronic transition from a higher to a lower energy level. Due to the much
larger energy differences between nuclear energy shells, gamma rays emanating from a nucleus have energies
that are typically millions of times larger than electromagnetic radiation emanating from electronic
transitions.
PAGE: 1044
1030 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Balancing Nuclear Reactions
A balanced chemical reaction equation reflects the fact that during a chemical reaction, bonds break and form,
and atoms are rearranged, but the total numbers of atoms of each element are conserved and do not change. A
balanced nuclear reaction equation indicates that there is a rearrangement during a nuclear reaction, but of
nucleons (subatomic particles within the atoms’ nuclei) rather than atoms. Nuclear reactions also follow
conservation laws, and they are balanced in two ways:
1. The sum of the mass numbers of the reactants equals the sum of the mass numbers of the products.
2. The sum of the charges of the reactants equals the sum of the charges of the products.
If the atomic number and the mass number of all but one of the particles in a nuclear reaction are known, we
can identify the particle by balancing the reaction. For instance, we could determine that is a product of
the nuclear reaction of and if we knew that a proton, was one of the two products.Example 21.4
shows how we can identify a nuclide by balancing the nuclear reaction.
EXAMPLE 21.4
Balancing Equations for Nuclear Reactions
The reaction of an α particle with magnesium-25 produces a proton and a nuclide of another element.
Identify the new nuclide produced.
Solution
The nuclear reaction can be written as:
where A is the mass number and Z is the atomic number of the new nuclide, X. Because the sum of the mass
numbers of the reactants must equal the sum of the mass numbers of the products:
Similarly, the charges must balance, so:
Check the periodic table: The element with nuclear charge = +13 is aluminum. Thus, the product is
Check Your Learning
The nuclide combines with an electron and produces a new nucleus and no other massive particles. What
is the equation for this reaction?
Answer:
Following are the equations of several nuclear reactions that have important roles in the history of nuclear
chemistry:
• The first naturally occurring unstable element that was isolated, polonium, was discovered by the Polish
scientist MarieCurieand her husband Pierre in 1898. It decays, emitting α particles:
• The first nuclide to be prepared by artificial means was an isotope of oxygen,17O. It was made by Ernest
Rutherfordin 1919 by bombarding nitrogen atoms with α particles:
• JamesChadwickdiscovered the neutron in 1932, as a previously unknown neutral particle produced
along with12C by the nuclear reaction between9Be and4He:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1045
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1031
• The first element to be prepared that does not occur naturally on the earth, technetium, was created by
bombardment of molybdenum by deuterons (heavy hydrogen, , by EmilioSegreand CarloPerrierin
1937:
• The first controlled nuclear chain reaction was carried out in a reactor at the University of Chicago in
1942. One of the many reactions involved was:
21.3 Radioactive Decay
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Recognize common modes of radioactive decay
• Identify common particles and energies involved in nuclear decay reactions
• Write and balance nuclear decay equations
• Calculate kinetic parameters for decay processes, including half-life
• Describe common radiometric dating techniques
Following the somewhat serendipitous discovery of radioactivity by Becquerel, many prominent scientists
began to investigate this new, intriguing phenomenon. Among them were Marie Curie (the first woman to win a
Nobel Prize, and the only person to win two Nobel Prizes in different sciences—chemistry and physics), who
was the first to coin the term “radioactivity,” and Ernest Rutherford (of gold foil experiment fame), who
investigated and named three of the most common types of radiation. During the beginning of the twentieth
century, many radioactive substances were discovered, the properties of radiation were investigated and
quantified, and a solid understanding of radiation and nuclear decay was developed.
The spontaneous change of an unstable nuclide into another isradioactive decay. The unstable nuclide is
called theparent nuclide; the nuclide that results from the decay is known as thedaughter nuclide. The
daughter nuclide may be stable, or it may decay itself. The radiation produced during radioactive decay is such
that the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than the parent nuclide, so the location of a nuclide
relative to the band of stability can serve as a guide to the kind of decay it will undergo (Figure 21.5).
FIGURE21.5 A nucleus of uranium-238 (the parent nuclide) undergoes α decay to form thorium-234 (the
daughter nuclide). The alpha particle removes two protons (green) and two neutrons (gray) from the uranium-238
nucleus.
LINK TO LEARNING
Although the radioactive decay of a nucleus is too small to see with the naked eye, we can indirectly view
radioactive decay in an environment called a cloud chamber. Clickhere(http://openstax.org/l/16cloudchamb)
to learn about cloud chambers and to view an interesting Cloud Chamber Demonstration from the Jefferson
Lab.
PAGE: 1046
1032 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Types of Radioactive Decay
Ernest Rutherford’s experiments involving the interaction of radiation with a magnetic or electric field (Figure
21.6) helped him determine that one type of radiation consisted of positively charged and relatively massive α
particles; a second type was made up of negatively charged and much less massive β particles; and a third was
uncharged electromagnetic waves, γ rays. We now know that α particles are high-energy helium nuclei, β
particles are high-energy electrons, and γ radiation compose high-energy electromagnetic radiation. We
classify different types of radioactive decay by the radiation produced.
FIGURE21.6 Alpha particles, which are attracted to the negative plate and deflected by a relatively small amount,
must be positively charged and relatively massive. Beta particles, which are attracted to the positive plate and
deflected a relatively large amount, must be negatively charged and relatively light. Gamma rays, which are
unaffected by the electric field, must be uncharged.
Alpha (α) decayis the emission of an α particle from the nucleus. For example, polonium-210 undergoes α
decay:
Alpha decay occurs primarily in heavy nuclei (A > 200, Z > 83). Because the loss of an α particle gives a
daughter nuclide with a mass number four units smaller and an atomic number two units smaller than those
of the parent nuclide, the daughter nuclide has a larger n:p ratio than the parent nuclide. If the parent nuclide
undergoing α decay lies below the band of stability (refer toFigure 21.2), the daughter nuclide will lie closer to
the band.
Beta (β) decayis the emission of an electron from a nucleus. Iodine-131 is an example of a nuclide that
undergoes β decay:
Beta decay, which can be thought of as the conversion of a neutron into a proton and a β particle, is observed in
nuclides with a large n:p ratio. The beta particle (electron) emitted is from the atomic nucleus and is not one of
the electrons surrounding the nucleus. Such nuclei lie above the band of stability. Emission of an electron does
not change the mass number of the nuclide but does increase the number of its protons and decrease the
number of its neutrons. Consequently, the n:p ratio is decreased, and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the
band of stability than did the parent nuclide.
Gamma emission (γ emission)is observed when a nuclide is formed in an excited state and then decays to its
ground state with the emission of a γ ray, a quantum of high-energy electromagnetic radiation. The presence
of a nucleus in an excited state is often indicated by an asterisk (*). Cobalt-60 emits γ radiation and is used in
many applications including cancer treatment:
There is no change in mass number or atomic number during the emission of a γ ray unless the γ emission
accompanies one of the other modes of decay.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1047
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1033
Positron emission (β+decay) is the emission of a positron from the nucleus. Oxygen-15 is an example of a
nuclide that undergoes positron emission:
Positron emission is observed for nuclides in which the n:p ratio is low. These nuclides lie below the band of
stability. Positron decay is the conversion of a proton into a neutron with the emission of a positron. The n:p
ratio increases, and the daughter nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide.
Electron captureoccurs when one of the inner electrons in an atom is captured by the atom’s nucleus. For
example, potassium-40 undergoes electron capture:
Electron capture occurs when an inner shell electron combines with a proton and is converted into a neutron.
The loss of an inner shell electron leaves a vacancy that will be filled by one of the outer electrons. As the outer
electron drops into the vacancy, it will emit energy. In most cases, the energy emitted will be in the form of an
X-ray. Like positron emission, electron capture occurs for “proton-rich” nuclei that lie below the band of
stability. Electron capture has the same effect on the nucleus as does positron emission: The atomic number is
decreased by one and the mass number does not change. This increases the n:p ratio, and the daughter
nuclide lies closer to the band of stability than did the parent nuclide. Whether electron capture or positron
emission occurs is difficult to predict. The choice is primarily due to kinetic factors, with the one requiring the
smaller activation energy being the one more likely to occur.
Figure 21.7summarizes these types of decay, along with their equations and changes in atomic and mass
numbers.
FIGURE21.7 This table summarizes the type, nuclear equation, representation, and any changes in the mass or
atomic numbers for various types of decay.
PAGE: 1048
1034 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Chemistry in Everyday Life
PET Scan
Positron emission tomography (PET) scans use radiation to diagnose and track health conditions and
monitor medical treatments by revealing how parts of a patient’s body function (Figure 21.8). To perform a
PET scan, a positron-emitting radioisotope is produced in a cyclotron and then attached to a substance that
is used by the part of the body being investigated. This “tagged” compound, or radiotracer, is then put into
the patient (injected via IV or breathed in as a gas), and how it is used by the tissue reveals how that organ
or other area of the body functions.
FIGURE21.8 A PET scanner (a) uses radiation to provide an image of how part of a patient’s body functions.
The scans it produces can be used to image a healthy brain (b) or can be used for diagnosing medical conditions
such as Alzheimer’s disease (c). (credit a: modification of work by Jens Maus)
For example, F-18 is produced by proton bombardment of18O and incorporated
into a glucose analog called fludeoxyglucose (FDG). How FDG is used by the body provides critical
diagnostic information; for example, since cancers use glucose differently than normal tissues, FDG can
reveal cancers. The18F emits positrons that interact with nearby electrons, producing a burst of gamma
radiation. This energy is detected by the scanner and converted into a detailed, three-dimensional, color
image that shows how that part of the patient’s body functions. Different levels of gamma radiation produce
different amounts of brightness and colors in the image, which can then be interpreted by a radiologist to
reveal what is going on. PET scans can detect heart damage and heart disease, help diagnose Alzheimer’s
disease, indicate the part of a brain that is affected by epilepsy, reveal cancer, show what stage it is, and
how much it has spread, and whether treatments are effective. Unlike magnetic resonance imaging and X-
rays, which only show how something looks, the big advantage of PET scans is that they show how
something functions. PET scans are now usually performed in conjunction with a computed tomography
scan.
Radioactive Decay Series
The naturally occurring radioactive isotopes of the heaviest elements fall into chains of successive
disintegrations, or decays, and all the species in one chain constitute a radioactive family, orradioactive
decay series. Three of these series include most of the naturally radioactive elements of the periodic table.
They are the uranium series, the actinide series, and the thorium series. The neptunium series is a fourth
series, which is no longer significant on the earth because of the short half-lives of the species involved. Each
series is characterized by a parent (first member) that has a long half-life and a series of daughter nuclides that
ultimately lead to a stable end-product—that is, a nuclide on the band of stability (Figure 21.9). In all three
series, the end-product is a stable isotope of lead. The neptunium series, previously thought to terminate with
bismuth-209, terminates with thallium-205.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1049
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1035
FIGURE21.9 Uranium-238 undergoes a radioactive decay series consisting of 14 separate steps before producing
stable lead-206. This series consists of eight α decays and six β decays.
Radioactive Half-Lives
Radioactive decay follows first-order kinetics. Since first-order reactions have already been covered in detail in
the kinetics chapter, we will now apply those concepts to nuclear decay reactions. Each radioactive nuclide has
a characteristic, constanthalf-life(t ), the time required for half of the atoms in a sample to decay. An
1/2
isotope’s half-life allows us to determine how long a sample of a useful isotope will be available, and how long a
sample of an undesirable or dangerous isotope must be stored before it decays to a low-enough radiation level
that is no longer a problem.
For example, cobalt-60, an isotope that emits gamma rays used to treat cancer, has a half-life of 5.27 years
(Figure 21.10). In a given cobalt-60 source, since half of the nuclei decay every 5.27 years, both the
amount of material and the intensity of the radiation emitted is cut in half every 5.27 years. (Note that for a
given substance, the intensity of radiation that it produces is directly proportional to the rate of decay of the
substance and the amount of the substance.) This is as expected for a process following first-order kinetics.
Thus, a cobalt-60 source that is used for cancer treatment must be replaced regularly to continue to be
effective.
PAGE: 1050
1036 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.10 For cobalt-60, which has a half-life of 5.27 years, 50% remains after 5.27 years (one half-life), 25%
remains after 10.54 years (two half-lives), 12.5% remains after 15.81 years (three half-lives), and so on.
Since nuclear decay follows first-order kinetics, we can adapt the mathematical relationships used for first-
order chemical reactions. We generally substitute the number of nuclei,N, for the concentration. If the rate is
stated in nuclear decays per second, we refer to it as the activity of the radioactive sample. The rate for
radioactive decay is:
decay rate =λNwithλ= the decay constant for the particular radioisotope
The decay constant,λ, which is the same as a rate constant discussed in the kinetics chapter. It is possible to
express the decay constant in terms of the half-life,t :
1/2
The first-order equations relating amount,N, and time are:
whereN is the initial number of nuclei or moles of the isotope, andN is the number of nuclei/moles
0 t
remaining at timet.Example 21.5applies these calculations to find the rates of radioactive decay for specific
nuclides.
EXAMPLE 21.5
Rates of Radioactive Decay
decays with a half-life of 5.27 years to produce
(a) What is the decay constant for the radioactive disintegration of cobalt-60?
(b) Calculate the fraction of a sample of the isotope that will remain after 15 years.
(c) How long does it take for a sample of to disintegrate to the extent that only 2.0% of the original amount
remains?
Solution
(a) The value of the rate constant is given by:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1051
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1037
(b) The fraction of that is left after timetis given by Rearranging the first-order relationshipN =
t
Ne–λtto solve for this ratio yields:
0
The fraction of that will remain after 15.0 years is 0.138. Or put another way, 13.8% of the originally
present will remain after 15 years.
(c) 2.00% of the original amount of is equal to 0.0200 N. Substituting this into the equation for time for
0
first-order kinetics, we have:
Check Your Learning
Radon-222, has a half-life of 3.823 days. How long will it take a sample of radon-222 with a mass of
0.750 g to decay into other elements, leaving only 0.100 g of radon-222?
Answer:
11.1 days
Because each nuclide has a specific number of nucleons, a particular balance of repulsion and attraction, and
its own degree of stability, the half-lives of radioactive nuclides vary widely. For example: the half-life of
is 1.9 1019years; is 24,000 years; is 3.82 days; and element-111 (Rg for roentgenium) is 1.5
10–3seconds. The half-lives of a number of radioactive isotopes important to medicine are shown inTable
21.2, and others are listed inAppendix M.
Half-lives of Radioactive Isotopes Important to Medicine
Type1 Decay Mode Half-Life Uses
F-18 β+decay 110. minutes PET scans
Co-60 β decay, γ decay 5.27 years cancer treatment
Tc-99m γ decay 8.01 hours scans of brain, lung, heart, bone
I-131 β decay 8.02 days thyroid scans and treatment
Tl-201 electron capture 73 hours heart and arteries scans; cardiac stress tests
TABLE21.2
Radiometric Dating
Several radioisotopes have half-lives and other properties that make them useful for purposes of “dating” the
origin of objects such as archaeological artifacts, formerly living organisms, or geological formations. This
process isradiometric datingand has been responsible for many breakthrough scientific discoveries about
1 The “m” in Tc-99m stands for “metastable,” indicating that this is an unstable, high-energy state of Tc-99. Metastable isotopes
emit γ radiation to rid themselves of excess energy and become (more) stable.
PAGE: 1052
1038 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
the geological history of the earth, the evolution of life, and the history of human civilization. We will explore
some of the most common types of radioactive dating and how the particular isotopes work for each type.
Radioactive Dating Using Carbon-14
The radioactivity of carbon-14 provides a method for dating objects that were a part of a living organism. This
method of radiometric dating, which is also calledradiocarbon datingor carbon-14 dating, is accurate for
dating carbon-containing substances that are up to about 30,000 years old, and can provide reasonably
accurate dates up to a maximum of about 50,000 years old.
Naturally occurring carbon consists of three isotopes: which constitutes about 99% of the carbon on
earth; about 1% of the total; and trace amounts of Carbon-14 forms in the upper atmosphere by the
reaction of nitrogen atoms with neutrons from cosmic rays in space:
All isotopes of carbon react with oxygen to produce CO molecules. The ratio of to depends on
2
the ratio of to in the atmosphere. The natural abundance of in the atmosphere is
approximately 1 part per trillion; until recently, this has generally been constant over time, as seen is gas
samples found trapped in ice. The incorporation of and into plants is a regular part of the
photosynthesis process, which means that the ratio found in a living plant is the same as the
ratio in the atmosphere. But when the plant dies, it no longer traps carbon through photosynthesis.
Because is a stable isotope and does not undergo radioactive decay, its concentration in the plant does not
change. However, carbon-14 decays by β emission with a half-life of 5730 years:
Thus, the ratio gradually decreases after the plant dies. The decrease in the ratio with time provides
a measure of the time that has elapsed since the death of the plant (or other organism that ate the plant).
Figure 21.11visually depicts this process.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1053
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1039
FIGURE21.11 Along with stable carbon-12, radioactive carbon-14 is taken in by plants and animals, and remains
at a constant level within them while they are alive. After death, the C-14 decays and the C-14:C-12 ratio in the
remains decreases. Comparing this ratio to the C-14:C-12 ratio in living organisms allows us to determine how long
ago the organism lived (and died).
For example, with the half-life of being 5730 years, if the ratio in a wooden object found in an
archaeological dig is half what it is in a living tree, this indicates that the wooden object is 5730 years old.
Highly accurate determinations of ratios can be obtained from very small samples (as little as a
milligram) by the use of a mass spectrometer.
LINK TO LEARNING
Visit thiswebsite(http://openstax.org/l/16phetradiom)to perform simulations of radiometric dating.
EXAMPLE 21.6
Radiocarbon Dating
A tiny piece of paper (produced from formerly living plant matter) taken from the Dead Sea Scrolls has an
activity of 10.8 disintegrations per minute per gram of carbon. If the initial C-14 activity was 13.6
disintegrations/min/g of C, estimate the age of the Dead Sea Scrolls.
Solution
The rate of decay (number of disintegrations/minute/gram of carbon) is proportional to the amount of
radioactive C-14 left in the paper, so we can substitute the rates for the amounts,N, in the relationship:
PAGE: 1054
1040 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
where the subscript 0 represents the time when the plants were cut to make the paper, and the subscriptt
represents the current time.
The decay constant can be determined from the half-life of C-14, 5730 years:
Substituting and solving, we have:
Therefore, the Dead Sea Scrolls are approximately 1900 years old (Figure 21.12).
FIGURE21.12 Carbon-14 dating has shown that these pages from the Dead Sea Scrolls were written or copied on
paper made from plants that died between 100 BC and AD 50.
Check Your Learning
More accurate dates of the reigns of ancient Egyptian pharaohs have been determined recently using plants
that were preserved in their tombs. Samples of seeds and plant matter from King Tutankhamun’s tomb have a
C-14 decay rate of 9.07 disintegrations/min/g of C. How long ago did King Tut’s reign come to an end?
Answer:
about 3350 years ago, or approximately 1340 BC
There have been some significant, well-documented changes to the ratio. The accuracy of a
straightforward application of this technique depends on the ratio in a living plant being the same
now as it was in an earlier era, but this is not always valid. Due to the increasing accumulation of CO
2
molecules (largely in the atmosphere caused by combustion of fossil fuels (in which essentially all of
the has decayed), the ratio of in the atmosphere may be changing. This manmade increase in
in the atmosphere causes the ratio to decrease, and this in turn affects the ratio in currently
living organisms on the earth. Fortunately, however, we can use other data, such as tree dating via examination
of annual growth rings, to calculate correction factors. With these correction factors, accurate dates can be
determined. In general, radioactive dating only works for about 10 half-lives; therefore, the limit for carbon-14
dating is about 57,000 years.
Radioactive Dating Using Nuclides Other than Carbon-14
Radioactive dating can also use other radioactive nuclides with longer half-lives to date older events. For
example, uranium-238 (which decays in a series of steps into lead-206) can be used for establishing the age of
rocks (and the approximate age of the oldest rocks on earth). Since U-238 has a half-life of 4.5 billion years, it
takes that amount of time for half of the original U-238 to decay into Pb-206. In a sample of rock that does not
contain appreciable amounts of Pb-208, the most abundant isotope of lead, we can assume that lead was not
present when the rock was formed. Therefore, by measuring and analyzing the ratio of U-238:Pb-206, we can
determine the age of the rock. This assumes that all of the lead-206 present came from the decay of
uranium-238. If there is additional lead-206 present, which is indicated by the presence of other lead isotopes
in the sample, it is necessary to make an adjustment. Potassium-argon dating uses a similar method. K-40
decays by positron emission and electron capture to form Ar-40 with a half-life of 1.25 billion years. If a rock
sample is crushed and the amount of Ar-40 gas that escapes is measured, determination of the Ar-40:K-40
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1055
21.3 • Radioactive Decay 1041
ratio yields the age of the rock. Other methods, such as rubidium-strontium dating (Rb-87 decays into Sr-87
with a half-life of 48.8 billion years), operate on the same principle. To estimate the lower limit for the earth’s
age, scientists determine the age of various rocks and minerals, making the assumption that the earth is older
than the oldest rocks and minerals in its crust. As of 2014, the oldest known rocks on earth are the Jack Hills
zircons from Australia, found by uranium-lead dating to be almost 4.4 billion years old.
EXAMPLE 21.7
Radioactive Dating of Rocks
An igneous rock contains 9.58 10–5g of U-238 and 2.51 10–5g of Pb-206, and much, much smaller
amounts of Pb-208. Determine the approximate time at which the rock formed.
Solution
The sample of rock contains very little Pb-208, the most common isotope of lead, so we can safely assume that
all the Pb-206 in the rock was produced by the radioactive decay of U-238. When the rock formed, it contained
all of the U-238 currently in it, plus some U-238 that has since undergone radioactive decay.
The amount of U-238 currently in the rock is:
Because when one mole of U-238 decays, it produces one mole of Pb-206, the amount of U-238 that has
undergone radioactive decay since the rock was formed is:
The total amount of U-238 originally present in the rock is therefore:
The amount of time that has passed since the formation of the rock is given by:
withN representing the original amount of U-238 andN representing the present amount of U-238.
0 t
U-238 decays into Pb-206 with a half-life of 4.5 109y, so the decay constantλis:
Substituting and solving, we have:
Therefore, the rock is approximately 1.7 billion years old.
Check Your Learning
A sample of rock contains 6.14 10–4g of Rb-87 and 3.51 10–5g of Sr-87. Calculate the age of the rock. (The
half-life of the β decay of Rb-87 is 4.7 1010y.)
Answer:
3.7 109y
PAGE: 1056
1042 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
21.4 Transmutation and Nuclear Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the synthesis of transuranium nuclides
• Explain nuclear fission and fusion processes
• Relate the concepts of critical mass and nuclear chain reactions
• Summarize basic requirements for nuclear fission and fusion reactors
After the discovery of radioactivity, the field of nuclear chemistry was created and developed rapidly during
the early twentieth century. A slew of new discoveries in the 1930s and 1940s, along with World War II,
combined to usher in the Nuclear Age in the mid-twentieth century. Scientists learned how to create new
substances, and certain isotopes of certain elements were found to possess the capacity to produce
unprecedented amounts of energy, with the potential to cause tremendous damage during war, as well as
produce enormous amounts of power for society’s needs during peace.
Synthesis of Nuclides
Nuclear transmutationis the conversion of one nuclide into another. It can occur by the radioactive decay of a
nucleus, or the reaction of a nucleus with another particle. The first manmade nucleus was produced in Ernest
Rutherford’s laboratory in 1919 by atransmutationreaction, the bombardment of one type of nuclei with
other nuclei or with neutrons. Rutherford bombarded nitrogen atoms with high-speed α particles from a
natural radioactive isotope of radium and observed protons resulting from the reaction:
The and nuclei that are produced are stable, so no further (nuclear) changes occur.
To reach the kinetic energies necessary to produce transmutation reactions, devices calledparticle
acceleratorsare used. These devices use magnetic and electric fields to increase the speeds of nuclear
particles. In all accelerators, the particles move in a vacuum to avoid collisions with gas molecules. When
neutrons are required for transmutation reactions, they are usually obtained from radioactive decay reactions
or from various nuclear reactions occurring in nuclear reactors. The Chemistry in Everyday Life feature that
follows discusses a famous particle accelerator that made worldwide news.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
CERN Particle Accelerator
Located near Geneva, the CERN (“Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire,” or European Council for
Nuclear Research) Laboratory is the world’s premier center for the investigations of the fundamental
particles that make up matter. It contains the 27-kilometer (17 mile) long, circular Large Hadron Collider
(LHC), the largest particle accelerator in the world (Figure 21.13). In the LHC, particles are boosted to high
energies and are then made to collide with each other or with stationary targets at nearly the speed of light.
Superconducting electromagnets are used to produce a strong magnetic field that guides the particles
around the ring. Specialized, purpose-built detectors observe and record the results of these collisions,
which are then analyzed by CERN scientists using powerful computers.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1057
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1043
FIGURE21.13 A small section of the LHC is shown with workers traveling along it. (credit: Christophe Delaere)
In 2012, CERN announced that experiments at the LHC showed the first observations of the Higgs boson,
an elementary particle that helps explain the origin of mass in fundamental particles. This long-
anticipated discovery made worldwide news and resulted in the awarding of the 2013 Nobel Prize in
Physics to François Englert and Peter Higgs, who had predicted the existence of this particle almost 50
years previously.
LINK TO LEARNING
Famous physicist Brian Cox talks about his work on the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, providing an
entertaining and engagingtour(http://openstax.org/l/16tedCERN)of this massive project and the physics
behind it.
View a shortvideo(http://openstax.org/l/16CERNvideo)from CERN, describing the basics of how its particle
accelerators work.
Prior to 1940, the heaviest-known element was uranium, whose atomic number is 92. Now, many artificial
elements have been synthesized and isolated, including several on such a large scale that they have had a
profound effect on society. One of these—element 93, neptunium (Np)—was first made in 1940 by McMillan
and Abelson by bombarding uranium-238 with neutrons. The reaction creates unstable uranium-239, with a
half-life of 23.5 minutes, which then decays into neptunium-239. Neptunium-239 is also radioactive, with a
half-life of 2.36 days, and it decays into plutonium-239. The nuclear reactions are:
Plutonium is now mostly formed in nuclear reactors as a byproduct during the fission of U-235. Additional
neutrons are released during this fission process (see the next section), some of which combine with U-238
nuclei to form uranium-239; this undergoes β decay to form neptunium-239, which in turn undergoes β decay
to form plutonium-239 as illustrated in the preceding three equations. These processes are summarized in the
equation:
Heavier isotopes of plutonium—Pu-240, Pu-241, and Pu-242—are also produced when lighter plutonium
PAGE: 1058
1044 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
nuclei capture neutrons. Some of this highly radioactive plutonium is used to produce military weapons, and
the rest presents a serious storage problem because they have half-lives from thousands to hundreds of
thousands of years.
Although they have not been prepared in the same quantity as plutonium, many other synthetic nuclei have
been produced. Nuclear medicine has developed from the ability to convert atoms of one type into other types
of atoms. Radioactive isotopes of several dozen elements are currently used for medical applications. The
radiation produced by their decay is used to image or treat various organs or portions of the body, among other
uses.
The elements beyond element 92 (uranium) are calledtransuranium elements. As of this writing, 22
transuranium elements have been produced and officially recognized by IUPAC; several other elements have
formation claims that are waiting for approval. Some of these elements are shown inTable 21.3.
Preparation of Some of the Transuranium Elements
Name Symbol Atomic Number Reaction
americium Am 95
curium Cm 96
californium Cf 98
einsteinium Es 99
mendelevium Md 101
nobelium No 102
rutherfordium Rf 104
seaborgium Sg 106
meitnerium Mt 107
TABLE21.3
Nuclear Fission
Many heavier elements with smaller binding energies per nucleon can decompose into more stable elements
that have intermediate mass numbers and larger binding energies per nucleon—that is, mass numbers and
binding energies per nucleon that are closer to the “peak” of the binding energy graph near 56 (seeFigure
21.3). Sometimes neutrons are also produced. This decomposition is calledfission, the breaking of a large
nucleus into smaller pieces. The breaking is rather random with the formation of a large number of different
products. Fission usually does not occur naturally, but is induced by bombardment with neutrons. The first
reported nuclear fission occurred in 1939 when three German scientists, Lise Meitner, Otto Hahn, and Fritz
Strassman, bombarded uranium-235 atoms with slow-moving neutrons that split the U-238 nuclei into
smaller fragments that consisted of several neutrons and elements near the middle of the periodic table. Since
then, fission has been observed in many other isotopes, including most actinide isotopes that have an odd
number of neutrons. A typical nuclear fission reaction is shown inFigure 21.14.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1059
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1045
FIGURE21.14 When a slow neutron hits a fissionable U-235 nucleus, it is absorbed and forms an unstable U-236
nucleus. The U-236 nucleus then rapidly breaks apart into two smaller nuclei (in this case, Ba-141 and Kr-92) along
with several neutrons (usually two or three), and releases a very large amount of energy.
Among the products of Meitner, Hahn, and Strassman’s fission reaction were barium, krypton, lanthanum, and
cerium, all of which have nuclei that are more stable than uranium-235. Since then, hundreds of different
isotopes have been observed among the products of fissionable substances. A few of the many reactions that
occur for U-235, and a graph showing the distribution of its fission products and their yields, are shown in
Figure 21.15. Similar fission reactions have been observed with other uranium isotopes, as well as with a
variety of other isotopes such as those of plutonium.
FIGURE21.15 (a) Nuclear fission of U-235 produces a range of fission products. (b) The larger fission products of
U-235 are typically one isotope with a mass number around 85–105, and another isotope with a mass number that
is about 50% larger, that is, about 130–150.
LINK TO LEARNING
View thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16fission)to see a simulation of nuclear fission.
A tremendous amount of energy is produced by the fission of heavy elements. For instance, when one mole of
PAGE: 1060
1046 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
U-235 undergoes fission, the products weigh about 0.2 grams less than the reactants; this “lost” mass is
converted into a very large amount of energy, about 1.8 1010kJ per mole of U-235. Nuclear fission reactions
produce incredibly large amounts of energy compared to chemical reactions. The fission of 1 kilogram of
uranium-235, for example, produces about 2.5 million times as much energy as is produced by burning 1
kilogram of coal.
As described earlier, when undergoing fission U-235 produces two “medium-sized” nuclei, and two or three
neutrons. These neutrons may then cause the fission of other uranium-235 atoms, which in turn provide more
neutrons that can cause fission of even more nuclei, and so on. If this occurs, we have a nuclearchain reaction
(seeFigure 21.16). On the other hand, if too many neutrons escape the bulk material without interacting with a
nucleus, then no chain reaction will occur.
FIGURE21.16 The fission of a large nucleus, such as U-235, produces two or three neutrons, each of which is
capable of causing fission of another nucleus by the reactions shown. If this process continues, a nuclear chain
reaction occurs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1061
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1047
Material that can sustain a nuclear fission chain reaction is said to befissileorfissionable. (Technically, fissile
material can undergo fission with neutrons of any energy, whereas fissionable material requires high-energy
neutrons.) Nuclear fission becomes self-sustaining when the number of neutrons produced by fission equals
or exceeds the number of neutrons absorbed by splitting nuclei plus the number that escape into the
surroundings. The amount of a fissionable material that will support a self-sustaining chain reaction is a
critical mass. An amount of fissionable material that cannot sustain a chain reaction is asubcritical mass. An
amount of material in which there is an increasing rate of fission is known as asupercritical mass. The
critical mass depends on the type of material: its purity, the temperature, the shape of the sample, and how the
neutron reactions are controlled (Figure 21.17).
FIGURE21.17 (a) In a subcritical mass, the fissile material is too small and allows too many neutrons to escape
the material, so a chain reaction does not occur. (b) In a critical mass, a large enough number of neutrons in the
fissile material induce fission to create a chain reaction.
An atomic bomb (Figure 21.18) contains several pounds of fissionable material, or a source of
neutrons, and an explosive device for compressing it quickly into a small volume. When fissionable material is
in small pieces, the proportion of neutrons that escape through the relatively large surface area is great, and a
chain reaction does not take place. When the small pieces of fissionable material are brought together quickly
to form a body with a mass larger than the critical mass, the relative number of escaping neutrons decreases,
and a chain reaction and explosion result.
PAGE: 1062
1048 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.18 (a) The nuclear fission bomb that destroyed Hiroshima on August 6, 1945, consisted of two
subcritical masses of U-235, where conventional explosives were used to fire one of the subcritical masses into the
other, creating the critical mass for the nuclear explosion. (b) The plutonium bomb that destroyed Nagasaki on
August 9, 1945, consisted of a hollow sphere of plutonium that was rapidly compressed by conventional explosives.
This led to a concentration of plutonium in the center that was greater than the critical mass necessary for the
nuclear explosion.
Fission Reactors
Chain reactions of fissionable materials can be controlled and sustained without an explosion in anuclear
reactor(Figure 21.19). Any nuclear reactor that produces power via the fission of uranium or plutonium by
bombardment with neutrons must have at least five components: nuclear fuel consisting of fissionable
material, a nuclear moderator, reactor coolant, control rods, and a shield and containment system. We will
discuss these components in greater detail later in the section. The reactor works by separating the fissionable
nuclear material such that a critical mass cannot be formed, controlling both the flux and absorption of
neutrons to allow shutting down the fission reactions. In a nuclear reactor used for the production of
electricity, the energy released by fission reactions is trapped as thermal energy and used to boil water and
produce steam. The steam is used to turn a turbine, which powers a generator for the production of electricity.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1063
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1049
FIGURE21.19 (a) The Diablo Canyon Nuclear Power Plant near San Luis Obispo is the only nuclear power plant
currently in operation in California. The domes are the containment structures for the nuclear reactors, and the
brown building houses the turbine where electricity is generated. Ocean water is used for cooling. (b) The Diablo
Canyon uses a pressurized water reactor, one of a few different fission reactor designs in use around the world, to
produce electricity. Energy from the nuclear fission reactions in the core heats water in a closed, pressurized
system. Heat from this system produces steam that drives a turbine, which in turn produces electricity. (credit a:
modification of work by “Mike” Michael L. Baird; credit b: modification of work by the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission)
Nuclear Fuels
Nuclear fuelconsists of a fissionable isotope, such as uranium-235, which must be present in sufficient
quantity to provide a self-sustaining chain reaction. In the United States, uranium ores contain from
0.05–0.3% of the uranium oxide U O ; the uranium in the ore is about 99.3% nonfissionable U-238 with only
3 8
0.7% fissionable U-235. Nuclear reactors require a fuel with a higher concentration of U-235 than is found in
nature; it is normally enriched to have about 5% of uranium mass as U-235. At this concentration, it is not
possible to achieve the supercritical mass necessary for a nuclear explosion. Uranium can be enriched by
gaseous diffusion (the only method currently used in the US), using a gas centrifuge, or by laser separation.
In the gaseous diffusion enrichment plant where U-235 fuel is prepared, UF (uranium hexafluoride) gas at low
6
pressure moves through barriers that have holes just barely large enough for UF to pass through. The slightly
6
lighter235UF molecules diffuse through the barrier slightly faster than the heavier238UF molecules. This
6 6
process is repeated through hundreds of barriers, gradually increasing the concentration of235UF to the level
6
needed by the nuclear reactor. The basis for this process, Graham’s law, is described in the chapter on gases.
The enriched UF gas is collected, cooled until it solidifies, and then taken to a fabrication facility where it is
6
made into fuel assemblies. Each fuel assembly consists of fuel rods that contain many thimble-sized, ceramic-
encased, enriched uranium (usually UO ) fuel pellets. Modern nuclear reactors may contain as many as 10
2
million fuel pellets. The amount of energy in each of these pellets is equal to that in almost a ton of coal or 150
gallons of oil.
Nuclear Moderators
Neutrons produced by nuclear reactions move too fast to cause fission (refer back toFigure 21.17). They must
first be slowed to be absorbed by the fuel and produce additional nuclear reactions. Anuclear moderatoris a
substance that slows the neutrons to a speed that is low enough to cause fission. Early reactors used high-
purity graphite as a moderator. Modern reactors in the US exclusively use heavy water or light water
(ordinary H O), whereas some reactors in other countries use other materials, such as carbon dioxide,
2
beryllium, or graphite.
PAGE: 1064
1050 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Reactor Coolants
A nuclearreactor coolantis used to carry the heat produced by the fission reaction to an external boiler and
turbine, where it is transformed into electricity. Two overlapping coolant loops are often used; this counteracts
the transfer of radioactivity from the reactor to the primary coolant loop. All nuclear power plants in the US
use water as a coolant. Other coolants include molten sodium, lead, a lead-bismuth mixture, or molten salts.
Control Rods
Nuclear reactors usecontrol rods(Figure 21.20) to control the fission rate of the nuclear fuel by adjusting the
number of slow neutrons present to keep the rate of the chain reaction at a safe level. Control rods are made of
boron, cadmium, hafnium, or other elements that are able to absorb neutrons. Boron-10, for example, absorbs
neutrons by a reaction that produces lithium-7 and alpha particles:
When control rod assemblies are inserted into the fuel element in the reactor core, they absorb a larger
fraction of the slow neutrons, thereby slowing the rate of the fission reaction and decreasing the power
produced. Conversely, if the control rods are removed, fewer neutrons are absorbed, and the fission rate and
energy production increase. In an emergency, the chain reaction can be shut down by fully inserting all of the
control rods into the nuclear core between the fuel rods.
FIGURE21.20 The nuclear reactor core shown in (a) contains the fuel and control rod assembly shown in (b).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1065
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1051
(credit: modification of work by E. Generalic, http://glossary.periodni.com/glossary.php?en=control+rod)
Shield and Containment System
During its operation, a nuclear reactor produces neutrons and other radiation. Even when shut down, the
decay products are radioactive. In addition, an operating reactor is thermally very hot, and high pressures
result from the circulation of water or another coolant through it. Thus, a reactor must withstand high
temperatures and pressures, and must protect operating personnel from the radiation. Reactors are equipped
with acontainment system(or shield) that consists of three parts:
1. The reactor vessel, a steel shell that is 3–20-centimeters thick and, with the moderator, absorbs much of
the radiation produced by the reactor
2. A main shield of 1–3 meters of high-density concrete
3. A personnel shield of lighter materials that protects operators from γ rays and X-rays
In addition, reactors are often covered with a steel or concrete dome that is designed to contain any radioactive
materials might be released by a reactor accident.
LINK TO LEARNING
Click here to watch a3-minute video(http://openstax.org/l/16nucreactors)from the Nuclear Energy Institute
on how nuclear reactors work.
Nuclear power plants are designed in such a way that they cannot form a supercritical mass of fissionable
material and therefore cannot create a nuclear explosion. But as history has shown, failures of systems and
safeguards can cause catastrophic accidents, including chemical explosions and nuclear meltdowns (damage
to the reactor core from overheating). The following Chemistry in Everyday Life feature explores three
infamous meltdown incidents.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Nuclear Accidents
The importance of cooling and containment are amply illustrated by three major accidents that occurred
with the nuclear reactors at nuclear power generating stations in the United States (Three Mile Island), the
former Soviet Union (Chernobyl), and Japan (Fukushima).
In March 1979, the cooling system of the Unit 2 reactor at Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station in
Pennsylvania failed, and the cooling water spilled from the reactor onto the floor of the containment
building. After the pumps stopped, the reactors overheated due to the high radioactive decay heat
produced in the first few days after the nuclear reactor shut down. The temperature of the core climbed to
at least 2200 °C, and the upper portion of the core began to melt. In addition, the zirconium alloy cladding
of the fuel rods began to react with steam and produced hydrogen:
The hydrogen accumulated in the confinement building, and it was feared that there was danger of an
explosion of the mixture of hydrogen and air in the building. Consequently, hydrogen gas and radioactive
gases (primarily krypton and xenon) were vented from the building. Within a week, cooling water
circulation was restored and the core began to cool. The plant was closed for nearly 10 years during the
cleanup process.
Although zero discharge of radioactive material is desirable, the discharge of radioactive krypton and
xenon, such as occurred at the Three Mile Island plant, is among the most tolerable. These gases readily
disperse in the atmosphere and thus do not produce highly radioactive areas. Moreover, they are noble
gases and are not incorporated into plant and animal matter in the food chain. Effectively none of the
heavy elements of the core of the reactor were released into the environment, and no cleanup of the area
outside of the containment building was necessary (Figure 21.21).
PAGE: 1066
1052 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.21 (a) In this 2010 photo of Three Mile Island, the remaining structures from the damaged Unit 2
reactor are seen on the left, whereas the separate Unit 1 reactor, unaffected by the accident, continues
generating power to this day (right). (b) President Jimmy Carter visited the Unit 2 control room a few days after
the accident in 1979.
Another major nuclear accident involving a reactor occurred in April 1986, at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power
Plant in Ukraine, which was still a part of the former Soviet Union. While operating at low power during an
unauthorized experiment with some of its safety devices shut off, one of the reactors at the plant became
unstable. Its chain reaction became uncontrollable and increased to a level far beyond what the reactor was
designed for. The steam pressure in the reactor rose to between 100 and 500 times the full power pressure
and ruptured the reactor. Because the reactor was not enclosed in a containment building, a large amount
of radioactive material spewed out, and additional fission products were released, as the graphite (carbon)
moderator of the core ignited and burned. The fire was controlled, but over 200 plant workers and
firefighters developed acute radiation sickness and at least 32 soon died from the effects of the radiation. It
is predicted that about 4000 more deaths will occur among emergency workers and former Chernobyl
residents from radiation-induced cancer and leukemia. The reactor has since been encapsulated in steel
and concrete, a now-decaying structure known as the sarcophagus. Almost 30 years later, significant
radiation problems still persist in the area, and Chernobyl largely remains a wasteland.
In 2011, the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in Japan was badly damaged by a 9.0-magnitude
earthquake and resulting tsunami. Three reactors up and running at the time were shut down
automatically, and emergency generators came online to power electronics and coolant systems. However,
the tsunami quickly flooded the emergency generators and cut power to the pumps that circulated coolant
water through the reactors. High-temperature steam in the reactors reacted with zirconium alloy to
produce hydrogen gas. The gas escaped into the containment building, and the mixture of hydrogen and
air exploded. Radioactive material was released from the containment vessels as the result of deliberate
venting to reduce the hydrogen pressure, deliberate discharge of coolant water into the sea, and accidental
or uncontrolled events.
An evacuation zone around the damaged plant extended over 12.4 miles away, and an estimated 200,000
people were evacuated from the area. All 48 of Japan’s nuclear power plants were subsequently shut down,
remaining shuttered as of December 2014. Since the disaster, public opinion has shifted from largely
favoring to largely opposing increasing the use of nuclear power plants, and a restart of Japan’s atomic
energy program is still stalled (Figure 21.22).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1067
21.4 • Transmutation and Nuclear Energy 1053
FIGURE21.22 (a) After the accident, contaminated waste had to be removed, and (b) an evacuation zone was
set up around the plant in areas that received heavy doses of radioactive fallout. (credit a: modification of work
by “Live Action Hero”/Flickr)
The energy produced by a reactor fueled with enriched uranium results from the fission of uranium as well as
from the fission of plutonium produced as the reactor operates. As discussed previously, the plutonium forms
from the combination of neutrons and the uranium in the fuel. In any nuclear reactor, only about 0.1% of the
mass of the fuel is converted into energy. The other 99.9% remains in the fuel rods as fission products and
unused fuel. All of the fission products absorb neutrons, and after a period of several months to a few years,
depending on the reactor, the fission products must be removed by changing the fuel rods. Otherwise, the
concentration of these fission products would increase and absorb more neutrons until the reactor could no
longer operate.
Spent fuel rods contain a variety of products, consisting of unstable nuclei ranging in atomic number from 25
to 60, some transuranium elements, including plutonium and americium, and unreacted uranium isotopes.
The unstable nuclei and the transuranium isotopes give the spent fuel a dangerously high level of radioactivity.
The long-lived isotopes require thousands of years to decay to a safe level. The ultimate fate of the nuclear
reactor as a significant source of energy in the United States probably rests on whether or not a politically and
scientifically satisfactory technique for processing and storing the components of spent fuel rods can be
developed.
LINK TO LEARNING
Explore the information in thislink(http://openstax.org/l/16wastemgmt)to learn about the approaches to
nuclear waste management.
Nuclear Fusion and Fusion Reactors
The process of converting very light nuclei into heavier nuclei is also accompanied by the conversion of mass
into large amounts of energy, a process calledfusion. The principal source of energy in the sun is a net fusion
reaction in which four hydrogen nuclei fuse and produce one helium nucleus and two positrons. This is a net
reaction of a more complicated series of events:
A helium nucleus has a mass that is 0.7% less than that of four hydrogen nuclei; this lost mass is converted
into energy during the fusion. This reaction produces about 3.6 1011kJ of energy per mole of produced.
This is somewhat larger than the energy produced by the nuclear fission of one mole of U-235 (1.8 1010kJ),
and over 3 million times larger than the energy produced by the (chemical) combustion of one mole of octane
(5471 kJ).
PAGE: 1068
1054 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
It has been determined that the nuclei of the heavy isotopes of hydrogen, a deuteron, and a triton,
undergo fusion at extremely high temperatures (thermonuclear fusion). They form a helium nucleus and a
neutron:
This change proceeds with a mass loss of 0.0188 amu, corresponding to the release of 1.69 109kilojoules per
mole of formed. The very high temperature is necessary to give the nuclei enough kinetic energy to
overcome the very strong repulsive forces resulting from the positive charges on their nuclei so they can
collide.
Useful fusion reactions require very high temperatures for their initiation—about 15,000,000 K or more. At
these temperatures, all molecules dissociate into atoms, and the atoms ionize, forming plasma. These
conditions occur in an extremely large number of locations throughout the universe—stars are powered by
fusion. Humans have already figured out how to create temperatures high enough to achieve fusion on a large
scale in thermonuclear weapons. A thermonuclear weapon such as a hydrogen bomb contains a nuclear
fission bomb that, when exploded, gives off enough energy to produce the extremely high temperatures
necessary for fusion to occur.
Another much more beneficial way to create fusion reactions is in afusion reactor, a nuclear reactor in which
fusion reactions of light nuclei are controlled. Because no solid materials are stable at such high temperatures,
mechanical devices cannot contain the plasma in which fusion reactions occur. Two techniques to contain
plasma at the density and temperature necessary for a fusion reaction are currently the focus of intensive
research efforts: containment by a magnetic field and by the use of focused laser beams (Figure 21.23). A
number of large projects are working to attain one of the biggest goals in science: getting hydrogen fuel to
ignite and produce more energy than the amount supplied to achieve the extremely high temperatures and
pressures that are required for fusion. At the time of this writing, there are no self-sustaining fusion reactors
operating in the world, although small-scale controlled fusion reactions have been run for very brief periods.
FIGURE21.23 (a) This model is of the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) reactor. Currently
under construction in the south of France with an expected completion date of 2027, the ITER will be the world’s
largest experimental Tokamak nuclear fusion reactor with a goal of achieving large-scale sustained energy
production. (b) In 2012, the National Ignition Facility at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory briefly produced
over 500,000,000,000 watts (500 terawatts, or 500 TW) of peak power and delivered 1,850,000 joules (1.85 MJ) of
energy, the largest laser energy ever produced and 1000 times the power usage of the entire United States in any
given moment. Although lasting only a few billionths of a second, the 192 lasers attained the conditions needed for
nuclear fusion ignition. This image shows the target prior to the laser shot. (credit a: modification of work by Stephan
Mosel)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1069
21.5 • Uses of Radioisotopes 1055
21.5 Uses of Radioisotopes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List common applications of radioactive isotopes
Radioactive isotopes have the same chemical properties as stable isotopes of the same element, but they emit
radiation, which can be detected. If we replace one (or more) atom(s) with radioisotope(s) in a compound, we
can track them by monitoring their radioactive emissions. This type of compound is called aradioactive
tracer(orradioactive label). Radioisotopes are used to follow the paths of biochemical reactions or to
determine how a substance is distributed within an organism. Radioactive tracers are also used in many
medical applications, including both diagnosis and treatment. They are used to measure engine wear, analyze
the geological formation around oil wells, and much more.
Radioimmunossays (RIA), for example, rely on radioisotopes to detect the presence and/or concentration of
certain antigens. Developed by Rosalyn Sussman Yalow and Solomon Berson in the 1950s, the technique is
known for extreme sensitivity, meaning that it can detect and measure very small quantities of a substance.
Prior to its discovery, most similar detection relied on large enough quantities to produce visible outcomes.
RIA revolutionized and expanded entire fields of study, most notably endocrinology, and is commonly used in
narcotics detection, blood bank screening, early cancer screening, hormone measurement, and allergy
diagnosis. Based on her significant contribution to medicine, Yalow received a Nobel Prize, making her the
second woman to be awarded the prize for medicine.
Radioisotopes have revolutionized medical practice (seeAppendix M), where they are used extensively. Over
10 million nuclear medicine procedures and more than 100 million nuclear medicine tests are performed
annually in the United States. Four typical examples of radioactive tracers used in medicine are technetium-99
, thallium-201 , iodine-131 , and sodium-24 . Damaged tissues in the heart, liver,
and lungs absorb certain compounds of technetium-99 preferentially. After it is injected, the location of the
technetium compound, and hence the damaged tissue, can be determined by detecting the γ rays emitted by
the Tc-99 isotope. Thallium-201 (Figure 21.24) becomes concentrated in healthy heart tissue, so the two
isotopes, Tc-99 and Tl-201, are used together to study heart tissue. Iodine-131 concentrates in the thyroid
gland, the liver, and some parts of the brain. It can therefore be used to monitor goiter and treat thyroid
conditions, such as Grave’s disease, as well as liver and brain tumors. Salt solutions containing compounds of
sodium-24 are injected into the bloodstream to help locate obstructions to the flow of blood.
PAGE: 1070
1056 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.24 Administering thallium-201 to a patient and subsequently performing a stress test offer medical
professionals an opportunity to visually analyze heart function and blood flow. (credit: modification of work by
“Blue0ctane”/Wikimedia Commons)
Radioisotopes used in medicine typically have short half-lives—for example, the ubiquitous Tc-99m has a half-
life of 6.01 hours. This makes Tc-99m essentially impossible to store and prohibitively expensive to transport,
so it is made on-site instead. Hospitals and other medical facilities use Mo-99 (which is primarily extracted
from U-235 fission products) to generate Tc-99. Mo-99 undergoes β decay with a half-life of 66 hours, and the
Tc-99 is then chemically extracted (Figure 21.25). The parent nuclide Mo-99 is part of a molybdate ion,
when it decays, it forms the pertechnetate ion, These two water-soluble ions are separated
by column chromatography, with the higher charge molybdate ion adsorbing onto the alumina in the column,
and the lower charge pertechnetate ion passing through the column in the solution. A few micrograms of
Mo-99 can produce enough Tc-99 to perform as many as 10,000 tests.
FIGURE21.25 (a) The first Tc-99m generator (circa 1958) is used to separate Tc-99 from Mo-99. The is
retained by the matrix in the column, whereas the passes through and is collected. (b) Tc-99 was used in
this scan of the neck of a patient with Grave’s disease. The scan shows the location of high concentrations of Tc-99.
(credit a: modification of work by the Department of Energy; credit b: modification of work by “MBq”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Radioisotopes can also be used, typically in higher doses than as a tracer, as treatment.Radiation therapyis
the use of high-energy radiation to damage the DNA of cancer cells, which kills them or keeps them from
dividing (Figure 21.26). A cancer patient may receiveexternal beam radiation therapydelivered by a
machine outside the body, orinternal radiation therapy (brachytherapy)from a radioactive substance that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1071
21.5 • Uses of Radioisotopes 1057
has been introduced into the body. Note thatchemotherapyis similar to internal radiation therapy in that the
cancer treatment is injected into the body, but differs in that chemotherapy uses chemical rather than
radioactive substances to kill the cancer cells.
FIGURE21.26 The cartoon in (a) shows a cobalt-60 machine used in the treatment of cancer. The diagram in (b)
shows how the gantry of the Co-60 machine swings through an arc, focusing radiation on the targeted region
(tumor) and minimizing the amount of radiation that passes through nearby regions.
Cobalt-60 is a synthetic radioisotope produced by the neutron activation of Co-59, which then undergoes β
decay to form Ni-60, along with the emission of γ radiation. The overall process is:
The overall decay scheme for this is shown graphically inFigure 21.27.
FIGURE21.27 Co-60 undergoes a series of radioactive decays. The γ emissions are used for radiation therapy.
PAGE: 1072
1058 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Radioisotopes are used in diverse ways to study the mechanisms of chemical reactions in plants and animals.
These include labeling fertilizers in studies of nutrient uptake by plants and crop growth, investigations of
digestive and milk-producing processes in cows, and studies on the growth and metabolism of animals and
plants.
For example, the radioisotope C-14 was used to elucidate the details of how photosynthesis occurs. The overall
reaction is:
but the process is much more complex, proceeding through a series of steps in which various organic
compounds are produced. In studies of the pathway of this reaction, plants were exposed to CO containing a
2
high concentration of . At regular intervals, the plants were analyzed to determine which organic
compounds contained carbon-14 and how much of each compound was present. From the time sequence in
which the compounds appeared and the amount of each present at given time intervals, scientists learned
more about the pathway of the reaction.
Commercial applications of radioactive materials are equally diverse (Figure 21.28). They include determining
the thickness of films and thin metal sheets by exploiting the penetration power of various types of radiation.
Flaws in metals used for structural purposes can be detected using high-energy gamma rays from cobalt-60 in
a fashion similar to the way X-rays are used to examine the human body. In one form of pest control, flies are
controlled by sterilizing male flies with γ radiation so that females breeding with them do not produce
offspring. Many foods are preserved by radiation that kills microorganisms that cause the foods to spoil.
FIGURE21.28 Common commercial uses of radiation include (a) X-ray examination of luggage at an airport and (b)
preservation of food. (credit a: modification of work by the Department of the Navy; credit b: modification of work by
the US Department of Agriculture)
Americium-241, an α emitter with a half-life of 458 years, is used in tiny amounts in ionization-type smoke
detectors (Figure 21.29). The α emissions from Am-241 ionize the air between two electrode plates in the
ionizing chamber. A battery supplies a potential that causes movement of the ions, thus creating a small
electric current. When smoke enters the chamber, the movement of the ions is impeded, reducing the
conductivity of the air. This causes a marked drop in the current, triggering an alarm.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1073
21.6 • Biological Effects of Radiation 1059
FIGURE21.29 Inside a smoke detector, Am-241 emits α particles that ionize the air, creating a small electric
current. During a fire, smoke particles impede the flow of ions, reducing the current and triggering an alarm. (credit
a: modification of work by “Muffet”/Wikimedia Commons)
21.6 Biological Effects of Radiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the biological impact of ionizing radiation
• Define units for measuring radiation exposure
• Explain the operation of common tools for detecting radioactivity
• List common sources of radiation exposure in the US
The increased use of radioisotopes has led to increased concerns over the effects of these materials on
biological systems (such as humans). All radioactive nuclides emit high-energy particles or electromagnetic
waves. When this radiation encounters living cells, it can cause heating, break chemical bonds, or ionize
molecules. The most serious biological damage results when these radioactive emissions fragment or ionize
molecules. For example, alpha and beta particles emitted from nuclear decay reactions possess much higher
energies than ordinary chemical bond energies. When these particles strike and penetrate matter, they
produce ions and molecular fragments that are extremely reactive. The damage this does to biomolecules in
living organisms can cause serious malfunctions in normal cell processes, taxing the organism’s repair
mechanisms and possibly causing illness or even death (Figure 21.30).
FIGURE21.30 Radiation can harm biological systems by damaging the DNA of cells. If this damage is not properly
repaired, the cells may divide in an uncontrolled manner and cause cancer.
PAGE: 1074
1060 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Ionizing and Nonionizing Radiation
There is a large difference in the magnitude of the biological effects ofnonionizing radiation(for example,
light and microwaves) andionizing radiation, emissions energetic enough to knock electrons out of molecules
(for example, α and β particles, γ rays, X-rays, and high-energy ultraviolet radiation) (Figure 21.31).
FIGURE21.31 Lower frequency, lower-energy electromagnetic radiation is nonionizing, and higher frequency,
higher-energy electromagnetic radiation is ionizing.
Energy absorbed from nonionizing radiation speeds up the movement of atoms and molecules, which is
equivalent to heating the sample. Although biological systems are sensitive to heat (as we might know from
touching a hot stove or spending a day at the beach in the sun), a large amount of nonionizing radiation is
necessary before dangerous levels are reached. Ionizing radiation, however, may cause much more severe
damage by breaking bonds or removing electrons in biological molecules, disrupting their structure and
function. The damage can also be done indirectly, by first ionizing H O (the most abundant molecule in living
2
organisms), which forms a H O+ion that reacts with water, forming a hydronium ion and a hydroxyl radical:
2
Because the hydroxyl radical has an unpaired electron, it is highly reactive. (This is true of any substance with
unpaired electrons, known as a free radical.) This hydroxyl radical can react with all kinds of biological
molecules (DNA, proteins, enzymes, and so on), causing damage to the molecules and disrupting physiological
processes. Examples of direct and indirect damage are shown inFigure 21.32.
FIGURE21.32 Ionizing radiation can (a) directly damage a biomolecule by ionizing it or breaking its bonds, or (b)
create an H O+ion, which reacts with H O to form a hydroxyl radical, which in turn reacts with the biomolecule,
2 2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1075
21.6 • Biological Effects of Radiation 1061
causing damage indirectly.
Biological Effects of Exposure to Radiation
Radiation can harm either the whole body (somatic damage) or eggs and sperm (genetic damage). Its effects
are more pronounced in cells that reproduce rapidly, such as the stomach lining, hair follicles, bone marrow,
and embryos. This is why patients undergoing radiation therapy often feel nauseous or sick to their stomach,
lose hair, have bone aches, and so on, and why particular care must be taken when undergoing radiation
therapy during pregnancy.
Different types of radiation have differing abilities to pass through material (Figure 21.33). A very thin barrier,
such as a sheet or two of paper, or the top layer of skin cells, usually stops alpha particles. Because of this,
alpha particle sources are usually not dangerous if outside the body, but are quite hazardous if ingested or
inhaled (see the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on Radon Exposure). Beta particles will pass through a
hand, or a thin layer of material like paper or wood, but are stopped by a thin layer of metal. Gamma radiation
is very penetrating and can pass through a thick layer of most materials. Some high-energy gamma radiation
is able to pass through a few feet of concrete. Certain dense, high atomic number elements (such as lead) can
effectively attenuate gamma radiation with thinner material and are used for shielding. The ability of various
kinds of emissions to cause ionization varies greatly, and some particles have almost no tendency to produce
ionization. Alpha particles have about twice the ionizing power of fast-moving neutrons, about 10 times that of
β particles, and about 20 times that of γ rays and X-rays.
FIGURE21.33 The ability of different types of radiation to pass through material is shown. From least to most
penetrating, they are alpha < beta < neutron < gamma.
Chemistry in Everyday Life
Radon Exposure
For many people, one of the largest sources of exposure to radiation is from radon gas (Rn-222). Radon-222
is an α emitter with a half–life of 3.82 days. It is one of the products of the radioactive decay series of U-238
(Figure 21.9), which is found in trace amounts in soil and rocks. The radon gas that is produced slowly
escapes from the ground and gradually seeps into homes and other structures above. Since it is about eight
times more dense than air, radon gas accumulates in basements and lower floors, and slowly diffuses
throughout buildings (Figure 21.34).
PAGE: 1076
1062 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
FIGURE21.34 Radon-222 seeps into houses and other buildings from rocks that contain uranium-238, a
radon emitter. The radon enters through cracks in concrete foundations and basement floors, stone or porous
cinderblock foundations, and openings for water and gas pipes.
Radon is found in buildings across the country, with amounts depending on where you live. The average
concentration of radon inside houses in the US (1.25 pCi/L) is about three times the levels found in outside
air, and about one in six houses have radon levels high enough that remediation efforts to reduce the radon
concentration are recommended. Exposure to radon increases one’s risk of getting cancer (especially lung
cancer), and high radon levels can be as bad for health as smoking a carton of cigarettes a day. Radon is the
number one cause of lung cancer in nonsmokers and the second leading cause of lung cancer overall.
Radon exposure is believed to cause over 20,000 deaths in the US per year.
Measuring Radiation Exposure
Several different devices are used to detect and measure radiation, including Geiger counters, scintillation
counters (scintillators), and radiation dosimeters (Figure 21.35). Probably the best-known radiation
instrument, theGeiger counter(also called the Geiger-Müller counter) detects and measures radiation.
Radiation causes the ionization of the gas in a Geiger-Müller tube. The rate of ionization is proportional to the
amount of radiation. Ascintillation countercontains a scintillator—a material that emits light (luminesces)
when excited by ionizing radiation—and a sensor that converts the light into an electric signal.Radiation
dosimetersalso measure ionizing radiation and are often used to determine personal radiation exposure.
Commonly used types are electronic, film badge, thermoluminescent, and quartz fiber dosimeters.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1077
21.6 • Biological Effects of Radiation 1063
FIGURE21.35 Devices such as (a) Geiger counters, (b) scintillators, and (c) dosimeters can be used to measure
radiation. (credit c: modification of work by “osaMu”/Wikimedia commons)
A variety of units are used to measure various aspects of radiation (Figure 21.36). The SI unit for rate of
radioactive decay is thebecquerel (Bq), with 1 Bq = 1 disintegration per second. Thecurie (Ci)andmillicurie
(mCi)are much larger units and are frequently used in medicine (1 curie = 1 Ci = 3.7 1010disintegrations
per second). The SI unit for measuring radiation dose is thegray (Gy), with 1 Gy = 1 J of energy absorbed per
kilogram of tissue. In medical applications, theradiation absorbed dose (rad)is more often used (1 rad = 0.01
Gy; 1 rad results in the absorption of 0.01 J/kg of tissue). The SI unit measuring tissue damage caused by
radiation is thesievert (Sv). This takes into account both the energy and the biological effects of the type of
radiation involved in the radiation dose. Theroentgen equivalent for man (rem)is the unit for radiation
damage that is used most frequently in medicine (100 rem = 1 Sv). Note that the tissue damage units (rem or
Sv) includes the energy of the radiation dose (rad or Gy) along with a biological factor referred to as theRBE
(forrelative biological effectiveness) that is an approximate measure of the relative damage done by the
radiation. These are related by:
with RBE approximately 10 for α radiation, 2(+) for protons and neutrons, and 1 for β and γ radiation.
FIGURE21.36 Different units are used to measure the rate of emission from a radioactive source, the energy that
is absorbed from the source, and the amount of damage the absorbed radiation does.
Units of Radiation Measurement
Table 21.4summarizes the units used for measuring radiation.
PAGE: 1078
1064 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
Units Used for Measuring Radiation
Measurement
Unit Quantity Measured Description
Purpose
amount of sample that undergoes 1
becquerel (Bq)
decay/second
activity of radioactive decays
source or emissions
amount of sample that undergoes 3.7
curie (Ci)
1010decays/second
gray (Gy) 1 Gy = 1 J/kg tissue
energy absorbed per
absorbed dose
radiation absorbed kg of tissue
1 rad = 0.01 J/kg tissue
dose (rad)
sievert (Sv) Sv = RBE Gy
biologically
tissue damage
effective dose roentgen equivalent
Rem = RBE rad
for man (rem)
TABLE21.4
EXAMPLE 21.8
Amount of Radiation
Cobalt-60 (t = 5.26 y) is used in cancer therapy since the γ rays it emits can be focused in small areas where
1/2
the cancer is located. A 5.00-g sample of Co-60 is available for cancer treatment.
(a) What is its activity in Bq?
(b) What is its activity in Ci?
Solution
The activity is given by:
And to convert this to decays per second:
(a) Since 1 Bq = the activity in Becquerel (Bq) is:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1079
21.6 • Biological Effects of Radiation 1065
(b) Since 1 Ci = the activity in curie (Ci) is:
Check Your Learning
Tritium is a radioactive isotope of hydrogen (t = 12.32 y) that has several uses, including self-powered
1/2
lighting, in which electrons emitted in tritium radioactive decay cause phosphorus to glow. Its nucleus
contains one proton and two neutrons, and the atomic mass of tritium is 3.016 amu. What is the activity of a
sample containing 1.00mg of tritium (a) in Bq and (b) in Ci?
Answer:
(a) 3.56 1011Bq; (b) 0.962 Ci
Effects of Long-term Radiation Exposure on the Human Body
The effects of radiation depend on the type, energy, and location of the radiation source, and the length of
exposure. As shown inFigure 21.37, the average person is exposed to background radiation, including cosmic
rays from the sun and radon from uranium in the ground (see the Chemistry in Everyday Life feature on Radon
Exposure); radiation from medical exposure, including CAT scans, radioisotope tests, X-rays, and so on; and
small amounts of radiation from other human activities, such as airplane flights (which are bombarded by
increased numbers of cosmic rays in the upper atmosphere), radioactivity from consumer products, and a
variety of radionuclides that enter our bodies when we breathe (for example, carbon-14) or through the food
chain (for example, potassium-40, strontium-90, and iodine-131).
FIGURE21.37 The total annual radiation exposure for a person in the US is about 620 mrem. The various sources
and their relative amounts are shown in this bar graph. (source: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission)
A short-term, sudden dose of a large amount of radiation can cause a wide range of health effects, from
PAGE: 1080
1066 21 • Nuclear Chemistry
changes in blood chemistry to death. Short-term exposure to tens of rems of radiation will likely cause very
noticeable symptoms or illness; a dose of about 500 rems is estimated to have a 50% probability of causing the
death of the victim within 30 days of exposure. Exposure to radioactive emissions has a cumulative effect on
the body during a person’s lifetime, which is another reason why it is important to avoid any unnecessary
exposure to radiation. Health effects of short-term exposure to radiation are shown inTable 21.5.
2
Health Effects of Radiation
Exposure (rem) Health Effect Time to Onset (without treatment)
5–10 changes in blood chemistry —
50 nausea hours
55 fatigue —
70 vomiting —
75 hair loss 2–3 weeks
90 diarrhea —
100 hemorrhage —
400 possible death within 2 months
destruction of intestinal lining —
1000 internal bleeding —
death 1–2 weeks
damage to central nervous system —
2000 loss of consciousness; minutes
death hours to days
TABLE21.5
It is impossible to avoid some exposure to ionizing radiation. We are constantly exposed to background
radiation from a variety of natural sources, including cosmic radiation, rocks, medical procedures, consumer
products, and even our own atoms. We can minimize our exposure by blocking or shielding the radiation,
moving farther from the source, and limiting the time of exposure.
2 Source: US Environmental Protection Agency
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1081
21 • Key Terms 1067
Key Terms
alpha (α) decay loss of an alpha particle during electron volt (eV) measurement unit of nuclear
radioactive decay binding energies, with 1 eV equaling the amount
alpha particle (αor or high-energy energy due to the moving an electron across an
helium nucleus; a helium atom that has lost two electric potential difference of 1 volt
electrons and contains two protons and two external beam radiation therapy radiation
neutrons delivered by a machine outside the body
antimatter particles with the same mass but fissile (or fissionable) when a material is capable
opposite properties (such as charge) of ordinary of sustaining a nuclear fission reaction
particles fission splitting of a heavier nucleus into two or
band of stability (also, belt of stability, zone of more lighter nuclei, usually accompanied by the
stability, or valley of stability) region of graph of conversion of mass into large amounts of energy
number of protons versus number of neutrons fusion combination of very light nuclei into
containing stable (nonradioactive) nuclides heavier nuclei, accompanied by the conversion of
becquerel (Bq) SI unit for rate of radioactive decay; mass into large amounts of energy
1 Bq = 1 disintegration/s fusion reactor nuclear reactor in which fusion
beta (β) decay breakdown of a neutron into a reactions of light nuclei are controlled
proton, which remains in the nucleus, and an gamma (γ) emission decay of an excited-state
electron, which is emitted as a beta particle nuclide accompanied by emission of a gamma ray
beta particle or or high-energy gamma ray (γor short wavelength, high-
electron energy electromagnetic radiation that exhibits
binding energy per nucleon total binding energy wave-particle duality
for the nucleus divided by the number of Geiger counter instrument that detects and
nucleons in the nucleus measures radiation via the ionization produced in
chain reaction repeated fission caused when the a Geiger-Müller tube
neutrons released in fission bombard other gray (Gy) SI unit for measuring radiation dose; 1
atoms Gy = 1 J absorbed/kg tissue
chemotherapy similar to internal radiation half-life (t 1/2 ) time required for half of the atoms in
therapy, but chemical rather than radioactive a radioactive sample to decay
substances are introduced into the body to kill internal radiation therapy (also, brachytherapy)
cancer cells radiation from a radioactive substance
containment system (also, shield) a three-part introduced into the body to kill cancer cells
structure of materials that protects the exterior of ionizing radiation radiation that can cause a
a nuclear fission reactor and operating personnel molecule to lose an electron and form an ion
from the high temperatures, pressures, and magic number nuclei with specific numbers of
radiation levels inside the reactor nucleons that are within the band of stability
control rod material inserted into the fuel mass defect difference between the mass of an
assembly that absorbs neutrons and can be atom and the summed mass of its constituent
raised or lowered to adjust the rate of a fission subatomic particles (or the mass “lost” when
reaction nucleons are brought together to form a nucleus)
critical mass amount of fissionable material that mass-energy equivalence equation Albert
will support a self-sustaining (nuclear fission) Einstein’s relationship showing that mass and
chain reaction energy are equivalent
curie (Ci) larger unit for rate of radioactive decay millicurie (mCi) larger unit for rate of radioactive
frequently used in medicine; 1 Ci = 3.7 1010 decay frequently used in medicine; 1 Ci = 3.7
disintegrations/s
1010disintegrations/s
daughter nuclide nuclide produced by the nonionizing radiation radiation that speeds up the
radioactive decay of another nuclide; may be movement of atoms and molecules; it is
stable or may decay further equivalent to heating a sample, but is not
electron capture combination of a core electron energetic enough to cause the ionization of
with a proton to yield a neutron within the molecules
nucleus nuclear binding energy energy lost when an
PAGE: 1082
1068 21 • Key Equations
atom’s nucleons are bound together (or the radioisotope used to track or follow a substance
energy needed to break a nucleus into its by monitoring its radioactive emissions
constituent protons and neutrons) radioactivity phenomenon exhibited by an
nuclear chemistry study of the structure of atomic unstable nucleon that spontaneously undergoes
nuclei and processes that change nuclear change into a nucleon that is more stable; an
structure unstable nucleon is said to be radioactive
nuclear fuel fissionable isotope present in radiocarbon dating highly accurate means of
sufficient quantities to provide a self-sustaining dating objects 30,000–50,000 years old that were
chain reaction in a nuclear reactor derived from once-living matter; achieved by
nuclear moderator substance that slows neutrons calculating the ratio of in the object vs.
to a speed low enough to cause fission the ratio of in the present-day
nuclear reaction change to a nucleus resulting in
atmosphere
changes in the atomic number, mass number, or
radioisotope isotope that is unstable and
energy state
undergoes conversion into a different, more
nuclear reactor environment that produces
stable isotope
energy via nuclear fission in which the chain
radiometric dating use of radioisotopes and their
reaction is controlled and sustained without
properties to date the formation of objects such
explosion
as archeological artifacts, formerly living
nuclear transmutation conversion of one nuclide
organisms, or geological formations
into another nuclide
reactor coolant assembly used to carry the heat
nucleon collective term for protons and neutrons
produced by fission in a reactor to an external
in a nucleus
boiler and turbine where it is transformed into
nuclide nucleus of a particular isotope
electricity
parent nuclide unstable nuclide that changes
relative biological effectiveness (RBE) measure of
spontaneously into another (daughter) nuclide
the relative damage done by radiation
particle accelerator device that uses electric and
roentgen equivalent man (rem) unit for radiation
magnetic fields to increase the kinetic energy of
damage, frequently used in medicine; 100 rem =
nuclei used in transmutation reactions
1 Sv
positron or antiparticle to the electron;
scintillation counter instrument that uses a
it has identical properties to an electron, except scintillator—a material that emits light when
for having the opposite (positive) charge excited by ionizing radiation—to detect and
positron emission (also, β+decay) conversion of a measure radiation
proton into a neutron, which remains in the sievert (Sv) SI unit measuring tissue damage
nucleus, and a positron, which is emitted caused by radiation; takes into account energy
radiation absorbed dose (rad) SI unit for and biological effects of radiation
measuring radiation dose, frequently used in strong nuclear force force of attraction between
medical applications; 1 rad = 0.01 Gy nucleons that holds a nucleus together
radiation dosimeter device that measures ionizing subcritical mass amount of fissionable material
radiation and is used to determine personal that cannot sustain a chain reaction; less than a
radiation exposure critical mass
radiation therapy use of high-energy radiation to supercritical mass amount of material in which
damage the DNA of cancer cells, which kills them there is an increasing rate of fission
or keeps them from dividing transmutation reaction bombardment of one type
radioactive decay spontaneous decay of an of nuclei with other nuclei or neutrons
unstable nuclide into another nuclide transuranium element element with an atomic
radioactive decay series chains of successive number greater than 92; these elements do not
disintegrations (radioactive decays) that occur in nature
ultimately lead to a stable end-product
radioactive tracer (also, radioactive label)
Key Equations
E=mc2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1083
21 • Summary 1069
decay rate =λN
rem = RBE rad
Sv = RBE Gy
Summary
21.1Nuclear Structure and Stability substances undergo radioactive decay series,
proceeding through multiple decays before ending
An atomic nucleus consists of protons and neutrons,
in a stable isotope. All nuclear decay processes
collectively called nucleons. Although protons repel
follow first-order kinetics, and each radioisotope has
each other, the nucleus is held tightly together by a
its own characteristic half-life, the time that is
short-range, but very strong, force called the strong
required for half of its atoms to decay. Because of the
nuclear force. A nucleus has less mass than the total
large differences in stability among nuclides, there
mass of its constituent nucleons. This “missing”
is a very wide range of half-lives of radioactive
mass is the mass defect, which has been converted
substances. Many of these substances have found
into the binding energy that holds the nucleus
useful applications in medical diagnosis and
together according to Einstein’s mass-energy
treatment, determining the age of archaeological
equivalence equation,E=mc2. Of the many nuclides
and geological objects, and more.
that exist, only a small number are stable. Nuclides
with even numbers of protons or neutrons, or those 21.4Transmutation and Nuclear Energy
with magic numbers of nucleons, are especially
It is possible to produce new atoms by bombarding
likely to be stable. These stable nuclides occupy a
other atoms with nuclei or high-speed particles. The
narrow band of stability on a graph of number of
products of these transmutation reactions can be
protons versus number of neutrons. The binding
stable or radioactive. A number of artificial
energy per nucleon is largest for the elements with
elements, including technetium, astatine, and the
mass numbers near 56; these are the most stable
transuranium elements, have been produced in this
nuclei.
way.
21.2Nuclear Equations
Nuclear power as well as nuclear weapon
Nuclei can undergo reactions that change their detonations can be generated through fission
number of protons, number of neutrons, or energy (reactions in which a heavy nucleus is split into two
state. Many different particles can be involved in or more lighter nuclei and several neutrons).
nuclear reactions. The most common are protons, Because the neutrons may induce additional fission
neutrons, positrons (which are positively charged reactions when they combine with other heavy
electrons), alpha (α) particles (which are high- nuclei, a chain reaction can result. Useful power is
energy helium nuclei), beta (β) particles (which are obtained if the fission process is carried out in a
high-energy electrons), and gamma (γ) rays (which nuclear reactor. The conversion of light nuclei into
compose high-energy electromagnetic radiation). As heavier nuclei (fusion) also produces energy. At
with chemical reactions, nuclear reactions are present, this energy has not been contained
always balanced. When a nuclear reaction occurs, adequately and is too expensive to be feasible for
the total mass (number) and the total charge remain commercial energy production.
unchanged.
21.5Uses of Radioisotopes
21.3Radioactive Decay
Compounds known as radioactive tracers can be
Nuclei that have unstable n:p ratios undergo used to follow reactions, track the distribution of a
spontaneous radioactive decay. The most common substance, diagnose and treat medical conditions,
types of radioactivity are α decay, β decay, γ and much more. Other radioactive substances are
emission, positron emission, and electron capture. helpful for controlling pests, visualizing structures,
Nuclear reactions also often involve γ rays, and providing fire warnings, and for many other
some nuclei decay by electron capture. Each of these applications. Hundreds of millions of nuclear
modes of decay leads to the formation of a new medicine tests and procedures, using a wide variety
nucleus with a more stable n:p ratio. Some of radioisotopes with relatively short half-lives, are
PAGE: 1084
1070 21 • Exercises
performed every year in the US. Most of these rapidly reproducing cells. Types of radiation differ
radioisotopes have relatively short half-lives; some in their ability to penetrate material and damage
are short enough that the radioisotope must be tissue, with alpha particles the least penetrating but
made on-site at medical facilities. Radiation therapy potentially most damaging and gamma rays the
uses high-energy radiation to kill cancer cells by most penetrating.
damaging their DNA. The radiation used for this
Various devices, including Geiger counters,
treatment may be delivered externally or internally.
scintillators, and dosimeters, are used to detect and
21.6Biological Effects of Radiation measure radiation, and monitor radiation exposure.
We use several units to measure radiation:
We are constantly exposed to radiation from a
becquerels or curies for rates of radioactive decay;
variety of naturally occurring and human-produced
gray or rads for energy absorbed; and rems or
sources. This radiation can affect living organisms.
sieverts for biological effects of radiation. Exposure
Ionizing radiation is the most harmful because it can
to radiation can cause a wide range of health effects,
ionize molecules or break chemical bonds, which
from minor to severe, and including death. We can
damages the molecule and causes malfunctions in
minimize the effects of radiation by shielding with
cell processes. It can also create reactive hydroxyl
dense materials such as lead, moving away from the
radicals that damage biological molecules and
source, and limiting time of exposure.
disrupt physiological processes. Radiation can cause
somatic or genetic damage, and is most harmful to
Exercises
21.1Nuclear Structure and Stability
1. Write the following isotopes in hyphenated form (e.g., “carbon-14”)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2. Write the following isotopes in nuclide notation (e.g.,
(a) oxygen-14
(b) copper-70
(c) tantalum-175
(d) francium-217
3. For the following isotopes that have missing information, fill in the missing information to complete the
notation
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
4. For each of the isotopes inExercise 21.1, determine the numbers of protons, neutrons, and electrons in a
neutral atom of the isotope.
5. Write the nuclide notation, including charge if applicable, for atoms with the following characteristics:
(a) 25 protons, 20 neutrons, 24 electrons
(b) 45 protons, 24 neutrons, 43 electrons
(c) 53 protons, 89 neutrons, 54 electrons
(d) 97 protons, 146 neutrons, 97 electrons
6. Calculate the density of the nucleus in g/mL, assuming that it has the typical nuclear diameter of 1
10–13cm and is spherical in shape.
7. What are the two principal differences between nuclear reactions and ordinary chemical changes?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1085
21 • Exercises 1071
8. The mass of the atom is 22.9898 amu.
(a) Calculate its binding energy per atom in millions of electron volts.
(b) Calculate its binding energy per nucleon.
9. Which of the following nuclei lie within the band of stability shown inFigure 21.2?
(a) chlorine-37
(b) calcium-40
(c)204Bi
(d)56Fe
(e)206Pb
(f)211Pb
(g)222Rn
(h) carbon-14
10. Which of the following nuclei lie within the band of stability shown inFigure 21.2?
(a) argon-40
(b) oxygen-16
(c)122Ba
(d)58Ni
(e)205Tl
(f)210Tl
(g)226Ra
(h) magnesium-24
21.2Nuclear Equations
11. Write a brief description or definition of each of the following:
(a) nucleon
(b) α particle
(c) β particle
(d) positron
(e) γ ray
(f) nuclide
(g) mass number
(h) atomic number
12. Which of the various particles (α particles, β particles, and so on) that may be produced in a nuclear
reaction are actually nuclei?
13. Complete each of the following equations by adding the missing species:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
14. Complete each of the following equations:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
15. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions:
(a) the production of17O from14N by α particle bombardment
(b) the production of14C from14N by neutron bombardment
(c) the production of233Th from232Th by neutron bombardment
(d) the production of239U from238U by bombardment
PAGE: 1086
1072 21 • Exercises
16. Technetium-99 is prepared from98Mo. Molybdenum-98 combines with a neutron to give
molybdenum-99, an unstable isotope that emits a β particle to yield an excited form of technetium-99,
represented as99Tc*. This excited nucleus relaxes to the ground state, represented as99Tc, by emitting a γ
ray. The ground state of99Tc then emits a β particle. Write the equations for each of these nuclear
reactions.
17. The mass of the atom is 18.99840 amu.
(a) Calculate its binding energy per atom in millions of electron volts.
(b) Calculate its binding energy per nucleon.
18. For the reaction if 100.0 g of carbon reacts, what volume of nitrogen gas (N ) is
2
produced at 273K and 1 atm?
21.3Radioactive Decay
19. What are the types of radiation emitted by the nuclei of radioactive elements?
20. What changes occur to the atomic number and mass of a nucleus during each of the following decay
scenarios?
(a) an α particle is emitted
(b) a β particle is emitted
(c) γ radiation is emitted
(d) a positron is emitted
(e) an electron is captured
21. What is the change in the nucleus that results from the following decay scenarios?
(a) emission of a β particle
(b) emission of a β+particle
(c) capture of an electron
22. Many nuclides with atomic numbers greater than 83 decay by processes such as electron emission.
Explain the observation that the emissions from these unstable nuclides also normally include α particles.
23. Why is electron capture accompanied by the emission of an X-ray?
24. Explain, in terms ofFigure 21.2, how unstable heavy nuclides (atomic number > 83) may decompose to
form nuclides of greater stability (a) if they are below the band of stability and (b) if they are above the
band of stability.
25. Which of the following nuclei is most likely to decay by positron emission? Explain your choice.
(a) chromium-53
(b) manganese-51
(c) iron-59
26. The following nuclei do not lie in the band of stability. How would they be expected to decay? Explain your
answer.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
27. The following nuclei do not lie in the band of stability. How would they be expected to decay?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1087
21 • Exercises 1073
28. Predict by what mode(s) of spontaneous radioactive decay each of the following unstable isotopes might
proceed:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)18F
(f)129Ba
(g)237Pu
29. Write a nuclear reaction for each step in the formation of from which proceeds by a series of
decay reactions involving the step-wise emission of α, β, β, α, α, α particles, in that order.
30. Write a nuclear reaction for each step in the formation of from which proceeds by a series of
decay reactions involving the step-wise emission of α, α, α, α, β, β, α particles, in that order.
31. Define the term half-life and illustrate it with an example.
32. A 1.00 10–6-g sample of nobelium, has a half-life of 55 seconds after it is formed. What is the
percentage of remaining at the following times?
(a) 5.0 min after it forms
(b) 1.0 h after it forms
33. 239Pu is a nuclear waste byproduct with a half-life of 24,000 y. What fraction of the239Pu present today will
be present in 1000 y?
34. The isotope208Tl undergoes β decay with a half-life of 3.1 min.
(a) What isotope is produced by the decay?
(b) How long will it take for 99.0% of a sample of pure208Tl to decay?
(c) What percentage of a sample of pure208Tl remains un-decayed after 1.0 h?
35. If 1.000 g of produces 0.0001 mL of the gas at STP (standard temperature and pressure) in
24 h, what is the half-life of226Ra in years?
36. The isotope is one of the extremely hazardous species in the residues from nuclear power
generation. The strontium in a 0.500-g sample diminishes to 0.393 g in 10.0 y. Calculate the half-life.
37. Technetium-99 is often used for assessing heart, liver, and lung damage because certain technetium
compounds are absorbed by damaged tissues. It has a half-life of 6.0 h. Calculate the rate constant for the
decay of
38. What is the age of mummified primate skin that contains 8.25% of the original quantity of14C?
39. A sample of rock was found to contain 8.23 mg of rubidium-87 and 0.47 mg of strontium-87.
(a) Calculate the age of the rock if the half-life of the decay of rubidium by β emission is 4.7 1010y.
(b) If some was initially present in the rock, would the rock be younger, older, or the same age as the
age calculated in (a)? Explain your answer.
40. A laboratory investigation shows that a sample of uranium ore contains 5.37 mg of and 2.52 mg of
Calculate the age of the ore. The half-life of is 4.5 109yr.
41. Plutonium was detected in trace amounts in natural uranium deposits by Glenn Seaborg and his
associates in 1941. They proposed that the source of this239Pu was the capture of neutrons by238U nuclei.
Why is this plutonium not likely to have been trapped at the time the solar system formed 4.7 109years
ago?
42. A atom (mass = 7.0169 amu) decays into a atom (mass = 7.0160 amu) by electron capture. How
much energy (in millions of electron volts, MeV) is produced by this reaction?
43. A atom (mass = 8.0246 amu) decays into a atom (mass = 8.0053 amu) by loss of a β+particle (mass
= 0.00055 amu) or by electron capture. How much energy (in millions of electron volts) is produced by this
reaction?
PAGE: 1088
1074 21 • Exercises
44. Isotopes such as26Al (half-life: 7.2 105years) are believed to have been present in our solar system as it
formed, but have since decayed and are now called extinct nuclides.
(a)26Al decays by β+emission or electron capture. Write the equations for these two nuclear
transformations.
(b) The earth was formed about 4.7 109(4.7 billion) years ago. How old was the earth when 99.999999%
of the26Al originally present had decayed?
45. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions:
(a) bismuth-212 decays into polonium-212
(b) beryllium-8 and a positron are produced by the decay of an unstable nucleus
(c) neptunium-239 forms from the reaction of uranium-238 with a neutron and then spontaneously
converts into plutonium-239
(d) strontium-90 decays into yttrium-90
46. Write a balanced equation for each of the following nuclear reactions:
(a) mercury-180 decays into platinum-176
(b) zirconium-90 and an electron are produced by the decay of an unstable nucleus
(c) thorium-232 decays and produces an alpha particle and a radium-228 nucleus, which decays into
actinium-228 by beta decay
(d) neon-19 decays into fluorine-19
21.4Transmutation and Nuclear Energy
47. Write the balanced nuclear equation for the production of the following transuranium elements:
(a) berkelium-244, made by the reaction of Am-241 and He-4
(b) fermium-254, made by the reaction of Pu-239 with a large number of neutrons
(c) lawrencium-257, made by the reaction of Cf-250 and B-11
(d) dubnium-260, made by the reaction of Cf-249 and N-15
48. How does nuclear fission differ from nuclear fusion? Why are both of these processes exothermic?
49. Both fusion and fission are nuclear reactions. Why is a very high temperature required for fusion, but not
for fission?
50. Cite the conditions necessary for a nuclear chain reaction to take place. Explain how it can be controlled to
produce energy, but not produce an explosion.
51. Describe the components of a nuclear reactor.
52. In usual practice, both a moderator and control rods are necessary to operate a nuclear chain reaction
safely for the purpose of energy production. Cite the function of each and explain why both are necessary.
53. Describe how the potential energy of uranium is converted into electrical energy in a nuclear power plant.
54. The mass of a hydrogen atom is 1.007825 amu; that of a tritium atom is 3.01605 amu; and that
of an α particle is 4.00150 amu. How much energy in kilojoules per mole of produced is released by
the following fusion reaction:
21.5Uses of Radioisotopes
55. How can a radioactive nuclide be used to show that the equilibrium:
is a dynamic equilibrium?
56. Technetium-99m has a half-life of 6.01 hours. If a patient injected with technetium-99m is safe to leave
the hospital once 75% of the dose has decayed, when is the patient allowed to leave?
57. Iodine that enters the body is stored in the thyroid gland from which it is released to control growth and
metabolism. The thyroid can be imaged if iodine-131 is injected into the body. In larger doses, I-133 is
also used as a means of treating cancer of the thyroid. I-131 has a half-life of 8.70 days and decays by β−
emission.
(a) Write an equation for the decay.
(b) How long will it take for 95.0% of a dose of I-131 to decay?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1089
21 • Exercises 1075
21.6Biological Effects of Radiation
58. If a hospital were storing radioisotopes, what is the minimum containment needed to protect against:
(a) cobalt-60 (a strong γ emitter used for irradiation)
(b) molybdenum-99 (a beta emitter used to produce technetium-99 for imaging)
59. Based on what is known about Radon-222’s primary decay method, why is inhalation so dangerous?
60. Given specimens uranium-232 (t = 68.9 y) and uranium-233 (t = 159,200 y) of equal mass, which one
1/2 1/2
would have greater activity and why?
61. A scientist is studying a 2.234 g sample of thorium-229 (t = 7340 y) in a laboratory.
1/2
(a) What is its activity in Bq?
(b) What is its activity in Ci?
62. Given specimens neon-24 (t = 3.38 min) and bismuth-211 (t = 2.14 min) of equal mass, which one
1/2 1/2
would have greater activity and why?
PAGE: 1090
1076 21 • Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1091
A • The Periodic Table 1077
APPENDIX A
The Periodic Table
FIGUREA1
PAGE: 1092
1078 A • The Periodic Table
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1093
B • Essential Mathematics 1079
APPENDIX B
Essential Mathematics
Exponential Arithmetic
Exponential notation is used to express very large and very small numbers as a product of two numbers. The
first number of the product, thedigit term, is usually a number not less than 1 and not equal to or greater than
10. The second number of the product, theexponential term, is written as 10 with an exponent. Some
examples of exponential notation are:
The power (exponent) of 10 is equal to the number of places the decimal is shifted to give the digit number. The
exponential method is particularly useful notation for very large and very small numbers. For example,
1,230,000,000 = 1.23 109, and 0.00000000036 = 3.6 10−10.
Addition of Exponentials
Convert all numbers to the same power of 10, add the digit terms of the numbers, and if appropriate, convert
the digit term back to a number between 1 and 10 by adjusting the exponential term.
EXAMPLE B1
Adding Exponentials
Add 5.00 10−5and 3.00 10−3.
Solution
Subtraction of Exponentials
Convert all numbers to the same power of 10, take the difference of the digit terms, and if appropriate, convert
the digit term back to a number between 1 and 10 by adjusting the exponential term.
EXAMPLE B2
Subtracting Exponentials
Subtract 4.0 10−7from 5.0 10−6.
PAGE: 1094
1080 B • Essential Mathematics
Solution
Multiplication of Exponentials
Multiply the digit terms in the usual way and add the exponents of the exponential terms.
EXAMPLE B3
Multiplying Exponentials
Multiply 4.2 10−8by 2.0 103.
Solution
Division of Exponentials
Divide the digit term of the numerator by the digit term of the denominator and subtract the exponents of the
exponential terms.
EXAMPLE B4
Dividing Exponentials
Divide 3.6 10–5by 6.0 10−4.
Solution
Squaring of Exponentials
Square the digit term in the usual way and multiply the exponent of the exponential term by 2.
EXAMPLE B5
Squaring Exponentials
Square the number 4.0 10−6.
Solution
Cubing of Exponentials
Cube the digit term in the usual way and multiply the exponent of the exponential term by 3.
EXAMPLE B6
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1095
B • Essential Mathematics 1081
Cubing Exponentials
Cube the number 2 104.
Solution
Taking Square Roots of Exponentials
If necessary, decrease or increase the exponential term so that the power of 10 is evenly divisible by 2. Extract
the square root of the digit term and divide the exponential term by 2.
EXAMPLE B7
Finding the Square Root of Exponentials
Find the square root of 1.6 10−7.
Solution
Significant Figures
A beekeeper reports that he has 525,341 bees. The last three figures of the number are obviously inaccurate,
for during the time the keeper was counting the bees, some of them died and others hatched; this makes it
quite difficult to determine the exact number of bees. It would have been more reasonable if the beekeeper had
reported the number 525,000. In other words, the last three figures are not significant, except to set the
position of the decimal point. Their exact values have no useful meaning in this situation. When reporting
quantities, use only as many significant figures as the accuracy of the measurement warrants.
The importance of significant figures lies in their application to fundamental computation. In addition and
subtraction, the sum or difference should contain as many digits to the right of the decimal as that in the least
certain of the numbers used in the computation (indicated by underscoring in the following example).
EXAMPLE B8
Addition and Subtraction with Significant Figures
Add 4.383 g and 0.0023 g.
Solution
In multiplication and division, the product or quotient should contain no more digits than that in the factor
containing the least number of significant figures.
EXAMPLE B9
PAGE: 1096
1082 B • Essential Mathematics
Multiplication and Division with Significant Figures
Multiply 0.6238 by 6.6.
Solution
When rounding numbers, increase the retained digit by 1 if it is followed by a number larger than 5 (“round
up”). Do not change the retained digit if the digits that follow are less than 5 (“round down”). If the retained
digit is followed by 5, round up if the retained digit is odd, or round down if it is even (after rounding, the
retained digit will thus always be even).
The Use of Logarithms and Exponential Numbers
The common logarithm of a number (log) is the power to which 10 must be raised to equal that number. For
example, the common logarithm of 100 is 2, because 10 must be raised to the second power to equal 100.
Additional examples follow.
Logarithms and Exponential Numbers
Number Number Expressed Exponentially Common Logarithm
1000 103 3
10 101 1
1 100 0
0.1 10−1 −1
0.001 10−3 −3
TABLEB1
What is the common logarithm of 60? Because 60 lies between 10 and 100, which have logarithms of 1 and 2,
respectively, the logarithm of 60 is 1.7782; that is,
The common logarithm of a number less than 1 has a negative value. The logarithm of 0.03918 is −1.4069, or
To obtain the common logarithm of a number, use thelogbutton on your calculator. To calculate a number
from its logarithm, take the inverse log of the logarithm, or calculate 10x(wherexis the logarithm of the
number).
The natural logarithm of a number (ln) is the power to whichemust be raised to equal the number;eis the
constant 2.7182818. For example, the natural logarithm of 10 is 2.303; that is,
To obtain the natural logarithm of a number, use thelnbutton on your calculator. To calculate a number from
its natural logarithm, enter the natural logarithm and take the inverse ln of the natural logarithm, or calculate
ex(wherexis the natural logarithm of the number).
Logarithms are exponents; thus, operations involving logarithms follow the same rules as operations involving
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1097
B • Essential Mathematics 1083
exponents.
1. The logarithm of a product of two numbers is the sum of the logarithms of the two numbers.
2. The logarithm of the number resulting from the division of two numbers is the difference between the
logarithms of the two numbers.
3. The logarithm of a number raised to an exponent is the product of the exponent and the logarithm of the
number.
The Solution of Quadratic Equations
Mathematical functions of this form are known as second-order polynomials or, more commonly, quadratic
functions.
The solution or roots for any quadratic equation can be calculated using the following formula:
EXAMPLE B10
Solving Quadratic Equations
Solve the quadratic equation 3x2+ 13x− 10 = 0.
Solution
Substituting the valuesa= 3,b= 13,c= −10 in the formula, we obtain
The two roots are therefore
Quadratic equations constructed on physical data always have real roots, and of these real roots, often only
those having positive values are of any significance.
Two-Dimensional (x-y) Graphing
The relationship between any two properties of a system can be represented graphically by a two-dimensional
data plot. Such a graph has two axes: a horizontal one corresponding to the independent variable, or the
variable whose value is being controlled (x), and a vertical axis corresponding to the dependent variable, or the
variable whose value is being observed or measured (y).
When the value ofyis changing as a function ofx(that is, different values ofxcorrespond to different values of
y), a graph of this change can be plotted or sketched. The graph can be produced by using specific values for
(x,y) data pairs.
EXAMPLE B11
PAGE: 1098
1084 B • Essential Mathematics
Graphing the Dependence ofyonx
x y
1 5
2 10
3 7
4 14
This table contains the following points: (1,5), (2,10), (3,7), and (4,14). Each of these points can be plotted on a
graph and connected to produce a graphical representation of the dependence ofyonx.
If the function that describes the dependence ofyonxis known, it may be used to compute x,y data pairs that
may subsequently be plotted.
EXAMPLE B12
Plotting Data Pairs
If we know thaty=x2+ 2, we can produce a table of a few (x,y) values and then plot the line based on the data
shown here.
x y=x2+ 2
1 3
2 6
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1099
B • Essential Mathematics 1085
x y=x2+ 2
3 11
4 18
PAGE: 1100
1086 B • Essential Mathematics
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1101
C • Units and Conversion Factors 1087
APPENDIX C
Units and Conversion Factors
Units of Length
= 39.37 inches (in.)
meter (m)
= 1.094 yards (yd)
centimeter (cm) = 0.01 m (exact, definition)
millimeter (mm) = 0.001 m (exact, definition)
kilometer (km) = 1000 m (exact, definition)
= 10–8cm (exact, definition)
angstrom (Å)
= 10–10m (exact, definition)
yard (yd) = 0.9144 m
inch (in.) = 2.54 cm (exact, definition)
mile (US) = 1.60934 km
TABLEC1
Units of Volume
= 0.001 m3(exact, definition)
liter (L) = 1000 cm3(exact, definition)
= 1.057 (US) quarts
= 0.001 L (exact, definition)
milliliter (mL)
= 1 cm3(exact, definition)
= 10–6L (exact, definition)
microliter
= 10–3cm3(exact, definition)
= 32 (US) liquid ounces (exact, definition)
liquid quart (US) = 0.25 (US) gallon (exact, definition)
= 0.9463 L
dry quart = 1.1012 L
cubic foot (US) = 28.316 L
TABLEC2
PAGE: 1102
1088 C • Units and Conversion Factors
Units of Mass
gram (g) = 0.001 kg (exact, definition)
milligram (mg) = 0.001 g (exact, definition)
= 1000 g (exact, definition)
kilogram (kg)
= 2.205 lb
=1000 kg (exact, definition)
ton (metric)
= 2204.62 lb
ounce (oz) = 28.35 g
pound (lb) = 0.4535924 kg
=2000 lb (exact, definition)
ton (short)
= 907.185 kg
= 2240 lb (exact, definition)
ton (long)
= 1.016 metric ton
TABLEC3
Units of Energy
4.184 joule (J) = 1 thermochemical calorie (cal)
1 thermochemical calorie (cal) = 4.184 107 erg
erg = 10–7J (exact, definition)
electron-volt (eV) = 1.60218 10−19J = 23.061 kcal mol−1
liter∙atmosphere = 24.217 cal = 101.325 J (exact, definition)
nutritional calorie (Cal) = 1000 cal (exact, definition) = 4184 J
1
British thermal unit (BTU) = 1054.804 J
TABLEC4
Units of Pressure
torr = 1 mm Hg (exact, definition)
TABLEC5
1 BTU is the amount of energy needed to heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit. Therefore, the exact relationship of
BTU to joules and other energy units depends on the temperature at which BTU is measured. 59 °F (15 °C) is the most widely used
reference temperature for BTU definition in the United States. At this temperature, the conversion factor is the one provided in this
table.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1103
C • Units and Conversion Factors 1089
= N m–2(exact, definition)
pascal (Pa)
= kg m–1s–2(exact, definition)
= 760 mm Hg (exact, definition)
= 760 torr (exact, definition)
atmosphere (atm)
= 101,325 N m–2(exact, definition)
= 101,325 Pa (exact, definition)
= 105Pa (exact, definition)
bar
= 105kg m–1s–2(exact, definition)
TABLEC5
PAGE: 1104
1090 C • Units and Conversion Factors
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1105
D • Fundamental Physical Constants 1091
APPENDIX D
Fundamental Physical Constants
Fundamental Physical Constants
Name and Symbol Value
atomic mass unit (amu) 1.6605402 10−27kg
Avogadro’s number 6.02214076 1023mol−1
Boltzmann’s constant (k) 1.380649 10−23J K−1
charge-to-mass ratio for electron (e/m) 1.75881962 1011C kg−1
e
fundamental unit of charge (e) 1.602176634 10−19C
electron rest mass (m) 9.1093897 10−31kg
e
Faraday’s constant (F) 9.6485309 104C mol−1
gas constant (R) 8.205784 10−2L atm mol−1K−1= 8.314510 J mol−1K−1
molar volume of an ideal gas, 1 atm, 0 °C 22.41409 L mol–1
molar volume of an ideal gas, 1 bar, 0 °C 22.71108 L mol–1
neutron rest mass (m ) 1.6749274 10−27kg
n
Planck’s constant (h) 6.62607015 10−34J s
proton rest mass (m) 1.6726231 10−27kg
p
Rydberg constant (R) 1.0973731534 107m−1= 2.1798736 10−18J
speed of light (in vacuum) (c) 2.99792458 108m s−1
TABLED1
PAGE: 1106
1092 D • Fundamental Physical Constants
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1107
E • Water Properties 1093
APPENDIX E
Water Properties
Water Density (g/mL) at Different Temperatures (°C)
Temperature Density (g/mL)
0 0.9998395
4 0.9999720 (density maximum)
10 0.9997026
15 0.9991026
20 0.9982071
22 0.9977735
25 0.9970479
30 0.9956502
40 0.9922
60 0.9832
80 0.9718
100 0.9584
TABLEE1
PAGE: 1108
1094 E • Water Properties
Water Vapor Pressure at Different Temperatures (°C)
Temperature Vapor Pressure (torr) Vapor Pressure (Pa)
0 4.6 613.2812
4 6.1 813.2642
10 9.2 1226.562
15 12.8 1706.522
20 17.5 2333.135
22 19.8 2639.776
25 23.8 3173.064
30 31.8 4239.64
35 42.2 5626.188
40 55.3 7372.707
45 71.9 9585.852
50 92.5 12332.29
55 118.0 15732
TABLEE2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1109
E • Water Properties 1095
Temperature Vapor Pressure (torr) Vapor Pressure (Pa)
60 149.4 19918.31
65 187.5 24997.88
70 233.7 31157.35
75 289.1 38543.39
80 355.1 47342.64
85 433.6 57808.42
90 525.8 70100.71
95 633.9 84512.82
100 760.0 101324.7
TABLEE2
Water K and pK at Different Temperatures (°C)
w w
Temperature K 10–14 pK 1
w w
0 0.112 14.95
TABLEE3
1 pKw= –log10(Kw)
PAGE: 1110
1096 E • Water Properties
Temperature K 10–14 pK 1
w w
5 0.182 14.74
10 0.288 14.54
15 0.465 14.33
20 0.671 14.17
25 0.991 14.00
30 1.432 13.84
35 2.042 13.69
40 2.851 13.55
45 3.917 13.41
50 5.297 13.28
55 7.080 13.15
60 9.311 13.03
75 19.95 12.70
100 56.23 12.25
TABLEE3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1111
E • Water Properties 1097
Specific Heat Capacity for Water
C°(H O(l)) = 4.184 J∙g-1∙°C-1
2
C°(H O(s)) = 1.864 J∙K−1∙g−1
2
C°(H O(g)) = 2.093 J∙K−1∙g−1
2
TABLEE4
Standard Water Melting and Boiling Temperatures and Enthalpies of the Transitions
Temperature (K) ΔH(kJ/mol)
melting 273.15 6.088
boiling 373.15 40.656 (44.016 at 298 K)
TABLEE5
Water Cryoscopic (Freezing Point Depression) and Ebullioscopic (Boiling Point Elevation) Constants
K = 1.86°C∙kg∙mol−1(cryoscopic constant)
f
K = 0.51°C∙kg∙mol−1(ebullioscopic constant)
b
TABLEE6
PAGE: 1112
1098 E • Water Properties
FIGUREE1 The plot shows the extent of light absorption versus wavelength for water. Absorption is reported in
reciprocal meters and corresponds to the inverse of the distance light may travel through water before its intensity
is diminished by 1/e(~37%).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1113
F • Composition of Commercial Acids and Bases 1099
APPENDIX F
Composition of Commercial Acids and Bases
Composition of Commercial Acids and Bases
Acid or Base1 Density (g/mL)2 Percentage by Mass Molarity
acetic acid, glacial 1.05 99.5% 17.4
3
aqueous ammonia 0.90 28% 14.8
hydrochloric acid 1.18 36% 11.6
nitric acid 1.42 71% 16.0
perchloric acid 1.67 70% 11.65
phosphoric acid 1.70 85% 14.7
sodium hydroxide 1.53 50% 19.1
sulfuric acid 1.84 96% 18.0
TABLEF1
1 Acids and bases are commercially available as aqueous solutions. This table lists properties (densities and concentrations) of
common acid and base solutions. Nominal values are provided in cases where the manufacturer cites a range of concentrations and
densities.
2 This column contains specific gravity data. In the case of this table, specific gravity is the ratio of density of a substance to the
density of pure water at the same conditions. Specific gravity is often cited on commercial labels.
3 This solution is sometimes called “ammonium hydroxide,” although this term is not chemically accurate.
PAGE: 1114
1100 F • Composition of Commercial Acids and Bases
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1115
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1101
APPENDIX G
Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
aluminum
Al(s) 0 0 28.3
Al(g) 324.4 285.7 164.54
Al3+(aq) –531 –485 –321.7
Al O (s) –1676 –1582 50.92
2 3
AlF (s) –1510.4 –1425 66.5
3
AlCl (s) –704.2 –628.8 110.67
3
AlCl ·6H O(s) –2691.57 –2269.40 376.56
3 2
Al S (s) –724.0 –492.4 116.9
2 3
Al (SO ) (s) –3445.06 –3506.61 239.32
2 43
antimony
Sb(s) 0 0 45.69
Sb(g) 262.34 222.17 180.16
Sb O (s) –1440.55 –1268.17 220.92
4 6
SbCl (g) –313.8 –301.2 337.80
3
SbCl (g) –394.34 –334.29 401.94
5
Sb S (s) –174.89 –173.64 182.00
2 3
SbCl (s) –382.17 –323.72 184.10
3
SbOCl(s) –374.0 — —
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1116
1102 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
arsenic
As(s) 0 0 35.1
As(g) 302.5 261.0 174.21
As (g) 143.9 92.4 314
4
As O (s) –1313.94 –1152.52 214.22
4 6
As O (s) –924.87 –782.41 105.44
2 5
AsCl (g) –261.50 –248.95 327.06
3
As S (s) –169.03 –168.62 163.59
2 3
AsH (g) 66.44 68.93 222.78
3
H AsO (s) –906.3 — —
3 4
barium
Ba(s) 0 0 62.5
Ba(g) 180 146 170.24
Ba2+(aq) –537.6 –560.8 9.6
BaO(s) –548.0 –520.3 72.1
BaCl (s) –855.0 –806.7 123.7
2
BaSO (s) –1473.2 –1362.3 132.2
4
beryllium
Be(s) 0 0 9.50
Be(g) 324.3 286.6 136.27
BeO(s) –609.4 –580.1 13.8
bismuth
Bi(s) 0 0 56.74
Bi(g) 207.1 168.2 187.00
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1117
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1103
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
Bi O (s) –573.88 –493.7 151.5
2 3
BiCl (s) –379.07 –315.06 176.98
3
Bi S (s) –143.1 –140.6 200.4
2 3
boron
B(s) 0 0 5.86
B(g) 565.0 521.0 153.4
B O (s) –1273.5 –1194.3 53.97
2 3
B H (g) 36.4 87.6 232.1
2 6
H BO (s) –1094.33 –968.92 88.83
3 3
BF (g) –1136.0 –1119.4 254.4
3
BCl (g) –403.8 –388.7 290.1
3
B N H (l) –540.99 –392.79 199.58
3 3 6
HBO (s) –794.25 –723.41 37.66
2
bromine
Br (l) 0 0 152.23
2
Br (g) 30.91 3.142 245.5
2
Br(g) 111.88 82.429 175.0
Br–(aq) –120.9 –102.82 80.71
BrF (g) –255.60 –229.45 292.42
3
HBr(g) –36.3 –53.43 198.7
cadmium
Cd(s) 0 0 51.76
Cd(g) 112.01 77.41 167.75
Cd2+(aq) –75.90 –77.61 –73.2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1118
1104 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
CdO(s) –258.2 –228.4 54.8
CdCl (s) –391.5 –343.9 115.3
2
CdSO (s) –933.3 –822.7 123.0
4
CdS(s) –161.9 –156.5 64.9
calcium
Ca(s) 0 0 41.6
Ca(g) 178.2 144.3 154.88
Ca2+(aq) –542.96 –553.04 –55.2
CaO(s) –634.9 –603.3 38.1
Ca(OH) (s) –985.2 –897.5 83.4
2
CaSO (s) –1434.5 –1322.0 106.5
4
CaSO ·2H O(s) –2022.63 –1797.45 194.14
4 2
CaCO (s) (calcite) –1220.0 –1081.4 110.0
3
CaSO ·H O(s) –1752.68 –1555.19 184.10
3 2
carbon
C(s) (graphite) 0 0 5.740
C(s) (diamond) 1.89 2.90 2.38
C(g) 716.681 671.2 158.1
CO(g) –110.52 –137.15 197.7
CO (g) –393.51 –394.36 213.8
2
CO 2–(aq) –677.1 –527.8 –56.9
3
CH (g) –74.6 –50.5 186.3
4
CH OH(l) –239.2 –166.6 126.8
3
CH OH(g) –201.0 –162.3 239.9
3
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1119
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1105
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
CCl (l) –128.2 –62.5 214.4
4
CCl (g) –95.7 –58.2 309.7
4
CHCl (l) –134.1 –73.7 201.7
3
CHCl (g) –103.14 –70.34 295.71
3
CS (l) 89.70 65.27 151.34
2
CS (g) 116.9 66.8 238.0
2
C H (g) 227.4 209.2 200.9
2 2
C H (g) 52.4 68.4 219.3
2 4
C H (g) –84.0 –32.0 229.2
2 6
CH CO H(l) –484.3 –389.9 159.8
3 2
CH CO H(g) –434.84 –376.69 282.50
3 2
C H OH(l) –277.6 –174.8 160.7
2 5
C H OH(g) –234.8 –167.9 281.6
2 5
HCO –(aq) –691.11 –587.06 95
3
C H (g) –103.8 –23.4 270.3
3 8
C H (g) 82.927 129.66 269.2
6 6
C H (l) 49.1 124.50 173.4
6 6
CH Cl (l) –124.2 –63.2 177.8
2 2
CH Cl (g) –95.4 –65.90 270.2
2 2
CH Cl(g) –81.9 –60.2 234.6
3
C H Cl(l) –136.52 –59.31 190.79
2 5
C H Cl(g) –112.17 –60.39 276.00
2 5
C N (g) 308.98 297.36 241.90
2 2
HCN(l) 108.9 125.0 112.8
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1120
1106 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
HCN(g) 135.5 124.7 201.8
cesium
Cs+(aq) –248 –282.0 133
chlorine
Cl (g) 0 0 223.1
2
Cl(g) 121.3 105.70 165.2
Cl–(aq) –167.2 –131.2 56.5
ClF(g) –54.48 –55.94 217.78
ClF (g) –158.99 –118.83 281.50
3
Cl O(g) 80.3 97.9 266.2
2
Cl O (l) 238.1 — —
2 7
Cl O (g) 272.0 — —
2 7
HCl(g) –92.307 –95.299 186.9
HClO (l) –40.58 — —
4
chromium
Cr(s) 0 0 23.77
Cr(g) 396.6 351.8 174.50
CrO 2–(aq) –881.2 –727.8 50.21
4
Cr O 2–(aq) –1490.3 –1301.1 261.9
2 7
Cr O (s) –1139.7 –1058.1 81.2
2 3
CrO (s) –589.5 — —
3
(NH ) Cr O (s) –1806.7 — —
42 2 7
cobalt
Co(s) 0 0 30.0
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1121
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1107
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
Co2+(aq) –67.4 –51.5 –155
Co3+(aq) 92 134 –305.0
CoO(s) –237.9 –214.2 52.97
Co O (s) –910.02 –794.98 114.22
3 4
Co(NO ) (s) –420.5 — —
32
copper
Cu(s) 0 0 33.15
Cu(g) 338.32 298.58 166.38
Cu+(aq) 51.9 50.2 –26
Cu2+(aq) 64.77 65.49 –99.6
CuO(s) –157.3 –129.7 42.63
Cu O(s) –168.6 –146.0 93.14
2
CuS(s) –53.1 –53.6 66.5
Cu S(s) –79.5 –86.2 120.9
2
CuSO (s) –771.36 –662.2 109.2
4
Cu(NO ) (s) –302.9 — —
32
fluorine
F (g) 0 0 202.8
2
F(g) 79.4 62.3 158.8
F–(aq) –332.6 –278.8 –13.8
F O(g) 24.7 41.9 247.43
2
HF(g) –273.3 –275.4 173.8
hydrogen
H (g) 0 0 130.7
2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1122
1108 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
H(g) 217.97 203.26 114.7
H+(aq) 0 0 0
OH–(aq) –230.0 –157.2 –10.75
H O+(aq) –285.8 69.91
3
H O(l) –285.83 –237.1 70.0
2
H O(g) –241.82 –228.59 188.8
2
H O (l) –187.78 –120.35 109.6
2 2
H O (g) –136.3 –105.6 232.7
2 2
HF(g) –273.3 –275.4 173.8
HCl(g) –92.307 –95.299 186.9
HBr(g) –36.3 –53.43 198.7
HI(g) 26.48 1.70 206.59
H S(g) –20.6 –33.4 205.8
2
H Se(g) 29.7 15.9 219.0
2
HNO –206.64 — —
3
iodine
I (s) 0 0 116.14
2
I (g) 62.438 19.3 260.7
2
I(g) 106.84 70.2 180.8
I–(aq) –55.19 –51.57 11.13
IF(g) 95.65 –118.49 236.06
ICl(g) 17.78 –5.44 247.44
IBr(g) 40.84 3.72 258.66
IF (g) –943.91 –818.39 346.44
7
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1123
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1109
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
HI(g) 26.48 1.70 206.59
iron
Fe(s) 0 0 27.3
Fe(g) 416.3 370.7 180.5
Fe2+(aq) –89.1 –78.90 –137.7
Fe3+(aq) –48.5 –4.7 –315.9
Fe O (s) –824.2 –742.2 87.40
2 3
Fe O (s) –1118.4 –1015.4 146.4
3 4
Fe(CO) (l) –774.04 –705.42 338.07
5
Fe(CO) (g) –733.87 –697.26 445.18
5
FeCl (s) –341.79 –302.30 117.95
2
FeCl (s) –399.49 –334.00 142.3
3
FeO(s) –272.0 –255.2 60.75
Fe(OH) (s) –569.0 –486.5 88.
2
Fe(OH) (s) –823.0 –696.5 106.7
3
FeS(s) –100.0 –100.4 60.29
Fe C(s) 25.10 20.08 104.60
3
lead
Pb(s) 0 0 64.81
Pb(g) 195.2 162. 175.4
Pb2+(aq) –1.7 –24.43 10.5
PbO(s) (yellow) –217.32 –187.89 68.70
PbO(s) (red) –218.99 –188.93 66.5
Pb(OH) (s) –515.9 — —
2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1124
1110 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
PbS(s) –100.4 –98.7 91.2
Pb(NO ) (s) –451.9 — —
32
PbO (s) –277.4 –217.3 68.6
2
PbCl (s) –359.4 –314.1 136.0
2
lithium
Li(s) 0 0 29.1
Li(g) 159.3 126.6 138.8
Li+(aq) –278.5 –293.3 13.4
LiH(s) –90.5 –68.3 20.0
Li(OH)(s) –487.5 –441.5 42.8
LiF(s) –616.0 –587.5 35.7
Li CO (s) –1216.04 –1132.19 90.17
2 3
magnesium
Mg2+(aq) –466.9 –454.8 –138.1
manganese
Mn(s) 0 0 32.0
Mn(g) 280.7 238.5 173.7
Mn2+(aq) –220.8 –228.1 –73.6
MnO(s) –385.2 –362.9 59.71
MnO (s) –520.03 –465.1 53.05
2
Mn O (s) –958.97 –881.15 110.46
2 3
Mn O (s) –1378.83 –1283.23 155.64
3 4
MnO –(aq) –541.4 –447.2 191.2
4
MnO 2–(aq) –653.0 –500.7 59
4
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1125
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1111
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
mercury
Hg(l) 0 0 75.9
Hg(g) 61.4 31.8 175.0
Hg2+(aq) 164.8
Hg2+(aq) 172.4 153.9 84.5
HgO(s) (red) –90.83 –58.5 70.29
HgO(s) (yellow) –90.46 –58.43 71.13
HgCl (s) –224.3 –178.6 146.0
2
Hg Cl (s) –265.4 –210.7 191.6
2 2
HgS(s) (red) –58.16 –50.6 82.4
HgS(s) (black) –53.56 –47.70 88.28
HgSO (s) –707.51 –594.13 0.00
4
nickel
Ni2+(aq) –64.0 –46.4 –159
nitrogen
N (g) 0 0 191.6
2
N(g) 472.704 455.5 153.3
NO(g) 90.25 87.6 210.8
NO (g) 33.2 51.30 240.1
2
N O(g) 81.6 103.7 220.0
2
N O (g) 83.72 139.41 312.17
2 3
NO –(aq) –205.0 –108.7 146.4
3
N O (g) 11.1 99.8 304.4
2 4
N O (g) 11.3 115.1 355.7
2 5
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1126
1112 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
NH (g) –45.9 –16.5 192.8
3
NH +(aq) –132.5 –79.31 113.4
4
N H (l) 50.63 149.43 121.21
2 4
N H (g) 95.4 159.4 238.5
2 4
NH NO (s) –365.56 –183.87 151.08
4 3
NH Cl(s) –314.43 –202.87 94.6
4
NH Br(s) –270.8 –175.2 113.0
4
NH I(s) –201.4 –112.5 117.0
4
NH NO (s) –256.5 — —
4 2
HNO (l) –174.1 –80.7 155.6
3
HNO (g) –133.9 –73.5 266.9
3
HNO (aq) –207.4 –110.5 146
3
oxygen
O (g) 0 0 205.2
2
O(g) 249.17 231.7 161.1
O (g) 142.7 163.2 238.9
3
phosphorus
P (s) 0 0 164.4
4
P (g) 58.91 24.4 280.0
4
P(g) 314.64 278.25 163.19
PH (g) 5.4 13.5 210.2
3
PCl (g) –287.0 –267.8 311.78
3
PCl (g) –374.9 –305.0 364.4
5
P O (s) –1640.1 — —
4 6
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1127
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1113
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
P O (s) –2984.0 –2697.0 228.86
4 10
PO 3–(aq) –1277 –1019 –222
4
HPO (s) –948.5 — —
3
HPO 2–(aq) –1292.1 –1089.3 –33
4
H PO 2–(aq) –1296.3 –1130.4 90.4
2 4
H PO (s) –604.6 — —
3 2
H PO (s) –964.4 — —
3 3
H PO (s) –1279.0 –1119.1 110.50
3 4
H PO (l) –1266.9 –1124.3 110.5
3 4
H P O (s) –2241.0 — —
4 2 7
POCl (l) –597.1 –520.8 222.5
3
POCl (g) –558.5 –512.9 325.5
3
potassium
K(s) 0 0 64.7
K(g) 89.0 60.5 160.3
K+(aq) –252.4 –283.3 102.5
KF(s) –576.27 –537.75 66.57
KCl(s) –436.5 –408.5 82.6
rubidium
Rb+(aq) –246 –282.2 124
silicon
Si(s) 0 0 18.8
Si(g) 450.0 405.5 168.0
SiO (s) –910.7 –856.3 41.5
2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1128
1114 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
SiH (g) 34.3 56.9 204.6
4
H SiO (s) –1188.67 –1092.44 133.89
2 3
H SiO (s) –1481.14 –1333.02 192.46
4 4
SiF (g) –1615.0 –1572.8 282.8
4
SiCl (l) –687.0 –619.8 239.7
4
SiCl (g) –662.75 –622.58 330.62
4
SiC(s, beta cubic) –73.22 –70.71 16.61
SiC(s, alpha hexagonal) –71.55 –69.04 16.48
silver
Ag(s) 0 0 42.55
Ag(g) 284.9 246.0 172.89
Ag+(aq) 105.6 77.11 72.68
Ag O(s) –31.05 –11.20 121.3
2
AgCl(s) –127.0 –109.8 96.3
Ag S(s) –32.6 –40.7 144.0
2
sodium
Na(s) 0 0 51.3
Na(g) 107.5 77.0 153.7
Na+(aq) –240.1 –261.9 59
Na O(s) –414.2 –375.5 75.1
2
NaCl(s) –411.2 –384.1 72.1
strontium
Sr2+(aq) –545.8 –557.3 –32.6
sulfur
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1129
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1115
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
S (s) (rhombic) 0 0 256.8
8
S(g) 278.81 238.25 167.82
S2–(aq) 41.8 83.7 22
SO (g) –296.83 –300.1 248.2
2
SO (g) –395.72 –371.06 256.76
3
SO 2–(aq) –909.3 –744.5 20.1
4
S O 2–(aq) –648.5 –522.5 67
2 3
H S(g) –20.6 –33.4 205.8
2
HS–(aq) –17.7 12.6 61.1
H SO (l) –813.989 –690.00 156.90
2 4
HSO 2–(aq) –885.75 –752.87 126.9
4
H S O (s) –1273.6 — —
2 2 7
SF (g) –728.43 –684.84 291.12
4
SF (g) –1220.5 –1116.5 291.5
6
SCl (l) –50 — —
2
SCl (g) –19.7 — —
2
S Cl (l) –59.4 — —
2 2
S Cl (g) –19.50 –29.25 319.45
2 2
SOCl (g) –212.55 –198.32 309.66
2
SOCl (l) –245.6 — —
2
SO Cl (l) –394.1 — —
2 2
SO Cl (g) –354.80 –310.45 311.83
2 2
tin
Sn(s) 0 0 51.2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1130
1116 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
Sn(g) 301.2 266.2 168.5
SnO(s) –285.8 –256.9 56.5
SnO (s) –577.6 –515.8 49.0
2
SnCl (l) –511.3 –440.1 258.6
4
SnCl (g) –471.5 –432.2 365.8
4
titanium
Ti(s) 0 0 30.7
Ti(g) 473.0 428.4 180.3
TiO (s) –944.0 –888.8 50.6
2
TiCl (l) –804.2 –737.2 252.4
4
TiCl (g) –763.2 –726.3 353.2
4
tungsten
W(s) 0 0 32.6
W(g) 849.4 807.1 174.0
WO (s) –842.9 –764.0 75.9
3
zinc
Zn(s) 0 0 41.6
Zn(g) 130.73 95.14 160.98
Zn2+(aq) –153.9 –147.1 –112.1
ZnO(s) –350.5 –320.5 43.7
ZnCl (s) –415.1 –369.43 111.5
2
ZnS(s) –206.0 –201.3 57.7
ZnSO (s) –982.8 –871.5 110.5
4
ZnCO (s) –812.78 –731.57 82.42
3
TABLEG1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1131
G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances 1117
Substance (kJ mol–1) (kJ mol–1) (J K–1mol–1)
complexes
[Co(NH ) (NO ) ]NO ,cis –898.7 — —
34 22 3
[Co(NH ) (NO ) ]NO ,trans –896.2 — —
34 22 3
NH [Co(NH ) (NO ) ] –837.6 — —
4 32 24
[Co(NH ) ][Co(NH ) (NO ) ] –2733.0 — —
36 32 243
[Co(NH ) Cl ]Cl,cis –874.9 — —
34 2
[Co(NH ) Cl ]Cl,trans –877.4 — —
34 2
[Co(en) (NO ) ]NO ,cis –689.5 — —
2 22 3
[Co(en) Cl ]Cl,cis –681.2 — —
2 2
[Co(en) Cl ]Cl,trans –677.4 — —
2 2
[Co(en) ](ClO ) –762.7 — —
3 43
[Co(en) ]Br –595.8 — —
3 2
[Co(en) ]I –475.3 — —
3 2
[Co(en) ]I –519.2 — —
3 3
[Co(NH ) ](ClO ) –1034.7 –221.1 615
36 43
[Co(NH ) NO ](NO ) –1088.7 –412.9 331
35 2 32
[Co(NH ) ](NO ) –1282.0 –524.5 448
36 33
[Co(NH ) Cl]Cl –1017.1 –582.5 366.1
35 2
[Pt(NH ) ]Cl –725.5 — —
34 2
[Ni(NH ) ]Cl –994.1 — —
36 2
[Ni(NH ) ]Br –923.8 — —
36 2
[Ni(NH ) ]I –808.3 — —
36 2
TABLEG1
PAGE: 1132
1118 G • Standard Thermodynamic Properties for Selected Substances
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1133
H • Ionization Constants of Weak Acids 1119
APPENDIX H
Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Acid Formula K at 25 °C Lewis Structure
a
acetic CH CO H 1.8 10−5
3 2
H AsO 5.5 10−3
3 4
1.7 10−7
arsenic
3.0 10−12
arsenous H AsO 5.1 10−10
3 3
boric H BO 5.4 10−10
3 3
H CO 4.3 10−7
2 3
carbonic
4.7 10−11
cyanic HCNO 2 10−4
formic HCO H 1.8 10−4
2
TABLEH1
PAGE: 1134
1120 H • Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Acid Formula K at 25 °C Lewis Structure
a
hydrazoic HN 2.5 10−5
3
hydrocyanic HCN 4.9 10−10
hydrofluoric HF 6.4 10−4
hydrogen peroxide H O 2.4 10−12
2 2
H Se 1.29 10−4
2
hydrogen selenide
HSe– 1 10−12
hydrogen sulfate ion 1.2 10−2
H S 8.9 10−8
2
hydrogen sulfide
HS– 1.0 10−19
H Te 2.3 10−3
2
hydrogen telluride
HTe– 1.6 10−11
hypobromous HBrO 2.8 10−9
hypochlorous HClO 2.9 10−8
nitrous HNO 4.6 10−4
2
H C O 6.0 10−2
2 2 4
oxalic
6.1 10−5
H PO 7.5 10−3
3 4
6.2 10−8
phosphoric
4.2 10−13
TABLEH1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1135
H • Ionization Constants of Weak Acids 1121
Acid Formula K at 25 °C Lewis Structure
a
H PO 5 10−2
3 3
phosphorous
2.0 10−7
H SO 1.6 10−2
2 3
sulfurous
6.4 10−8
TABLEH1
PAGE: 1136
1122 H • Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1137
I • Ionization Constants of Weak Bases 1123
APPENDIX I
Ionization Constants of Weak Bases
Ionization Constants of Weak Bases
Base Lewis Structure K at 25 °C
b
ammonia 1.8 10−5
dimethylamine 5.9 10−4
methylamine 4.4 10−4
phenylamine (aniline) 4.3 10−10
trimethylamine 6.3 10−5
TABLEI1
PAGE: 1138
1124 I • Ionization Constants of Weak Bases
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1139
J • Solubility Products 1125
APPENDIX J
Solubility Products
Solubility Products
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
aluminum
Al(OH) 2 10−32
3
barium
BaCO 1.6 10−9
3
BaC O ·2H O 1.1 10−7
2 4 2
BaSO 2.3 10−8
4
BaCrO 8.5 10−11
4
BaF 2.4 10−5
2
Ba(OH) ·8H O 5.0 10−3
2 2
Ba (PO ) 6 10−39
3 42
Ba (AsO ) 1.1 10−13
3 42
bismuth
BiO(OH) 4 10−10
BiOCl 1.8 10−31
Bi S 1 10−97
2 3
cadmium
Cd(OH) 5.9 10−15
2
CdS 1.0 10−28
CdCO 5.2 10−12
3
TABLEJ1
PAGE: 1140
1126 J • Solubility Products
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
calcium
Ca(OH) 1.3 10−6
2
CaCO 8.7 10−9
3
CaSO4·2H O 6.1 10−5
2
CaC O ·H O 1.96 10−8
2 4 2
Ca (PO ) 1.3 10−32
3 42
CaHPO 7 10−7
4
CaF 4.0 10−11
2
chromium
Cr(OH) 6.7 10−31
3
cobalt
Co(OH) 2.5 10−16
2
CoS(α) 5 10−22
CoS(β) 3 10−26
CoCO 1.4 10−13
3
Co(OH) 2.5 10−43
3
copper
CuCl 1.2 10−6
CuBr 6.27 10−9
CuI 1.27 10−12
CuSCN 1.6 10−11
Cu S 2.5 10−48
2
Cu(OH) 2.2 10−20
2
CuS 8.5 10−45
TABLEJ1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1141
J • Solubility Products 1127
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
CuCO 2.5 10−10
3
iron
Fe(OH) 1.8 10−15
2
FeCO 2.1 10−11
3
FeS 3.7 10−19
Fe(OH) 4 10−38
3
lead
Pb(OH) 1.2 10−15
2
PbF 4 10−8
2
PbCl 1.6 10−5
2
PbBr 4.6 10−6
2
PbI 1.4 10−8
2
PbCO 1.5 10−15
3
PbS 7 10−29
PbCrO 2 10−16
4
PbSO 1.3 10−8
4
Pb (PO ) 1 10−54
3 42
magnesium
Mg(OH) 8.9 10−12
2
MgCO ·3H O ca1 10−5
3 2
MgNH PO 3 10−13
4 4
MgF 6.4 10−9
2
MgC O 7 10−7
2 4
manganese
TABLEJ1
PAGE: 1142
1128 J • Solubility Products
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
Mn(OH) 2 10−13
2
MnCO 8.8 10−11
3
MnS 2.3 10−13
mercury
Hg O·H O 3.6 10−26
2 2
Hg Cl 1.1 10−18
2 2
Hg Br 1.3 10−22
2 2
Hg I 4.5 10−29
2 2
Hg CO 9 10−15
2 3
Hg SO 7.4 10−7
2 4
Hg S 1.0 10−47
2
Hg CrO 2 10−9
2 4
HgS 1.6 10−54
nickel
Ni(OH) 1.6 10−16
2
NiCO 1.4 10−7
3
NiS(α) 4 10−20
NiS(β) 1.3 10−25
potassium
KClO 1.05 10−2
4
K PtCl 7.48 10−6
2 6
KHC H O 3 10−4
4 4 6
silver
2 10−8
TABLEJ1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1143
J • Solubility Products 1129
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
AgCl 1.6 10−10
AgBr 5.0 10−13
AgI 1.5 10−16
AgCN 1.2 10−16
AgSCN 1.0 10−12
Ag S 1.6 10−49
2
Ag CO 8.1 10−12
2 3
Ag CrO 9.0 10−12
2 4
Ag Fe(CN) 1.55 10−41
4 6
Ag SO 1.2 10−5
2 4
Ag PO 1.8 10−18
3 4
strontium
Sr(OH) ·8H O 3.2 10−4
2 2
SrCO 7 10−10
3
SrCrO 3.6 10−5
4
SrSO 3.2 10−7
4
SrC O ·H O 4 10−7
2 4 2
thallium
TlCl 1.7 10−4
TlSCN 1.6 10−4
Tl S 6 10−22
2
Tl(OH) 6.3 10−46
3
tin
Sn(OH) 3 10−27
2
TABLEJ1
PAGE: 1144
1130 J • Solubility Products
Substance K at 25 °C
sp
SnS 1 10−26
Sn(OH) 1.0 10−57
4
zinc
ZnCO 2 10−10
3
TABLEJ1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1145
K • Formation Constants for Complex Ions 1131
APPENDIX K
Formation Constants for Complex Ions
Formation Constants for Complex Ions
Equilibrium K
f
7 1019
1.3 107
3 1018
1.3 105
2.3 1033
1.0 1016
1.7 1013
1.5 1035
2 1043
3.2 103
1.1 1016
2.0 108
1.8 105
1 1021
1.7 107
2.1 1019
2 1015
TABLEK1
PAGE: 1146
1132 K • Formation Constants for Complex Ions
Equilibrium K
f
8.9 102
1.2 1010
3.0 104
1 1016
1.0 1025
1 103
TABLEK1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1147
L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials 1133
APPENDIX L
Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials
Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials
Half-Reaction E° (V)
+0.7996
+0.22233
−0.31
+0.45
+0.373
+0.017
−2.07
−1.662
−2.048
+1.498
+1.692
−2.912
−1.847
+1.0873
−2.868
−2.483
+1.61
−0.4030
−1.09
TABLEL1
PAGE: 1148
1134 L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials
Half-Reaction E° (V)
−0.61
−1.17
+1.35827
+0.36
+0.33
+0.66
+0.89
+1.189
+1.21
+1.482
+1.611
+1.628
+1.83
−0.28
+0.1
+0.17
−0.744
−0.407
−0.913
−0.43
−0.13
+1.232
−1.2
TABLEL1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1149
L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials 1135
Half-Reaction E° (V)
−1.48
+0.153
+0.34
+0.521
+2.866
−0.447
+0.771
+0.36
−0.88
−1.01
−0.549
−2.279
−2.23
−0.8277
+1.776
0.00
+0.878
−1.55
+0.851
+0.92
+0.7973
+0.21
+0.26808
TABLEL1
PAGE: 1150
1136 L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials
Half-Reaction E° (V)
−0.37
−0.04
−0.70
+0.5355
−0.3382
−2.931
−2.52
−3.04
−2.28
−2.372
−1.185
−0.05
+0.558
+1.23
+1.507
−2.71
−2.323
−0.257
−0.49
+1.593
+0.49
+0.76
+0.957
+0.92
TABLEL1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1151
L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials 1137
Half-Reaction E° (V)
+0.10
−1.856
+0.401
+0.695
+1.229
−0.1262
+1.69
−0.95
−0.3505
+0.987
+0.591
+1.20
+0.58
+0.755
+0.68
−2.03
−2.92
−2.98
+0.44
−0.47627
+0.142
−2.09
−0.399
−1.2
TABLEL1
PAGE: 1152
1138 L • Standard Electrode (Half-Cell) Potentials
Half-Reaction E° (V)
−1.697
−0.86
−2.304
+0.151
−0.1375
−0.25
−0.94
−2.89
+0.593
−1.90
−1.630
−1.79
−1.19
−2.37
−0.7618
−1.26
−1.04
−1.245
−1.199
−1.40
−1.539
TABLEL1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1153
M • Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes 1139
APPENDIX M
Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes
Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes
Isotope Half-Life1 Type of Emission2 Isotope Half-Life3 Type of Emission4
5730 y 5.01 d
9.97 m 60.55 m
4.1 10−22s 138.4 d
15.00 h 3 10−7s
14.29 d 0.15 s
1.27 109y 3.05 m
0.08 s 1.0 10−4s
2.6 106y 1.6 s
5.27 y 55.6 s
4.7 1010y 3.82 d
29 y 3.66 d
5.1 1015y 1600 y
8.040 d 5.75 y
5 1015y 6.13 h
3.07 m 1.913 y
22.3 y 1.4 1010y
10.6 h 22 m
26.8 m
1 y = years, d = days, h = hours, m = minutes, s = seconds
2 E.C.= electron capture,S.F.= Spontaneous fission
3 y = years, d = days, h = hours, m = minutes, s = seconds
PAGE: 1154
1140 M • Half-Lives for Several Radioactive Isotopes
Isotope Half-Life1 Type of Emission2 Isotope Half-Life3 Type of Emission4
6.243 d 27 d
1.59 105y 162.8 d
2.45 105y 4.5 h
7.03 108y 20.47 d
4.47 109y 3.24 h
23.54 m 20.1 h
2.3 d 76 m
2.407 104y 55 s
6.54 103y 0.65 s
14.4 y 1.5 s
432.2 y 0.8 s
TABLEM1
4 E.C.= electron capture,S.F.= Spontaneous fission
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1155
1141
ANSWER KEY
Chapter 1
1. Place a glass of water outside. It will freeze if the temperature is below 0 °C.
3. (a) law (states a consistently observed phenomenon, can be used for prediction); (b) theory (a widely
accepted explanation of the behavior of matter); (c) hypothesis (a tentative explanation, can be
investigated by experimentation)
5. (a) symbolic, microscopic; (b) macroscopic; (c) symbolic, macroscopic; (d) microscopic
7. Macroscopic. The heat required is determined from macroscopic properties.
9. Liquids can change their shape (flow); solids can’t. Gases can undergo large volume changes as pressure
changes; liquids do not. Gases flow and change volume; solids do not.
11. The mixture can have a variety of compositions; a pure substance has a definite composition. Both have
the same composition from point to point.
13. Molecules of elements contain only one type of atom; molecules of compounds contain two or more types
of atoms. They are similar in that both are comprised of two or more atoms chemically bonded together.
15. Answers will vary. Sample answer: Gatorade contains water, sugar, dextrose, citric acid, salt, sodium
chloride, monopotassium phosphate, and sucrose acetate isobutyrate.
17. (a) element; (b) element; (c) compound; (d) mixture; (e) compound; (f) compound; (g) compound; (h)
mixture
19. In each case, a molecule consists of two or more combined atoms. They differ in that the types of atoms
change from one substance to the next.
21. Gasoline (a mixture of compounds), oxygen, and to a lesser extent, nitrogen are consumed. Carbon
dioxide and water are the principal products. Carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxides are produced in
lesser amounts.
23. (a) Increased as it would have combined with oxygen in the air thus increasing the amount of matter and
therefore the mass. (b) 0.9 g
25. (a) 200.0 g; (b) The mass of the container and contents would decrease as carbon dioxide is a gaseous
product and would leave the container. (c) 102.3 g
27. (a) physical; (b) chemical; (c) chemical; (d) physical; (e) physical
29. physical
31. The value of an extensive property depends upon the amount of matter being considered, whereas the
value of an intensive property is the same regardless of the amount of matter being considered.
33. Being extensive properties, both mass and volume are directly proportional to the amount of substance
under study. Dividing one extensive property by another will in effect “cancel” this dependence on
amount, yielding a ratio that is independent of amount (an intensive property).
35. about a yard
37. (a) kilograms; (b) meters; (c) meters/second; (d) kilograms/cubic meter; (e) kelvin; (f) square meters; (g)
cubic meters
39. (a) centi-, 10−2; (b) deci-, 10−1; (c) Giga-, 109; (d) kilo-, 103; (e) milli-, 10−3; (f) nano-, 10−9; (g)
pico-, 10−12; (h) tera-, 1012
41. (a) m = 18.58 g, V = 5.7 mL. (b) d = 3.3 g/mL (c) dioptase (copper cyclosilicate, d = 3.28—3.31 g/mL);
malachite (basic copper carbonate, d = 3.25—4.10 g/mL); Paraiba tourmaline (sodium lithium boron
silicate with copper, d = 2.82—3.32 g/mL)
43. (a) displaced water volume = 2.8 mL; (b) displaced water mass = 2.8 g; (c) The block mass is 2.76 g,
essentially equal to the mass of displaced water (2.8 g) and consistent with Archimedes’ principle of
buoyancy.
45. (a) 7.04 102; (b) 3.344 10−2; (c) 5.479 102; (d) 2.2086 104; (e) 1.00000 103; (f) 6.51 10−8; (g)
7.157 10−3
47. (a) exact; (b) exact; (c) uncertain; (d) exact; (e) uncertain; (f) uncertain
PAGE: 1156
1142
49. (a) two; (b) three; (c) five; (d) four; (e) six; (f) two; (g) five
51. (a) 0.44; (b) 9.0; (c) 27; (d) 140; (e) 1.5 10−3; (f) 0.44
53. (a) 2.15 105; (b) 4.2 106; (c) 2.08; (d) 0.19; (e) 27,440; (f) 43.0
55. (a) Archer X; (b) Archer W; (c) Archer Y
57. (a) ; (b) ; (c)
59.
Only two significant figures are justified.
61. 68–71 cm; 400–450 g
63. 355 mL
65. 8 10−4cm
67. yes; weight = 89.4 kg
69. 5.0 10−3mL
71. (a) 1.3 10−4kg; (b) 2.32 108kg; (c) 5.23 10−12m; (d) 8.63 10−5kg; (e) 3.76 10−1m; (f) 5.4 10−5
m; (g) 1 1012s; (h) 2.7 10−11s; (i) 1.5 10−4K
73. 45.4 L
75. 1.0160 103kg
77. (a) 394 ft; (b) 5.9634 km; (c) 6.0 102; (d) 2.64 L; (e) 5.1 1018kg; (f) 14.5 kg; (g) 324 mg
79. 0.46 m; 1.5 ft/cubit
81. Yes, the acid’s volume is 123 mL.
83. 62.6 in (about 5 ft 3 in.) and 101 lb
85. (a) 3.81 cm 8.89 cm 2.44 m; (b) 40.6 cm
87. 2.70 g/cm3
89. (a) 81.6 g; (b) 17.6 g
91. (a) 5.1 mL; (b) 37 L
93. 5371 °F, 3239 K
95. −23 °C, 250 K
97. −33.4 °C, 239.8 K
99. 113 °F
Chapter 2
1. The starting materials consist of one green sphere and two purple spheres. The products consist of two
green spheres and two purple spheres. This violates Dalton’s postulate that that atoms are not created
during a chemical change, but are merely redistributed.
3. This statement violates Dalton’s fourth postulate: In a given compound, the numbers of atoms of each type
(and thus also the percentage) always have the same ratio.
5. Dalton originally thought that all atoms of a particular element had identical properties, including mass.
Thus, the concept of isotopes, in which an element has different masses, was a violation of the original
idea. To account for the existence of isotopes, the second postulate of his atomic theory was modified to
state that atoms of the same element must have identical chemical properties.
7. Both are subatomic particles that reside in an atom’s nucleus. Both have approximately the same mass.
Protons are positively charged, whereas neutrons are uncharged.
9. (a) The Rutherford atom has a small, positively charged nucleus, so most α particles will pass through
empty space far from the nucleus and be undeflected. Those α particles that pass near the nucleus will be
deflected from their paths due to positive-positive repulsion. The more directly toward the nucleus the α
particles are headed, the larger the deflection angle will be. (b) Higher-energy α particles that pass near
the nucleus will still undergo deflection, but the faster they travel, the less the expected angle of deflection.
(c) If the nucleus is smaller, the positive charge is smaller and the expected deflections are smaller—both
in terms of how closely the α particles pass by the nucleus undeflected and the angle of deflection. If the
nucleus is larger, the positive charge is larger and the expected deflections are larger—more α particles
will be deflected, and the deflection angles will be larger. (d) The paths followed by the α particles match
the predictions from (a), (b), and (c).
11. (a)133Cs+; (b)127I−; (c)31P3−; (d)57Co3+
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1157
1143
13. (a) Carbon-12,12C; (b) This atom contains six protons and six neutrons. There are six electrons in a
neutral12C atom. The net charge of such a neutral atom is zero, and the mass number is 12. (c) The
preceding answers are correct. (d) The atom will be stable since C-12 is a stable isotope of carbon. (e) The
preceding answer is correct. Other answers for this exercise are possible if a different element of isotope
is chosen.
15. (a) Lithium-6 contains three protons, three neutrons, and three electrons. The isotope symbol is6Li or
(b)6Li+or
17. (a) Iron, 26 protons, 24 electrons, and 32 neutrons; (b) iodine, 53 protons, 54 electrons, and 74 neutrons
19. (a) 3 protons, 3 electrons, 4 neutrons; (b) 52 protons, 52 electrons, 73 neutrons; (c) 47 protons, 47
electrons, 62 neutrons; (d) 7 protons, 7 electrons, 8 neutrons; (e) 15 protons, 15 electrons, 16 neutrons
21. Let us use neon as an example. Since there are three isotopes, there is no way to be sure to accurately
predict the abundances to make the total of 20.18 amu average atomic mass. Let us guess that the
abundances are 9% Ne-22, 91% Ne-20, and only a trace of Ne-21. The average mass would be 20.18 amu.
Checking the nature’s mix of isotopes shows that the abundances are 90.48% Ne-20, 9.25% Ne-22, and
0.27% Ne-21, so our guessed amounts have to be slightly adjusted.
23. 79.90 amu
25. Turkey source: 20.3% (of 10.0129 amu isotope); US source: 19.1% (of 10.0129 amu isotope)
27. The symbol for the element oxygen, O, represents both the element and one atom of oxygen. A molecule of
oxygen, O , contains two oxygen atoms; the subscript 2 in the formula must be used to distinguish the
2
diatomic molecule from two single oxygen atoms.
29. (a) molecular CO , empirical CO ; (b) molecular C H , empirical CH; (c) molecular C H , empirical CH ; (d)
2 2 2 2 2 4 2
molecular H SO , empirical H SO
2 4 2 4
31. (a) C H N O; (b) C H O ; (c) HO; (d) CH O; (e) C H O
4 5 2 12 22 11 2 3 4 3
33. (a) CH O; (b) C H O
2 2 4
35. (a) ethanol
(b) methoxymethane, more commonly known as dimethyl ether
(c) These molecules have the same chemical composition (types and number of atoms) but different
chemical structures. They are structural isomers.
37. (a) metal, inner transition metal; (b) nonmetal, representative element; (c) metal, representative element;
(d) nonmetal, representative element; (e) metal, transition metal; (f) metal, inner transition metal; (g)
metal, transition metal; (h) nonmetal, representative element; (i) nonmetal, representative element; (j)
metal, representative element
39. (a) He; (b) Be; (c) Li; (d) O
41. (a) krypton, Kr; (b) calcium, Ca; (c) fluorine, F; (d) tellurium, Te
43. (a) ; (b) ; (c) ; (d)
45. Ionic: KCl, MgCl ; Covalent: NCl , ICl, PCl , CCl
2 3 5 4
47. (a) covalent; (b) ionic, Ba2+, O2−; (c) ionic, (d) ionic, Sr2+, (e) covalent; (f) ionic,
Na+, O2−
49. (a) CaS; (b) (NH ) SO ; (c) AlBr ; (d) Na HPO ; (e) Mg (PO )
42 4 3 2 4 3 42
51. (a) cesium chloride; (b) barium oxide; (c) potassium sulfide; (d) beryllium chloride; (e) hydrogen bromide;
(f) aluminum fluoride
53. (a) RbBr; (b) MgSe; (c) Na O; (d) CaCl ; (e) HF; (f) GaP; (g) AlBr ; (h) (NH ) SO
2 2 3 42 4
55. (a) ClO ; (b) N O ; (c) K P; (d) Ag S; (e) AIF ·3H O; (f) SiO
2 2 4 3 2 3 2 2
57. (a) chromium(III) oxide; (b) iron(II) chloride; (c) chromium(VI) oxide; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e)
PAGE: 1158
1144
cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate; (f) molybdenum(IV) sulfide
59. (a) K PO ; (b) CuSO ; (c) CaCl ; (d) TiO ; (e) NH NO ; (f) NaHSO
3 4 4 2 2 4 3 4
61. (a) manganese(IV) oxide; (b) mercury(I) chloride; (c) iron(III) nitrate; (d) titanium(IV) chloride; (e)
copper(II) bromide
Chapter 3
1. (a) 12.01 amu; (b) 12.01 amu; (c) 144.12 amu; (d) 60.05 amu
3. (a) 123.896 amu; (b) 18.015 amu; (c) 164.086 amu; (d) 60.052 amu; (e) 342.297 amu
5. (a) 56.107 amu; (b) 54.091 amu; (c) 199.9976 amu; (d) 97.9950 amu
7. Use the molecular formula to find the molar mass; to obtain the number of moles, divide the mass of
compound by the molar mass of the compound expressed in grams.
9. Formic acid. Its formula has twice as many oxygen atoms as the other two compounds (one each).
Therefore, 0.60 mol of formic acid would be equivalent to 1.20 mol of a compound containing a single
oxygen atom.
11. The two masses have the same numerical value, but the units are different: The molecular mass is the
mass of 1 molecule while the molar mass is the mass of 6.022 1023molecules.
13. (a) 256.48 g/mol; (b) 72.150 g mol−1; (c) 378.103 g mol−1; (d) 58.080 g mol−1; (e) 180.158 g mol−1
15. (a) 197.382 g mol−1; (b) 257.163 g mol−1; (c) 194.193 g mol−1; (d) 60.056 g mol−1; (e) 306.464 g mol−1
17. (a) 0.819 g; (b) 307 g; (c) 0.23 g; (d) 1.235 106g (1235 kg); (e) 765 g
19. (a) 99.41 g; (b) 2.27 g; (c) 3.5 g; (d) 222 kg; (e) 160.1 g
21. (a) 9.60 g; (b) 19.2 g; (c) 28.8 g
23. zirconium: 2.038 1023atoms; 30.87 g; silicon: 2.038 1023atoms; 9.504 g; oxygen: 8.151 1023atoms;
21.66 g
25. AlPO : 1.000 mol, or 26.98 g Al; Al Cl : 1.994 mol, or 53.74 g Al; Al S : 3.00 mol, or 80.94 g Al; The Al S
4 2 6 2 3 2 3
sample thus contains the greatest mass of Al.
27. 3.113 1025C atoms
29. 0.865 servings, or about 1 serving.
31. 20.0 g H O represents the least number of molecules since it has the least number of moles.
2
33. (a) % N = 82.24%, % H = 17.76%; (b) % Na = 29.08%, % S = 40.56%, % O = 30.36%; (c) % Ca2+= 38.76%
35. % NH = 38.2%
3
37. (a) CS ; (b) CH O
2 2
39. C H
6 6
41. Mg Si H O (empirical formula), Mg Si H O (molecular formula)
3 2 3 8 6 4 6 16
43. C H N
15 15 3
45. We need to know the number of moles of sulfuric acid dissolved in the solution and the volume of the
solution.
47. (a) 0.679M; (b) 1.00M; (c) 0.06998M; (d) 1.75M; (e) 0.070M; (f) 6.6M
49. (a) determine the number of moles of glucose in 0.500 L of solution; determine the molar mass of glucose;
determine the mass of glucose from the number of moles and its molar mass; (b) 27 g
51. (a) 37.0 mol H SO , 3.63 103g H SO ; (b) 3.8 10−7mol NaCN, 1.9 10−5g NaCN; (c) 73.2 mol H CO,
2 4 2 4 2
2.20 kg H CO; (d) 5.9 10−7mol FeSO , 8.9 10−5g FeSO
2 4 4
53. (a) Determine the molar mass of KMnO ; determine the number of moles of KMnO in the solution; from
4 4
the number of moles and the volume of solution, determine the molarity; (b) 1.15 10−3M
55. (a) 5.04 10−3M; (b) 0.499M; (c) 9.92M; (d) 1.1 10−3M
57. 0.025M
59. 0.5000 L
61. 1.9 mL
63. (a) 0.125M; (b) 0.04888M; (c) 0.206M; (d) 0.0056M
65. 11.9M
67. 1.6 L
69. (a) The dilution equation can be used, appropriately modified to accommodate mass-based concentration
units: . This equation can be rearranged to isolate mass and the
1
given quantities substituted into this equation. (b) 58.8 g
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1159
1145
71. 114 g
73. 1.75 10−3M
75. 95 mg/dL
77. 2.38 10−4mol
79. 0.29 mol
Chapter 4
1. An equation is balanced when the same number of each element is represented on the reactant and
product sides. Equations must be balanced to accurately reflect the law of conservation of matter.
3. (a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e) (f)
(g) (h)
5. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
7. (a) Ba(NO ) , KClO ; (b) (c)
32 3
(d)
9. (a) (b) complete ionic equation:
net ionic equation:
11. (a)
(b)
(c)
13. (a) oxidation-reduction (addition); (b) acid-base (neutralization); (c) oxidation-reduction (combustion)
15. It is an oxidation-reduction reaction because the oxidation state of the silver changes during the reaction.
17. (a) H +1, P +5, O −2; (b) Al +3, H +1, O −2; (c) Se +4, O −2; (d) K +1, N +3, O −2; (e) In +3, S −2; (f) P +3, O −2
19. (a) acid-base; (b) oxidation-reduction: Na is oxidized, H+is reduced; (c) oxidation-reduction: Mg is
oxidized, Cl is reduced; (d) acid-base; (e) oxidation-reduction: P3−is oxidized, O is reduced; (f) acid-base
2 2
21. (a) (b)
23. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
25. (a) (b)
(a solution of H SO ); (c)
2 4
27.
29.
31.
33. (a) (b)
35. (a) step 1: step 2:
(b)
PAGE: 1160
1146
(c) and
37. (a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
39. (a) (b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
41. (a) (b)
(c)
43. (a) 0.435 mol Na, 0.217 mol Cl , 15.4 g Cl ; (b) 0.005780 mol HgO, 2.890 10−3mol O , 9.248 10−2g O ;
2 2 2 2
(c) 8.00 mol NaNO , 6.8 102g NaNO ; (d) 1665 mol CO , 73.3 kg CO ; (e) 18.86 mol CuO, 2.330 kg CuCO ;
3 3 2 2 3
(f) 0.4580 mol C H Br , 86.05 g C H Br
2 4 2 2 4 2
45. (a) 0.0686 mol Mg, 1.67 g Mg; (b) 2.701 10−3mol O , 0.08644 g O ; (c) 6.43 mol MgCO , 542 g MgCO (d)
2 2 3 3
768 mol H O, 13.8 kg H O; (e) 16.31 mol BaO , 2762 g BaO ; (f) 0.207 mol C H , 5.81 g C H
2 2 2 2 2 4 2 4
47. (a) (b) 1.25 mol GaCl , 2.2 102g GaCl
3 3
49. (a) 5.337 1022molecules; (b) 10.41 g Zn(CN)
2
51. 4.50 kg SiO
2
53. 5.00 103kg
55. 1.28 105g CO
2
57. 161.4 mL KI solution
59. 176 g TiO
2
61. The limiting reactant is Cl2.
63.
65.
67.
69. Convert mass of ethanol to moles of ethanol; relate the moles of ethanol to the moles of ether produced
using the stoichiometry of the balanced equation. Convert moles of ether to grams; divide the actual
grams of ether (determined through the density) by the theoretical mass to determine the percent yield;
87.6%
71. The conversion needed is Then compare the amount of Cr to the amount of acid
present. Cr is the limiting reactant.
73. Na C O is the limiting reactant. percent yield = 86.56%
2 2 4
75. Only four molecules can be made.
77. This amount cannot be weighted by ordinary balances and is worthless.
79. 3.4 10−3MH SO
2 4
81. 9.6 10−3MCl−
83. 22.4%
85. The empirical formula is BH . The molecular formula is B H .
3 2 6
87. 49.6 mL
89. 13.64 mL
91. 0.0122M
93. 34.99 mL KOH
95. The empirical formula is WCl .
4
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1161
1147
Chapter 5
1. The temperature of 1 gram of burning wood is approximately the same for both a match and a bonfire.
This is an intensive property and depends on the material (wood). However, the overall amount of
produced heat depends on the amount of material; this is an extensive property. The amount of wood in a
bonfire is much greater than that in a match; the total amount of produced heat is also much greater,
which is why we can sit around a bonfire to stay warm, but a match would not provide enough heat to keep
us from getting cold.
3. Heat capacity refers to the heat required to raise the temperature of the mass of the substance 1 degree;
specific heat refers to the heat required to raise the temperature of 1 gram of the substance 1 degree. Thus,
heat capacity is an extensive property, and specific heat is an intensive one.
5. (a) 47.6 J/°C; 11.38 cal °C−1; (b) 407 J/°C; 97.3 cal °C−1
7. 1310 J; 313 cal
9. 7.15 °C
11. (a) 0.390 J/g °C; (b) Copper is a likely candidate.
13. We assume that the density of water is 1.0 g/cm3(1 g/mL) and that it takes as much energy to keep the
water at 85 °F as to heat it from 72 °F to 85 °F. We also assume that only the water is going to be heated.
Energy required = 7.47 kWh
15. lesser; more heat would be lost to the coffee cup and the environment and so ΔTfor the water would be
lesser and the calculatedqwould be lesser
17. greater, since taking the calorimeter’s heat capacity into account will compensate for the thermal energy
transferred to the solution from the calorimeter; this approach includes the calorimeter itself, along with
the solution, as “surroundings”:q = −(q +q ); since bothq andq are
rxn solution calorimeter solution calorimeter
negative, including the latter term (q ) will yield a greater value for the heat of the dissolution
rxn
19. The temperature of the coffee will drop 1 degree.
21. 5.7 102kJ
23. 38.5 °C
25. −2.2 kJ; The heat produced shows that the reaction is exothermic.
27. 1.4 kJ
29. 22.6. Since the mass and the heat capacity of the solution is approximately equal to that of the water, the
two-fold increase in the amount of water leads to a two-fold decrease of the temperature change.
31. 11.7 kJ
33. 30%
35. 0.24 g
37. 1.4 102Calories
39. The enthalpy change of the indicated reaction is for exactly 1 mol HCL and 1 mol NaOH; the heat in the
example is produced by 0.0500 mol HCl and 0.0500 mol NaOH.
41. 25 kJ mol−1
43. 81 kJ mol−1
45. 5204.4 kJ
47. 1.83 10−2mol
49. –802 kJ mol−1
51. 15.5 kJ/ºC
53. 7.43 g
55. Yes.
57. 459.6 kJ
59. −494 kJ/mol
61. 44.01 kJ/mol
63. −394 kJ
65. 265 kJ
67. 90.3 kJ/mol
69. (a) −1615.0 kJ mol−1; (b) −484.3 kJ mol−1; (c) 164.2 kJ; (d) −232.1 kJ
71. −54.04 kJ mol−1
73. −2660 kJ mol−1
PAGE: 1162
1148
75. –66.4 kJ
77. −122.8 kJ
79. 3.7 kg
81. On the assumption that the best rocket fuel is the one that gives off the most heat, B H is the prime
2 6
candidate.
83. −88.2 kJ
85. (a) (b) 1570 L air; (c) −104.5 kJ mol−1; (d) 75.4 °C
Chapter 6
1. The spectrum consists of colored lines, at least one of which (probably the brightest) is red.
3. 3.15 m
5. 3.233 10−19J; 2.018 eV
7. ν= 4.568 1014s; λ = 656.3 nm; Energy mol−1= 1.823 105J mol−1; red
9. (a)λ= 8.69 10−7m;E= 2.29 10−19J; (b)λ= 4.59 10−7m;E= 4.33 10−19J; The color of (a) is red; (b)
is blue.
11. E= 9.502 10−15J;ν= 1.434 1019s−1
13. Red: 660 nm; 4.54 1014Hz; 3.01 10−19J. Green: 520 nm; 5.77 1014Hz; 3.82 10−19J. Blue: 440 nm;
6.81 1014Hz; 4.51 10−19J. Somewhat different numbers are also possible.
15. 5.49 1014s−1; no
17. Quantized energy means that the electrons can possess only certain discrete energy values; values
between those quantized values are not permitted.
19.
21. −8.716 10−18J
23. −3.405 10−20J
25. 33.9 Å
27. 1.471 10−17J
29. Both involve a relatively heavy nucleus with electrons moving around it, although strictly speaking, the
Bohr model works only for one-electron atoms or ions. According to classical mechanics, the Rutherford
model predicts a miniature “solar system” with electrons moving about the nucleus in circular or elliptical
orbits that are confined to planes. If the requirements of classical electromagnetic theory that electrons in
such orbits would emit electromagnetic radiation are ignored, such atoms would be stable, having
constant energy and angular momentum, but would not emit any visible light (contrary to observation). If
classical electromagnetic theory is applied, then the Rutherford atom would emit electromagnetic
radiation of continually increasing frequency (contrary to the observed discrete spectra), thereby losing
energy until the atom collapsed in an absurdly short time (contrary to the observed long-term stability of
atoms). The Bohr model retains the classical mechanics view of circular orbits confined to planes having
constant energy and angular momentum, but restricts these to quantized values dependent on a single
quantum number,n. The orbiting electron in Bohr’s model is assumed not to emit any electromagnetic
radiation while moving about the nucleus in its stationary orbits, but the atom can emit or absorb
electromagnetic radiation when the electron changes from one orbit to another. Because of the quantized
orbits, such “quantum jumps” will produce discrete spectra, in agreement with observations.
31. Both models have a central positively charged nucleus with electrons moving about the nucleus in
accordance with the Coulomb electrostatic potential. The Bohr modelassumesthat the electrons move in
circular orbits that have quantized energies, angular momentum, and radii that are specified by a single
quantum number,n= 1, 2, 3, …, but this quantization is an ad hoc assumption made by Bohr to
incorporate quantization into an essentially classical mechanics description of the atom. Bohr also
assumed that electrons orbiting the nucleus normally do not emit or absorb electromagnetic radiation,
but do so when the electron switches to a different orbit. In the quantum mechanical model, the electrons
do not move in precise orbits (such orbits violate the Heisenberg uncertainty principle) and, instead, a
probabilistic interpretation of the electron’s position at any given instant is used, with a mathematical
functionψcalled a wavefunction that can be used to determine the electron’s spatial probability
distribution. These wavefunctions, or orbitals, are three-dimensional stationary waves that can be
specified by three quantum numbers that arise naturally from their underlying mathematics (no ad hoc
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1163
1149
assumptions required): the principal quantum number,n(the same one used by Bohr), which specifies
shells such that orbitals having the samenall have the same energy and approximately the same spatial
extent; the angular momentum quantum numberl, which is a measure of the orbital’s angular
momentum and corresponds to the orbitals’ general shapes, as well as specifying subshells such that
orbitals having the samel(andn) all have the same energy; and the orientation quantum numberm,
which is a measure of thezcomponent of the angular momentum and corresponds to the orientations of
the orbitals. The Bohr model gives the same expression for the energy as the quantum mechanical
expression and, hence, both properly account for hydrogen’s discrete spectrum (an example of getting the
right answers for the wrong reasons, something that many chemistry students can sympathize with), but
gives the wrong expression for the angular momentum (Bohr orbits necessarily all have non-zero angular
momentum, but some quantum orbitals [sorbitals] can have zero angular momentum).
33. ndetermines the general range for the value of energy and the probable distances that the electron can be
from the nucleus.ldetermines the shape of the orbital.m determines the orientation of the orbitals of the
1
samelvalue with respect to one another.m determines the spin of an electron.
s
35. (a) 2p; (b) 4d; (c) 6s
37. (a)3d;(b) 1s;(c) 4f
39.
41. (a) x. 2, y. 2, z. 2; (b) x. 1, y. 3, z. 0; (c) x. 4 0 0 y. 2 1 0 z. 3 2 0 (d) x. 1, y. 2, z. 3; (e) x.l= 0,m= 0, y.
l
l= 1,m=–1, 0, or+1, z.l= 2,m= –2, –1, 0, +1, +2
l l
43. 12
45.
n l m s
l
4 0 0
4 0 0
4 1 −1
4 1 0
4 1 +1
4 1 −1
47. For example, Na+: 1s22s22p6; Ca2+: 1s22s22p63s23p6; Sn2+: 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s2; F–:
1s22s22p6; O2–: 1s22s22p6; Cl–: 1s22s22p63s23p6.
49. (a) 1s22s22p3; (b) 1s22s22p63s23p2; (c) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d6; (d)
1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p4; (e) 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f9
51. The charge on the ion.
53. (a)
PAGE: 1164
1150
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
55. Zr
57. Rb+, Se2−
59. Although both (b) and (c) are correct, (e) encompasses both and is the best answer.
61. K
63. 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d104p65s24d105p66s24f145d10
65. Co has 27 protons, 27 electrons, and 33 neutrons: 1s22s22p63s23p64s23d7. I has 53 protons, 53 electrons,
and 78 neutrons: 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s25p5.
67. Cl
69. O
71. Rb < Li < N < F
73. 15 (5A)
75. Mg < Ca < Rb < Cs
77. Si4+< Al3+< Ca2+< K+
79. Se, As−
81. Mg2+< K+< Br–< As3–
83. O, IE
1
85. Ra
Chapter 7
1. The protons in the nucleus do not change during normal chemical reactions. Only the outer electrons
move. Positive charges form when electrons are lost.
3. P, I, Cl, and O would form anions because they are nonmetals. Mg, In, Cs, Pb, and Co would form cations
because they are metals.
5. (a) P3–; (b) Mg2+; (c) Al3+; (d) O2–; (e) Cl–; (f) Cs+
7. (a) [Ar]4s23d104p6; (b) [Kr]4d105s25p6(c) 1s2(d) [Kr]4d10; (e) [He]2s22p6; (f) [Ar]3d10; (g) 1s2(h) [He]2s22p6
(i) [Kr]4d105s2(j) [Ar]3d7(k) [Ar]3d6, (l) [Ar]3d104s2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1165
1151
9. (a) 1s22s22p63s23p1; Al3+: 1s22s22p6; (b) 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p5; 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p6; (c)
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p65s2; Sr2+: 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p6; (d) 1s22s1; Li+: 1s2; (e)
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p3; 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p6; (f) 1s22s22p63s23p4; 1s22s22p63s23p6
11. NaCl consists of discrete ions arranged in a crystal lattice, not covalently bonded molecules.
13. ionic: (b), (d), (e), (g), and (i); covalent: (a), (c), (f), (h), (j), and (k)
15. (a) Cl; (b) O; (c) O; (d) S; (e) N; (f) P; (g) N
17. (a) H, C, N, O, F; (b) H, I, Br, Cl, F; (c) H, P, S, O, F; (d) Na, Al, H, P, O; (e) Ba, H, As, N, O
19. N, O, F, and Cl
21. (a) HF; (b) CO; (c) OH; (d) PCl; (e) NH; (f) PO; (g) CN
23. (a) eight electrons:
(b) eight electrons:
(c) no electrons Be2+
(d) eight electrons:
(e) no electrons Ga3+
(f) no electrons Li+
(g) eight electrons:
25. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
27.
29. (a)
PAGE: 1166
1152
In this case, the Lewis structure is inadequate to depict the fact that experimental studies have shown two
unpaired electrons in each oxygen molecule.
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1167
1153
(k)
31. (a) SeF :
6
(b) XeF :
4
(c)
(d) Cl BBCl :
2 2
33. Two valence electrons per Pb atom are transferred to Cl atoms; the resulting Pb2+ion has a 6s2valence
shell configuration. Two of the valence electrons in the HCl molecule are shared, and the other six are
located on the Cl atom as lone pairs of electrons.
35.
37.
39. (a)
PAGE: 1168
1154
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
41.
43. Each bond includes a sharing of electrons between atoms. Two electrons are shared in a single bond; four
electrons are shared in a double bond; and six electrons are shared in a triple bond.
45. (a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1169
1155
(d)
(e)
47.
49. (a)
(b)
CO has the strongest carbon-oxygen bond because there is a triple bond joining C and O. CO has double
2
bonds.
51. (a) H: 0, Cl: 0; (b) C: 0, F: 0; (c) P: 0, Cl 0; (d) P: 0, F: 0
53. Cl in Cl : 0; Cl in BeCl : 0; Cl in ClF : 0
2 2 5
55. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
PAGE: 1170
1156
57. HOCl
59. The structure that gives zero formal charges is consistent with the actual structure:
61. NF ;
3
63.
65. (a) −114 kJ; (b) 30 kJ; (c) −1055 kJ
67. The greater bond energy is in the figure on the left. It is the more stable form.
69.
71. The S–F bond in SF is stronger.
4
73.
The C–C single bonds are longest.
75. (a) When two electrons are removed from the valence shell, the Ca radius loses the outermost energy level
and reverts to the lowern= 3 level, which is much smaller in radius. (b) The +2 charge on calcium pulls
the oxygen much closer compared with K, thereby increasing the lattice energy relative to a less charged
ion. (c) Removal of the 4selectron in Ca requires more energy than removal of the 4selectron in K because
of the stronger attraction of the nucleus and the extra energy required to break the pairing of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1171
1157
electrons. The second ionization energy for K requires that an electron be removed from a lower energy
level, where the attraction is much stronger from the nucleus for the electron. In addition, energy is
required to unpair two electrons in a full orbital. For Ca, the second ionization potential requires removing
only a lone electron in the exposed outer energy level. (d) In Al, the removed electron is relatively
unprotected and unpaired in aporbital. The higher energy for Mg mainly reflects the unpairing of the 2s
electron.
77. (d)
79. 4008 kJ/mol; both ions in MgO have twice the charge of the ions in LiF; the bond length is very similar and
both have the same structure; a quadrupling of the energy is expected based on the equation for lattice
energy
81. (a) Na O; Na+has a smaller radius than K+; (b) BaS; Ba has a larger charge than K; (c) BaS; Ba and S have
2
larger charges; (d) BaS; S has a larger charge
83. (e)
85. The placement of the two sets of unpaired electrons in water forces the bonds to assume a tetrahedral
arrangement, and the resulting HOH molecule is bent. The HBeH molecule (in which Be has only two
electrons to bond with the two electrons from the hydrogens) must have the electron pairs as far from one
another as possible and is therefore linear.
87. Space must be provided for each pair of electrons whether they are in a bond or are present as lone pairs.
Electron-pair geometry considers the placement of all electrons. Molecular structure considers only the
bonding-pair geometry.
89. As long as the polar bonds are compensated (for example. two identical atoms are found directly across
the central atom from one another), the molecule can be nonpolar.
91. (a) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are octahedral. (b) Both the electron geometry
and the molecular structure are trigonal bipyramid. (c) Both the electron geometry and the molecular
structure are linear. (d) Both the electron geometry and the molecular structure are trigonal planar.
93. (a) electron-pair geometry: octahedral, molecular structure: square pyramidal; (b) electron-pair
geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: bent; (c) electron-pair geometry: octahedral, molecular
structure: square planar; (d) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal;
(e) electron-pair geometry: trigonal bypyramidal, molecular structure: seesaw; (f) electron-pair geometry:
tetrahedral, molecular structure: bent (109°)
95. (a) electron-pair geometry: trigonal planar, molecular structure: bent (120°); (b) electron-pair geometry:
linear, molecular structure: linear; (c) electron-pair geometry: trigonal planar, molecular structure:
trigonal planar; (d) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: trigonal pyramidal; (e)
electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure: tetrahedral; (f) electron-pair geometry: trigonal
bipyramidal, molecular structure: seesaw; (g) electron-pair geometry: tetrahedral, molecular structure:
trigonal pyramidal
97. All of these molecules and ions contain polar bonds. Only ClF , PCl , SeF , and have dipole
5 3 4
moments.
99. SeS , CCl F , PCl , and ClNO all have dipole moments.
2 2 2 3
101. P
103. nonpolar
105. (a) tetrahedral; (b) trigonal pyramidal; (c) bent (109°); (d) trigonal planar; (e) bent (109°); (f) bent (109°);
(g)CH CCH tetrahedral, CH CCH linear; (h) tetrahedral; (i) H CCCH linear; H CCCH trigonal planar
3 3 2 2 2 2
107.
109. (a)
PAGE: 1172
1158
(b)
(c)
(d) includes three regions of electron density (all are bonds with no lone pairs); the shape is
trigonal planar; CS has only two regions of electron density (all bonds with no lone pairs); the shape is
2
linear
111. The Lewis structure is made from three units, but the atoms must be rearranged:
113. The molecular dipole points away from the hydrogen atoms.
115. The structures are very similar. In the model mode, each electron group occupies the same amount of
space, so the bond angle is shown as 109.5°. In the “real” mode, the lone pairs are larger, causing the
hydrogens to be compressed. This leads to the smaller angle of 104.5°.
Chapter 8
1. Similarities: Both types of bonds result from overlap of atomic orbitals on adjacent atoms and contain a
maximum of two electrons. Differences: σ bonds are stronger and result from end-to-end overlap and all
single bonds are σ bonds; π bonds between the same two atoms are weaker because they result from side-
by-side overlap, and multiple bonds contain one or more π bonds (in addition to a σ bond).
3. The specific average bond distance is the distance with the lowest energy. At distances less than the bond
distance, the positive charges on the two nuclei repel each other, and the overall energy increases.
5. Bonding: One σ bond and one π bond. Thesorbitals are filled and do not overlap. Theporbitals overlap
along the axis to form a σ bond and side-by-side to form the π bond.
7. No, two of theporbitals (one on each N) will be oriented end-to-end and will form a σ bond.
9. Hybridization is introduced to explain the geometry of bonding orbitals in valance bond theory.
11. There are nodorbitals in the valence shell of carbon.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1173
1159
13. trigonal planar,sp2; trigonal pyramidal (one lone pair on A)sp3; T-shaped (two lone pairs on Asp3d, or
(three lone pairs on A)sp3d2
15. (a) Each S has a bent (109°) geometry,sp3
(b) Bent (120°),sp2
(c) Trigonal planar,sp2
(d) Tetrahedral,sp3
17. (a) XeF
2
(b)
(c) linear (d)sp3d
19. (a)
(b) P atoms, trigonal pyramidal; S atoms, bent, with two lone pairs; Cl atoms, trigonal pyramidal; (c)
Hybridization about P, S, and Cl is, in all cases,sp3; (d) Oxidation states P +1, S Cl +5, O –2. Formal
charges: P 0; S 0; Cl +2: O –1
21.
Phosphorus and nitrogen can formsp3hybrids to form three bonds and hold one lone pair in PF and NF ,
3 3
respectively. However, nitrogen has no valencedorbitals, so it cannot form a set ofsp3dhybrid orbitals to
bind five fluorine atoms in NF . Phosphorus hasdorbitals and can bind five fluorine atoms withsp3d
5
PAGE: 1174
1160
hybrid orbitals in PF .
5
23. A triple bond consists of one σ bond and two π bonds. A σ bond is stronger than a π bond due to greater
overlap.
25. (a)
(b) The terminal carbon atom usessp3hybrid orbitals, while the central carbon atom issphybridized. (c)
Each of the two π bonds is formed by overlap of a 2porbital on carbon and a nitrogen 2porbital.
27. (a)sp2; (b)sp; (c)sp2; (d)sp3; (e)sp3; (f)sp3d; (g)sp3
29. (a)sp2, delocalized; (b)sp, localized; (c)sp2, delocalized; (d)sp3, delocalized
31.
Each of the four electrons is in a separate orbital and overlaps with an electron on an oxygen atom.
33. (a) Similarities: Both are bonding orbitals that can contain a maximum of two electrons. Differences: σ
orbitals are end-to-end combinations of atomic orbitals, whereas π orbitals are formed by side-by-side
overlap of orbitals. (b) Similarities: Both are quantum-mechanical constructs that represent the
probability of finding the electron about the atom or the molecule. Differences:ψfor an atomic orbital
describes the behavior of only one electron at a time based on the atom. For a molecule,ψrepresents a
mathematical combination of atomic orbitals. (c) Similarities: Both are orbitals that can contain two
electrons. Differences: Bonding orbitals result in holding two or more atoms together. Antibonding
orbitals have the effect of destabilizing any bonding that has occurred.
35. An odd number of electrons can never be paired, regardless of the arrangement of the molecular orbitals.
It will always be paramagnetic.
37. Bonding orbitals have electron density in close proximity to more than one nucleus. The interaction
between the bonding positively charged nuclei and negatively charged electrons stabilizes the system.
39. The pairing of the two bonding electrons lowers the energy of the system relative to the energy of the
nonbonded electrons.
41. (a) H bond order = 1, bond order = 0.5, bond order = 0.5, strongest bond is H ; (b) O bond
2 2 2
order = 2, bond order = 3; bond order = 1, strongest bond is (c) Li bond order = 1,
2
bond order = 0.5, Be bond order = 0, strongest bond is ;(d) F bond order = 1, bond order = 1.5,
2 2
bond order = 0.5, strongest bond is (e) N bond order = 3, bond order = 2.5, bond
2
order = 2.5, strongest bond is N
2
43. (a) H ; (b) N ; (c) O; (d) C ; (e) B
2 2 2 2
45. Yes, fluorine is a smaller atom than Li, so atoms in the 2sorbital are closer to the nucleus and more stable.
47. 2+
49. N has s-p mixing, so the π orbitals are the last filled in O does not have s-p mixing, so the σ
2 2 p
orbital fills before the π orbitals.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1175
1161
Chapter 9
1. The cutting edge of a knife that has been sharpened has a smaller surface area than a dull knife. Since
pressure is force per unit area, a sharp knife will exert a higher pressure with the same amount of force
and cut through material more effectively.
3. Lying down distributes your weight over a larger surface area, exerting less pressure on the ice compared
to standing up. If you exert less pressure, you are less likely to break through thin ice.
5. 0.809 atm; 82.0 kPa
7. 2.2 102kPa
9. Earth: 14.7 lb in–2; Venus: 1.30 × 103lb in−2
11. (a) 101.5 kPa; (b) 51 torr drop
13. (a) 264 torr; (b) 35,200 Pa; (c) 0.352 bar
15. (a) 623 mm Hg; (b) 0.820 atm; (c) 83.1 kPa
17. With a closed-end manometer, no change would be observed, since the vaporized liquid would contribute
equal, opposing pressures in both arms of the manometer tube. However, with an open-ended
manometer, a higher pressure reading of the gas would be obtained than expected, sinceP =P +P
gas atm vol
.
liquid
19. As the bubbles rise, the pressure decreases, so their volume increases as suggested by Boyle’s law.
21. (a) The number of particles in the gas increases as the volume increases. (b) temperature, pressure
23. The curve would be farther to the right and higher up, but the same basic shape.
25. About 12.5 L
27. 3.40 103torr
29. 12.1 L
31. 217 L
33. 8.190 10–2mol; 5.553 g
35. (a) 7.24 10–2g; (b) 23.1 g; (c) 1.5 10–4g
37. 5561 L
39. 46.4 g
41. For a gas exhibiting ideal behavior:
PAGE: 1176
1162
43. (a) 1.85 L CCl F ; (b) 4.66 L CH CH F
2 2 3 2
45. 0.644 atm
47. The pressure decreases by a factor of 3.
49. 4.64 g L−1
51. 38.8 g
53. 72.0 g mol−1
55. 88.1 g mol−1; PF
3
57. 141 atm, 107,000 torr, 14,300 kPa
59. CH : 276 kPa; C H : 27 kPa; C H : 3.4 kPa
4 2 6 3 8
61. Yes
63. 740 torr
65. (a) Determine the moles of HgO that decompose; using the chemical equation, determine the moles of O
2
produced by decomposition of this amount of HgO; and determine the volume of O from the moles of O ,
2 2
temperature, and pressure. (b) 0.308 L
67. (a) Determine the molar mass of CCl F . From the balanced equation, calculate the moles of H needed for
2 2 2
the complete reaction. From the ideal gas law, convert moles of H into volume. (b) 3.72 103L
2
69. (a) Balance the equation. Determine the grams of CO produced and the number of moles. From the ideal
2
gas law, determine the volume of gas. (b) 7.43 105L
71. 42.00 L
73. (a) 18.0 L; (b) 0.533 atm
75. 10.57 L O
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1177
1163
77. 5.40 105L
79. XeF
4
81. 4.2 hours
83. Effusion can be defined as the process by which a gas escapes through a pinhole into a vacuum. Graham’s
law states that with a mixture of two gases A and B: Both A and B are in the
same container at the same temperature, and therefore will have the same kinetic energy:
Therefore,
85. F , N O, Cl , H S
2 2 2 2
87. 1.4; 1.2
89. 51.7 cm
91. Yes. At any given instant, there are a range of values of molecular speeds in a sample of gas. Any single
molecule can speed up or slow down as it collides with other molecules. The average speed of all the
molecules is constant at constant temperature.
93. H O. Cooling slows the speeds of the He atoms, causing them to behave as though they were heavier.
2
95. (a) The number of collisions per unit area of the container wall is constant. (b) The average kinetic energy
doubles. (c) The root mean square speed increases to times its initial value;u is proportional to
rms
97. (a) equal; (b) less than; (c) 29.48 g mol−1; (d) 1.0966 g L−1; (e) 0.129 g/L; (f) 4.01 105g; net lifting capacity
= 384 lb; (g) 270 L; (h) 39.1 kJ min−1
99. Gases C, E, and F
101. The gas behavior most like an ideal gas will occur under the conditions in (b). Molecules have high
speeds and move through greater distances between collision; they also have shorter contact times and
interactions are less likely. Deviations occur with the conditions described in (a) and (c). Under
conditions of (a), some gases may liquefy. Under conditions of (c), most gases will liquefy.
103. SF
6
105. (a) A straight horizontal line at 1.0; (b) When real gases are at low pressures and high temperatures, they
behave close enough to ideal gases that they are approximated as such; however, in some cases, we see
that at a high pressure and temperature, the ideal gas approximation breaks down and is significantly
different from the pressure calculated by the ideal gas equation. (c) The greater the compressibility, the
more the volume matters. At low pressures, the correction factor for intermolecular attractions is more
significant, and the effect of the volume of the gas molecules on Z would be a small lowering
compressibility. At higher pressures, the effect of the volume of the gas molecules themselves on Z would
increase compressibility (seeFigure 9.35). (d) Once again, at low pressures, the effect of intermolecular
attractions on Z would be more important than the correction factor for the volume of the gas molecules
themselves, though perhaps still small. At higher pressures and low temperatures, the effect of
intermolecular attractions would be larger. SeeFigure 9.35. (e) Low temperatures
Chapter 10
1. Liquids and solids are similar in that they are matter composed of atoms, ions, or molecules. They are
incompressible and have similar densities that are both much larger than those of gases. They are
different in that liquids have no fixed shape, and solids are rigid.
3. They are similar in that the atoms or molecules are free to move from one position to another. They differ
in that the particles of a liquid are confined to the shape of the vessel in which they are placed. In contrast,
a gas will expand without limit to fill the space into which it is placed.
PAGE: 1178
1164
5. All atoms and molecules will condense into a liquid or solid in which the attractive forces exceed the
kinetic energy of the molecules, at sufficiently low temperature.
7. (a) Dispersion forces occur as an atom develops a temporary dipole moment when its electrons are
distributed asymmetrically about the nucleus. This structure is more prevalent in large atoms such as
argon or radon. A second atom can then be distorted by the appearance of the dipole in the first atom. The
electrons of the second atom are attracted toward the positive end of the first atom, which sets up a dipole
in the second atom. The net result is rapidly fluctuating, temporary dipoles that attract one another (e.g.,
Ar). (b) A dipole-dipole attraction is a force that results from an electrostatic attraction of the positive end
of one polar molecule for the negative end of another polar molecule (e.g., ICI molecules attract one
another by dipole-dipole interaction). (c) Hydrogen bonds form whenever a hydrogen atom is bonded to
one of the more electronegative atoms, such as a fluorine, oxygen, or nitrogen atom. The electrostatic
attraction between the partially positive hydrogen atom in one molecule and the partially negative atom in
another molecule gives rise to a strong dipole-dipole interaction called a hydrogen bond (e.g.,
9. The London forces typically increase as the number of electrons increase.
11. (a) SiH < HCl < H O; (b) F < Cl < Br ; (c) CH < C H < C H ; (d) N < O < NO
4 2 2 2 2 4 2 6 3 8 2 2
13. Only rather small dipole-dipole interactions from C-H bonds are available to holdn-butane in the liquid
state. Chloroethane, however, has rather large dipole interactions because of the Cl-C bond; the
interaction, therefore, is stronger, leading to a higher boiling point.
15. −85 °C. Water has stronger hydrogen bonds, so it melts at a higher temperature.
17. The hydrogen bond between two hydrogen fluoride molecules is stronger than that between two water
molecules because the electronegativity of F is greater than that of O. Consequently, the partial negative
charge on F is greater than that on O. The hydrogen bond between the partially positive H and the larger
partially negative F will be stronger than that formed between H and O.
19. H-bonding is the principle IMF holding the protein strands together. The H-bonding is between the
and
21. (a) hydrogen bonding, dipole-dipole attraction, and dispersion forces; (b) dispersion forces; (c) dipole-
dipole attraction and dispersion forces
23. The water molecules have strong intermolecular forces of hydrogen bonding. The water molecules are
thus attracted strongly to one another and exhibit a relatively large surface tension, forming a type of
“skin” at its surface. This skin can support a bug or paper clip if gently placed on the water.
25. Temperature has an effect on intermolecular forces: The higher the temperature, the greater the kinetic
energies of the molecules and the greater the extent to which their intermolecular forces are overcome,
and so the more fluid (less viscous) the liquid. The lower the temperature, the less the intermolecular
forces are overcome, and so the less viscous the liquid.
27. (a) As the water reaches higher temperatures, the increased kinetic energies of its molecules are more
effective in overcoming hydrogen bonding, and so its surface tension decreases. Surface tension and
intermolecular forces are directly related. (b) The same trend in viscosity is seen as in surface tension,
and for the same reason.
29. 1.7 10−4m
31. The heat is absorbed by the ice, providing the energy required to partially overcome intermolecular
attractive forces in the solid and causing a phase transition to liquid water. The solution remains at 0 °C
until all the ice is melted. Only the amount of water existing as ice changes until the ice disappears. Then
the temperature of the water can rise.
33. We can see the amount of liquid in an open container decrease and we can smell the vapor of some
liquids.
35. The vapor pressure of a liquid decreases as the strength of its intermolecular forces increases.
37. As the temperature increases, the average kinetic energy of the molecules of gasoline increases and so a
greater fraction of molecules have sufficient energy to escape from the liquid than at lower temperatures.
39. They are equal when the pressure of gas above the liquid is exactly 1 atm.
41. approximately 95 °C
43. (a) At 5000 feet, the atmospheric pressure is lower than at sea level, and water will therefore boil at a lower
temperature. This lower temperature will cause the physical and chemical changes involved in cooking
the egg to proceed more slowly, and a longer time is required to fully cook the egg. (b) As long as the air
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1179
1165
surrounding the body contains less water vapor than the maximum that air can hold at that temperature,
perspiration will evaporate, thereby cooling the body by removing the heat of vaporization required to
vaporize the water.
45. Dispersion forces increase with molecular mass or size. As the number of atoms composing the molecules
in this homologous series increases, so does the extent of intermolecular attraction via dispersion forces
and, consequently, the energy required to overcome these forces and vaporize the liquids.
47. The boiling point of CS is higher than that of CO partially because of the higher molecular weight of CS ;
2 2 2
consequently, the attractive forces are stronger in CS . It would be expected, therefore, that the heat of
2
vaporization would be greater than that of 9.8 kJ/mol for CO . A value of 28 kJ/mol would seem
2
reasonable. A value of −8.4 kJ/mol would indicate a release of energy upon vaporization, which is clearly
implausible.
49. The thermal energy (heat) needed to evaporate the liquid is removed from the skin.
51. 1130 kJ
53. (a) 13.0 kJ; (b) It is likely that the heat of vaporization will have a larger magnitude since in the case of
vaporization the intermolecular interactions have to be completely overcome, while melting weakens or
destroys only some of them.
55. At low pressures and 0.005 °C, the water is a gas. As the pressure increases to 4.6 torr, the water becomes
a solid; as the pressure increases still more, it becomes a liquid. At 40 °C, water at low pressure is a vapor;
at pressures higher than about 75 torr, it converts into a liquid. At −40 °C, water goes from a gas to a solid
as the pressure increases above very low values.
57. (a) gas; (b) gas; (c) gas; (d) gas; (e) solid; (f) gas
59.
61. Yes, ice will sublime, although it may take it several days. Ice has a small vapor pressure, and some ice
molecules form gas and escape from the ice crystals. As time passes, more and more solid converts to gas
until eventually the clothes are dry.
63. (a)
PAGE: 1180
1166
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1181
1167
(d)
(e) liquid phase (f) sublimation
65. (e) molecular crystals
67. Ice has a crystalline structure stabilized by hydrogen bonding. These intermolecular forces are of
comparable strength and thus require the same amount of energy to overcome. As a result, ice melts at a
single temperature and not over a range of temperatures. The various, very large molecules that compose
butter experience varied van der Waals attractions of various strengths that are overcome at various
temperatures, and so the melting process occurs over a wide temperature range.
69. (a) ionic; (b) covalent network; (c) molecular; (d) metallic; (e) covalent network; (f) molecular; (g)
PAGE: 1182
1168
molecular; (h) ionic; (i) ionic
71. X = ionic; Y = metallic; Z = covalent network
73. (b) metallic solid
75. The structure of this low-temperature form of iron (below 910 °C) is body-centered cubic. There is one-
eighth atom at each of the eight corners of the cube and one atom in the center of the cube.
77. eight
79. 12
81. (a) 1.370 Å; (b) 19.26 g/cm
83. (a) 2.176 Å; (b) 3.595 g/cm3
85. The crystal structure of Si shows that it is less tightly packed (coordination number 4) in the solid than Al
(coordination number 12).
87. In a closest-packed array, two tetrahedral holes exist for each anion. If only half the tetrahedral holes are
occupied, the numbers of anions and cations are equal. The formula for cadmium sulfide is CdS.
89. Co O
3 4
91. In a simple cubic array, only one cubic hole can be occupied be a cation for each anion in the array. The
ratio of thallium to iodide must be 1:1; therefore, the formula for thallium is TlI.
93. 59.95%; The oxidation number of titanium is +4.
95. Both ions are close in size: Mg, 0.65; Li, 0.60. This similarity allows the two to interchange rather easily.
The difference in charge is generally compensated by the switch of Si4+for Al3+.
97. Mn O
2 3
99. 1.48 Å
101. 2.874 Å
103. 20.2°
105. 1.74 104eV
Chapter 11
1. A solution can vary in composition, while a compound cannot vary in composition. Solutions are
homogeneous at the molecular level, while other mixtures are heterogeneous.
3. (a) The process is endothermic as the solution is consuming heat. (b) Attraction between the K+and
ions is stronger than between the ions and water molecules (the ion-ion interactions have a lower, more
negative energy). Therefore, the dissolution process increases the energy of the molecular interactions,
and it consumes the thermal energy of the solution to make up for the difference. (c) No, an ideal solution
is formed with no appreciable heat release or consumption.
5. (a) ion-dipole forces; (b) dipole-dipole forces; (c) dispersion forces; (d) dispersion forces; (e) hydrogen
bonding
7. Heat is released when the total intermolecular forces (IMFs) between the solute and solvent molecules are
stronger than the total IMFs in the pure solute and in the pure solvent: Breaking weaker IMFs and forming
stronger IMFs releases heat. Heat is absorbed when the total IMFs in the solution are weaker than the total
of those in the pure solute and in the pure solvent: Breaking stronger IMFs and forming weaker IMFs
absorbs heat.
9. Crystals of NaCl dissolve in water, a polar liquid with a very large dipole moment, and the individual ions
become strongly solvated. Hexane is a nonpolar liquid with a dipole moment of zero and, therefore, does
not significantly interact with the ions of the NaCl crystals.
11. (a) Fe(NO ) is a strong electrolyte, thus it should completely dissociate into Fe3+and ions.
33
Therefore, (z) best represents the solution. (b)
13. (a) high conductivity (solute is an ionic compound that will dissociate when dissolved); (b) high
conductivity (solute is a strong acid and will ionize completely when dissolved); (c) nonconductive (solute
is a covalent compound, neither acid nor base, unreactive towards water); (d) low conductivity (solute is a
weak base and will partially ionize when dissolved)
15. (a) ion-dipole; (b) hydrogen bonds; (c) dispersion forces; (d) dipole-dipole attractions; (e) dispersion forces
17. The solubility of solids usually decreases upon cooling a solution, while the solubility of gases usually
decreases upon heating.
19. 40%
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1183
1169
21. 2.8 g
23. 2.9 atm
25. 102 L HCl
27. The strength of the bonds between like molecules is stronger than the strength between unlike molecules.
Therefore, some regions will exist in which the water molecules will exclude oil molecules and other
regions will exist in which oil molecules will exclude water molecules, forming a heterogeneous region.
29. Both form homogeneous solutions; their boiling point elevations are the same, as are their lowering of
vapor pressures. Osmotic pressure and the lowering of the freezing point are also the same for both
solutions.
31. (a) Find number of moles of HNO and H O in 100 g of the solution. Find the mole fractions for the
3 2
components. (b) The mole fraction of HNO is 0.378. The mole fraction of H O is 0.622.
3 2
33. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
35. In a 1Msolution, the mole is contained in exactly 1 L of solution. In a 1msolution, the mole is contained
in exactly 1 kg of solvent.
37. (a) Determine the molar mass of HNO . Determine the number of moles of acid in the solution. From the
3
number of moles and the mass of solvent, determine the molality. (b) 33.7m
39. (a) 6.70 10−1m; (b) 5.67m; (c) 2.8m; (d) 0.0358m
41. 1.08m
43. (a) Determine the molar mass of sucrose; determine the number of moles of sucrose in the solution;
convert the mass of solvent to units of kilograms; from the number of moles and the mass of solvent,
determine the molality; determine the difference between the boiling point of water and the boiling point
of the solution; determine the new boiling point. (b) 100.5 °C
45. (a) Determine the molar mass of sucrose; determine the number of moles of sucrose in the solution;
convert the mass of solvent to units of kilograms; from the number of moles and the mass of solvent,
determine the molality; determine the difference between the freezing temperature of water and the
freezing temperature of the solution; determine the new freezing temperature. (b) −1.8 °C
47. (a) Determine the molar mass of Ca(NO ) ; determine the number of moles of Ca(NO ) in the solution;
32 32
determine the number of moles of ions in the solution; determine the molarity of ions, then the osmotic
pressure. (b) 2.67 atm
49. (a) Determine the molal concentration from the change in boiling point andK; determine the moles of
b
solute in the solution from the molal concentration and mass of solvent; determine the molar mass from
the number of moles and the mass of solute. (b) 2.1 102g mol−1
51. No. Pure benzene freezes at 5.5 °C, and so the observed freezing point of this solution is depressed by ΔT
f
= 5.5 − 0.4 = 5.1 °C. The value computed, assuming no ionization of HCl, is ΔT = (1.0 m)(5.14 °C/m) = 5.1
f
°C. Agreement of these values supports the assumption that HCl is not ionized.
53. 144 g mol−1
55. 0.870 °C
57. S
8
59. 1.39 104g mol−1
61. 54 g
63. 100.26 °C
65. (a) (b) Vapor pressures are: CH OH: 55 torr; C H OH: 18 torr; (c)
3 2 5
CH OH: 0.75; C H OH: 0.25
3 2 5
67. The ions and compounds present in the water in the beef lower the freezing point of the beef below −1 °C.
69.
The observed change equals the theoretical change; therefore, no dissociation occurs.
PAGE: 1184
1170
71.
Colloidal System Dispersed Phase Dispersion Medium
starch dispersion starch water
smoke solid particles air
fog water air
pearl water calcium carbonate (CaCO )
3
whipped cream air cream
floating soap air soap
jelly fruit juice pectin gel
milk butterfat water
ruby chromium(III) oxide (Cr O ) aluminum oxide (Al O )
2 3 2 3
73. Colloidal dispersions consist of particles that are much bigger than the solutes of typical solutions.
Colloidal particles are either very large molecules or aggregates of smaller species that usually are big
enough to scatter light. Colloids are homogeneous on a macroscopic (visual) scale, while solutions are
homogeneous on a microscopic (molecular) scale.
75. If they are placed in an electrolytic cell, dispersed particles will move toward the electrode that carries a
charge opposite to their own charge. At this electrode, the charged particles will be neutralized and will
coagulate as a precipitate.
Chapter 12
1. The instantaneous rate is the rate of a reaction at any particular point in time, a period of time that is so
short that the concentrations of reactants and products change by a negligible amount. The initial rate is
the instantaneous rate of reaction as it starts (as product just begins to form). Average rate is the average of
the instantaneous rates over a time period.
3.
5. (a) average rate, 0 − 10 s = 0.0375 mol L−1s−1; average rate, 10 − 20 s = 0.0265 mol L−1s−1; (b)
instantaneous rate, 15 s = 0.023 mol L−1s−1; (c) average rate for B formation = 0.0188 mol L−1s−1;
instantaneous rate for B formation = 0.012 mol L−1s−1
7. Higher molarity increases the rate of the reaction. Higher temperature increases the rate of the reaction.
Smaller pieces of magnesium metal will react more rapidly than larger pieces because more reactive
surface exists.
9. (a) Depending on the angle selected, the atom may take a long time to collide with the molecule and, when
a collision does occur, it may not result in the breaking of the bond and the forming of the other. (b)
Particles of reactant must come into contact with each other before they can react.
11. (a) very slow; (b) As the temperature is increased, the reaction proceeds at a faster rate. The amount of
reactants decreases, and the amount of products increases. After a while, there is a roughly equal amount
ofBC,AB, andCin the mixture and a slight excess ofA.
13. (a) 2; (b) 1
15. (a) The process reduces the rate by a factor of 4. (b) Since CO does not appear in the rate law, the rate is not
affected.
17. 4.3 10−5mol/L/s
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1185
1171
19. 7.9 10−13mol/L/year
21. rate =k;k= 2.0 10−2mol L−1h−1(about 0.9 g L−1h−1for the average male); The reaction is zero order.
23. rate =k[NOCl]2;k= 8.0 10−8L/mol/h; second order
25. rate =k[NO]2[Cl ];k= 9.1 L2mol−2h−1; second order in NO; first order in Cl
2 2
27. (a) The rate law is second order in A and is written as rate =k[A]2. (b)k= 7.88 10−3L mol−1s−1
29. (a) 2.5 10−4mol/L/min
31. rate =k[I−][OCl−];k= 6.1 10−2L mol−1s−1
33. Plotting a graph of ln[SO Cl ] versustreveals a linear trend; therefore we know this is a first-order
2 2
reaction:
k= 2.20 10–5s−1
PAGE: 1186
1172
34.
The plot is nicely linear, so the reaction is second order.k= 50.1 L mol−1h−1
36. 14.3 d
38. 8.3 107s
40. 0.826 s
42. The reaction is first order.k= 1.0 107L mol−1min−1
44. 1.16 × 103s ; 20% remains
46. 252 days
48.
[A] (M) k 103(s−1)
0
4.88 2.45
3.52 2.51
2.29 2.53
1.81 2.58
5.33 2.36
4.05 2.47
2.95 2.48
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1187
1173
[A] (M) k 103(s−1)
0
1.72 2.43
50. The reactants either may be moving too slowly to have enough kinetic energy to exceed the activation
energy for the reaction, or the orientation of the molecules when they collide may prevent the reaction
from occurring.
52. The activation energy is the minimum amount of energy necessary to form the activated complex in a
reaction. It is usually expressed as the energy necessary to form one mole of activated complex.
54. After findingkat several different temperatures, a plot of lnkversus gives a straight line with the slope
from whichE may be determined.
a
56. (a) 4-times faster (b) 128-times faster
58.
60. 43.0 kJ/mol
62. 177 kJ/mol
64. E = 108 kJ;A= 2.0 108s−1;k= 3.2 10−10s−1; (b) 1.81 108h or 7.6 106day; (c) Assuming that the
a
reaction is irreversible simplifies the calculation because we do not have to account for any reactant that,
having been converted to product, returns to the original state.
66. TheAatom has enough energy to react withBC; however, the different angles at which it bounces off ofBC
without reacting indicate that the orientation of the molecule is an important part of the reaction kinetics
and determines whether a reaction will occur.
68. No. In general, for the overall reaction, we cannot predict the effect of changing the concentration without
knowing the rate law. Yes. If the reaction is an elementary reaction, then doubling the concentration ofA
doubles the rate.
70. Rate =k[A][B]2; Rate =k[A]3
72. (a) Rate =k[O ]; (b) Rate =k[O ][Cl]; (c) Rate =k[ClO][O]; (d) Rate =k[O ][NO]; (e) Rate =k[NO ][O]
1 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 2
74. (a) Doubling [H ] doubles the rate. [H ] must enter the rate law to the first power. Doubling [NO] increases
2 2
the rate by a factor of 4. [NO] must enter the rate law to the second power. (b) Rate =k[NO]2[H ]; (c)k= 5.0
2
103mol−2L−2min−1; (d) 0.0050 mol/L; (e) Step II is the rate-determining step. If step I gives N O in
2 2
adequate amount, steps 1 and 2 combine to give This reaction corresponds
to the observed rate law. Combine steps 1 and 2 with step 3, which occurs by supposition in a rapid
fashion, to give the appropriate stoichiometry.
76. The general mode of action for a catalyst is to provide a mechanism by which the reactants can unite more
readily by taking a path with a lower reaction energy. The rates of both the forward and the reverse
reactions are increased, leading to a faster achievement of equilibrium.
78. (a) Chlorine atoms are a catalyst because they react in the second step but are regenerated in the third
step. Thus, they are not used up, which is a characteristic of catalysts. (b) NO is a catalyst for the same
reason as in part (a).
80. The lowering of the transition state energy indicates the effect of a catalyst. (a) B; (b) B
82. The energy needed to go from the initial state to the transition state is (a) 10 kJ; (b) 10 kJ.
84. Both diagrams describe two-step, exothermic reactions, but with different changes in enthalpy, suggesting
the diagrams depict two different overall reactions.
Chapter 13
1. The reaction can proceed in both the forward and reverse directions.
3. When a system has reached equilibrium, no further changes in the reactant and product concentrations
occur; the forward and reverse reactions continue to proceed, but at equal rates.
5. Not necessarily. A system at equilibrium is characterized byconstantreactant and product
concentrations, but the values of the reactant and product concentrations themselves need not be equal.
7. Equilibrium cannot be established between the liquid and the gas phase if the top is removed from the
PAGE: 1188
1174
bottle because the system is not closed; one of the components of the equilibrium, the Br vapor, would
2
escape from the bottle until all liquid disappeared. Thus, more liquid would evaporate than can condense
back from the gas phase to the liquid phase.
9. (a)K = [Ag+][Cl−] < 1. AgCl is insoluble; thus, the concentrations of ions are much less than 1M; (b)
c
> 1 because PbCl is insoluble and formation of the solid will reduce the concentration
2
of ions to a low level (<1M).
11. Since a value ofK ≈ 10 means that C H predominates over C H . In such a case, the
c 6 6 2 2
reaction would be commercially feasible if the rate to equilibrium is suitable.
13. K > 1
c
15. (a) (b) (c) (d)Q = [SO ]; (e) (f)
c 2
(g) (h)Q = [H O]5
c 2
17. (a)Q 25 proceeds left; (b)Q 0.22 proceeds right; (c)Q undefined proceeds left; (d)Q 1.00 proceeds
c P c P
right; (e)Q 0 proceeds right; (f)Q 4 proceeds left
P c
19. The system will shift toward the reactants to reach equilibrium.
21. (a) homogenous; (b) homogenous; (c) homogenous; (d) heterogeneous; (e) heterogeneous; (f) homogenous;
(g) heterogeneous; (h) heterogeneous
23. This situation occurs in (a) and (b).
25. (a)K = 1.6 10−4; (b)K = 50.2; (c)K = 5.34 10−39; (d)K = 4.60 10−3
P P c c
27.
29.
31. The amount of CaCO must be so small that is less thanK when the CaCO has completely
3 P 3
decomposed. In other words, the starting amount of CaCO cannot completely generate the full
3
required for equilibrium.
33. The change in enthalpy may be used. If the reaction is exothermic, the heat produced can be thought of as
a product. If the reaction is endothermic the heat added can be thought of as a reactant. Additional heat
would shift an exothermic reaction back to the reactants but would shift an endothermic reaction to the
products. Cooling an exothermic reaction causes the reaction to shift toward the product side; cooling an
endothermic reaction would cause it to shift to the reactants’ side.
34. No, it is not at equilibrium. Because the system is not confined, products continuously escape from the
region of the flame; reactants are also added continuously from the burner and surrounding atmosphere.
36. Add N ; add H ; decrease the container volume; heat the mixture.
2 2
38. (a)Tincrease = shift right,Vdecrease = shift left; (b)Tincrease = shift right,V= no effect; (c)Tincrease =
shift left,Vdecrease = shift left; (d)Tincrease = shift left,Vdecrease = shift right.
40. (a) (b) [H ] increases, [CO] decreases, [CH OH] increases; (c), [H ] increases, [CO]
2 3 2
decreases, [CH OH] decreases; (d), [H ] increases, [CO] increases, [CH OH] increases; (e), [H ] increases,
3 2 3 2
[CO] increases, [CH OH] decreases; (f), no changes.
3
42. (a) (b) [H O] no change, [CO] no change, [H ] no change; (c) [H O] decreases, [CO]
2 2 2
decreases, [H ] decreases; (d) [H O] increases, [CO] increases, [H ] decreases; (e) [H O] decreases, [CO]
2 2 2 2
increases, [H ] increases. In (b), (c), (d), and (e), the mass of carbon will change, but its concentration
2
(activity) will not change.
44. Only (b)
46. Add NaCl or some other salt that produces Cl−to the solution. Cooling the solution forces the equilibrium
to the right, precipitating more AgCl(s).
48. Though the solution is saturated, the dynamic nature of the solubility equilibrium means the opposing
processes of solid dissolution and precipitation continue to occur (just at equal rates, meaning the
dissolved ion concentrations and the amount of undissolved solid remain constant). The radioactive Ag+
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1189
1175
ions detected in the solution phase come from dissolution of the added solid, and their presence is
countered by precipitation of nonradioactive Ag+.
50. [A] = 0.1M, [B] = 0.1M, [C] = 1M; and [A] = 0.01, [B] = 0.250, [C] = 0.791.
52. K = 6.00 10−2
c
54. K = 0.50
c
56. K = 1.9 103
P
58. K = 3.06
P
60. (a) −2x, +2x; (b) , , −2x; (c) −2x, 3x; (d)x, –x, −3x; (e) +x; (f)
62. Activities of pure crystalline solids equal 1 and are constant; however, the mass of Ni does change.
64. [NH ] = 9.1 10−2M
3
66. P = 4.9 10−2atm
BrCl
68. [CO] = 2.04 10−4M
70.
72. CalculateQbased on the calculated concentrations and see if it is equal toK. BecauseQdoes equal 4.32,
c
the system must be at equilibrium.
74. (a) [NO ] = 1.17 10−3M; [N O ] = 0.128M; (b) The assumption thatxis negligibly small compared to
2 2 4
0.129 is confirmed by comparing the initial concentration of the N O to its concentration at equilibrium
2 4
(they differ by just 1 in the least significant digit’s place).
76. (a) [H S] = 0.810 atm, [H ] = 0.014 atm, [S ] = 0.0072 atm; (b) The assumption that 2xis negligibly small
2 2 2
compared to 0.824 is confirmed by comparing the initial concentration of the H S to its concentration at
2
equilibrium (0.824 atm versus 0.810 atm, a difference of less than 2%).
78. [PCl ] = 1.80M; [Cl ] = 0.195M; [PCl ] = 0.195M.
5 2 3
79. 507 g
81. 330 g
84. (a) 0.33 mol. (b) [CO ] = 0.50M. Added H forms some water as a result of a shift to the left after H is
2 2 2
added.
86. (a) (b) [NH ] must increase forQ to reachK. (c) The increase in system volume
3 c c
would lower the partial pressures of all reactants (including NO ). (d)
2
88.
Chapter 14
1. One example for NH as a conjugate acid: as a conjugate base:
3
3. (a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
(f)
5. (a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
(f)
7. (a) H O, O2−; (b) H O+, OH−; (c) H CO , (d) (e) H SO , (f) (g)
2 3 2 3 2 4
H S; S2−; (h) H N
2 4 2
9. The labels are Brønsted-Lowry acid = BA; its conjugate base = CB; Brønsted-Lowry base = BB; its conjugate
acid = CA. (a) HNO (BA), H O(BB), H O+(CA), (b) CN−(BB), H O(BA), HCN(CA), OH−(CB); (c)
3 2 3 2
H SO (BA), Cl−(BB), HCl(CA), (d) OH−(BB), (CB), H O(CA); (e) O2−(BB),
2 4 2
H O(BA) OH−(CB and CA); (f) [Cu(H O) (OH)]+(BB), [Al(H O) ]3+(BA), [Cu(H O) ]2+(CA), [Al(H O) (OH)]2+(CB);
2 2 3 2 6 2 4 2 5
(g) H S(BA), HS−(CB), NH (CA)
2 3
11. Amphiprotic species may either gain or lose a proton in a chemical reaction, thus acting as a base or an
acid. An example is H O. As an acid: As a base:
2
13. amphiprotic: (a) (b)
PAGE: 1190
1176
not amphiprotic: (c)
Br−; (d) (e)
15. In a neutral solution [H O+] = [OH−]. At 40 °C, [H O+] = [OH−] = (2.910 × 10−14)1/2= 1.7 10−7.
3 3
17. x= 3.051 10−7M= [H O+] = [OH−]; pH = −log3.051 10−7= −(−6.5156) = 6.5156; pOH = pH = 6.5156
3
19. (a) pH = 3.587; pOH = 10.413; (b) pOH = 0.68; pH = 13.32; (c) pOH = 3.85; pH = 10.15; (d) pOH = −0.40; pH
= 14.4
21. [H O+] = 3.0 10−7M; [OH−] = 3.3 10−8M
3
23. [H O+] = 1 10−2M; [OH−] = 1 10−12M
3
25. [OH−] = 3.1 10−12M
27. The salt ionizes in solution, but the anion slightly reacts with water to form the weak acid. This reaction
also forms OH−, which causes the solution to be basic.
29. [H O] > [CH CO H] > ≈ > [OH−]
2 3 2
31. The oxidation state of the sulfur in H SO is greater than the oxidation state of the sulfur in H SO .
2 4 2 3
33.
35.
37. The stronger base or stronger acid is the one with the largerK orK, respectively. In these two examples,
b a
they are (CH ) NH and
32
39. triethylamine
41. (a) higher electronegativity of the central ion. (b) H O; NH is a base and water is neutral, or
2 3
decide on the basis ofK values. (c) HI; PH is weaker than HCl; HCl is weaker than HI. Thus, PH is weaker
a 3 3
than HI. (d) PH ; in binary compounds of hydrogen with nonmetals, the acidity increases for the element
3
lower in a group. (e) HBr; in a period, the acidity increases from left to right; in a group, it increases from
top to bottom. Br is to the left and below S, so HBr is the stronger acid.
43. (a) NaHSeO < NaHSO < NaHSO ; in polyoxy acids, the more electronegative central element—S, in this
3 3 4
case—forms the stronger acid. The larger number of oxygen atoms on the central atom (giving it a higher
oxidation state) also creates a greater release of hydrogen atoms, resulting in a stronger acid. As a salt, the
acidity increases in the same manner. (b) the basicity of the anions in a series
of acids will be the opposite of the acidity in their oxyacids. The acidity increases as the electronegativity
of the central atom increases. Cl is more electronegative than Br, and I is the least electronegative of the
three. (c) HOI < HOBr < HOCl; in a series of the same form of oxyacids, the acidity increases as the
electronegativity of the central atom increases. Cl is more electronegative than Br, and I is the least
electronegative of the three. (d) HOCl < HOClO < HOClO < HOClO ; in a series of oxyacids of the same
2 3
central element, the acidity increases as the number of oxygen atoms increases (or as the oxidation state
of the central atom increases). (e) and are anions of weak
bases, so they act as strong bases toward H+. and HS−are anions of weak acids, so they have less
basic character. In a periodic group, the more electronegative element has the more basic anion. (f)
with a larger number of oxygen atoms (that is, as the oxidation state
of the central ion increases), the corresponding acid becomes more acidic and the anion consequently
less basic.
45.
47. 1. Assume that the change in initial concentration of the acid as the equilibrium is established can be
neglected, so this concentration can be assumed constant and equal to the initial value of the total acid
concentration. 2. Assume we can neglect the contribution of water to the equilibrium concentration of
H O+.
3
48. (b) The addition of HCl
50. (a) Adding HCl will add H O+ions, which will then react with the OH−ions, lowering their concentration.
3
The equilibrium will shift to the right, increasing the concentration of HNO , and decreasing the
2
concentration of ions. (b) Adding HNO increases the concentration of HNO and shifts the
2 2
equilibrium to the left, increasing the concentration of ions and decreasing the concentration of
OH−ions. (c) Adding NaOH adds OH−ions, which shifts the equilibrium to the left, increasing the
concentration of ions and decreasing the concentrations of HNO . (d) Adding NaCl has no effect on
2
the concentrations of the ions. (e) Adding KNO adds ions and shifts the equilibrium to the right,
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1191
1177
increasing the HNO and OH−ion concentrations.
2
52. This is a case in which the solution contains a mixture of acids of different ionization strengths. In
solution, the HCO H exists primarily as HCO H molecules because the ionization of the weak acid is
2 2
suppressed by the strong acid. Therefore, the HCO H contributes a negligible amount of hydronium ions
2
to the solution. The stronger acid, HCl, is the dominant producer of hydronium ions because it is
completely ionized. In such a solution, the stronger acid determines the concentration of hydronium ions,
and the ionization of the weaker acid is fixed by the [H O+] produced by the stronger acid.
3
54. (a) (b) (c) (d)
56.
58. (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
(f)
60. (a)
Solving forxgives 1.63 10−5M. This value is less than 5% of 0.0092, so the assumption that it can be
neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:
[H O+] = [ClO–] = 1.6 10−5M
3
[HClO–] = 0.0092M
[OH−] = 6.1 10−10M;
(b)
Solving forxgives 5.81 10−6M. This value is less than 5% of 0.0784, so the assumption that it can be
neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:
= [OH−] = 5.8 10−6M
[C H NH ] = 0.0784M
6 5 2
[H O+] = 1.7 10−9M;
3
(c)
Solving forxgives 6.30 10−6M. This value is less than 5% of 0.0810, so the assumption that it can be
neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:
[H O+] = [CN−] = 6.3 10−6M
3
[HCN] = 0.0810M
[OH−] = 1.6 10−9M;
(d)
Solving forxgives 2.63 10−3M. This value is less than 5% of 0.11, so the assumption that it can be
neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:
[(CH ) NH+] = [OH−] = 2.6 10−3M
33
[(CH ) N] = 0.11M
33
[H O+] = 3.8 10−12M;
3
(e)
Solving forxgives 1.39 10−4M. This value is less than 5% of 0.120, so the assumption that it can be
neglected is valid. Thus, the concentrations of solute species at equilibrium are:
[Fe(H O) (OH)+] = [H O+] = 1.4 10−4M
2 5 3
= 0.120M
[OH−] = 7.2 10−11M
62. pH = 2.41
64. [C H N ] = 0.049M; [C H N H+] = 1.9 10−4M; = 1.4 10−11M; [OH−] = 1.9 10−4
10 14 2 10 14 2
M; [H O+] = 5.3 10−11M
3
66.
68.
70. (a) acidic; (b) basic; (c) acidic; (d) neutral
72. [H O+] and are practically equal
3
74. [C H (CO H) ] 7.2 10−3M, [C H (CO H)(CO )−] = [H O+] 2.8 10−3M, 3.9 10−6M,
6 4 2 2 6 4 2 2 3
PAGE: 1192
1178
[OH−] 3.6 10−12M
76. (a)
(b)
(c)
Solving forxgives 1.5 10−11M. Therefore, compared with 0.014M, this value is negligible (1.1
10−7%).
78. Excess H O+is removed primarily by the reaction:
3
Excess base is removed by the reaction:
80. [H O+] = 1.5 10−4M
3
82. [OH−] = 4.2 10−4M
84. (a) The added HCl will increase the concentration of H O+slightly, which will react with and
3
produce CH CO H in the process. Thus, decreases and [CH CO H] increases. (b) The added
3 2 3 2
KCH CO will increase the concentration of which will react with H O+and produce CH CO
3 2 3 3 2
H in the process. Thus, [H O+] decreases slightly and [CH CO H] increases. (c) The added NaCl will have no
3 3 2
effect on the concentration of the ions. (d) The added KOH will produce OH−ions, which will react with the
H O+, thus reducing [H O+]. Some additional CH CO H will dissociate, producing ions in the
3 3 3 2
process. Thus, [CH CO H] decreases slightly and increases. (e) The added CH CO H will
3 2 3 2
increase its concentration, causing more of it to dissociate and producing more and H O+in
3
the process. Thus, [H O+] increases slightly and increases.
3
86. pH = 8.95
88. 37 g (0.27 mol)
90. (a) pH = 5.222; (b) The solution is acidic. (c) pH = 5.220
92. At the equivalence point in the titration of a weak base with a strong acid, the resulting solution is slightly
acidic due to the presence of the conjugate acid. Thus, pick an indicator that changes color in the acidic
range and brackets the pH at the equivalence point. Methyl orange is a good example.
94. (a) pH = 2.50; (b) pH = 4.01; (c) pH = 5.60; (d) pH = 8.35; (e) pH = 11.08
Chapter 15
1. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
3. There is no change. A solid has an activity of 1 whether there is a little or a lot.
5. The solubility of silver bromide at the new temperature must be known. Normally the solubility increases
and some of the solid silver bromide will dissolve.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1193
1179
7. CaF , MnCO , and ZnS
2 3
9. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
11. (a)1.77 10–7; (b) 1.6 10–6; (c) 2.2 10–9; (d) 7.91 10–22
13. (a) 2 10–2M; (b) 1.5 10–3M; (c) 2.27 10–9M; (d) 2.2 10–10M
15. (a) 6.4 10−9M= [Ag+], [Cl−] = 0.025M. Check: an insignificant
change;
(b) 2.2 10−5M= [Ca2+], [F−] = 0.0013M. Check: This value is less than
5% and can be ignored.
(c) 0.2238M= [Ag+] = 7.4 10–3M. Check: the condition is
satisfied.
(d) [OH–] = 2.8 10–3M; 5.7 10−12M= [Zn2+]. Check: xis less than
5% of [OH–] and is, therefore, negligible.
17. (a) [Cl–] = 7.6 10−3M
Check:
This value is too large to dropx. Therefore solve by using the quadratic equation:
[Ti+] = 3.1 10–2M
[Cl–] = 6.1 10–3
(b) [Ba2+] = 7.7 10–4M
Check:
Therefore, the condition is satisfied.
[Ba2+] = 7.7 10–4M
[F–] = 0.0321M;
(c) Mg(NO ) = 0.02444M
32
Check:
The condition is satisfied; the above value is less than 5%.
[Mg2+] = 0.0244M
(d) [OH–] = 0.0501M
[Ca2+] = 3.15 10–3
Check:
This value is greater than 5%, so a more exact method, such as successive approximations, must be used.
[Ca2+] = 2.8 10–3M
[OH–] = 0.053 10–2M
19. The changes in concentration are greater than 5% and thus exceed the maximum value for disregarding
the change.
21. CaSO ∙2H O is the most soluble Ca salt in mol/L, and it is also the most soluble Ca salt in g/L.
4 2
23. 4.8 10–3M= = [Ca2+]; Since this concentration is higher than 2.60 10–3M, “gyp” water does
not meet the standards.
25. Mass (CaSO ·2H O) = 0.72 g/L
4 2
27. (a) [Ag+] = [I–] = 1.3 10–5M; (b) [Ag+] = 2.88 10–2M, = 1.44 10–2M; (c) [Mn2+] = 3.7 10–5M,
[OH–] = 7.4 10–5M; (d) [Sr2+] = 4.3 10–2M, [OH–] = 8.6 10–2M; (e) [Mg2+] = 1.3 10–4M, [OH–] = 2.6
10–4M.
29. (a) 1.45 10–4; (b) 8.2 10–55; (c) 1.35 10–4; (d) 1.18 10–5; (e) 1.08 10–10
31. (a) CaCO does precipitate. (b) The compound does not precipitate. (c) The compound does not precipitate.
3
PAGE: 1194
1180
(d) The compound precipitates.
33. 3.03 10−7M
35. 9.2 10−13M
37. [Ag+] = 1.8 10–3M
39. 6.3 10–4
41. (a) 2.25 L; (b) 7.2 10–7g
43. 100% of it is dissolved
45. (a) and Cu2+: Add (b) and Cl–: Add Ba2+. (c) Hg2+and Co2+: Add S2–. (d) Zn2+and
Sr2+: Add OH–until [OH–] = 0.050M. (e) Ba2+and Mg2+: Add (f) and OH–: Add Ba2+.
47. AgI will precipitate first.
49. 1.5 10−12M
51. 3.99 kg
53. (a) 3.1 10–11; (b) [Cu2+] = 2.6 10–3; = 5.3 10–3
55. 1.8 10–5g Pb(OH)
2
57.
1.23 10−3g Mg(OH)
2
59. MnCO will form first since it has the smallestK value among these homologous compounds and is
3 sp
therefore the least soluble. MgCO •3H O will be the last to precipitate since it has the largest K_sp value
3 2
and is the most soluble.K value.
sp
62. when the amount of solid is so small that a saturated solution is not produced
64. 1.8 10–5M
66. 5 1023
68.
[Cd2+] = 9.5 10–5M; [CN–] = 3.8 10–4M
70. [Co3+] = 3.0 10–6M; [NH ] = 1.8 10–5M
3
72. 1.3 g
74. 0.79 g
76. (a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1195
1181
(d)
(e)
78. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
80. 0.0281 g
82.
84. (a) (b) The electronic and molecular shapes are the same—both
tetrahedral. (c) The tetrahedral structure is consistent withsp3hybridization.
86. 0.014M
88. 7.2 10–15M
PAGE: 1196
1182
90. 4.4 10−22M
93. [OH−] = 4.5 10−6; [Al3+] = 2 10–16(molar solubility)
95. ; [Ba2+] = 4.7 10–7(molar solubility)
97. [OH–] = 7.6 10−3M; [Pb2+] = 2.1 10–11(molar solubility)
99. 7.66
101. (a)K = [Mg2+][F–]2= (1.21 10–3)(2 1.21 10–3)2= 7.09 10–9
sp
(b) 7.09 10–7M
(c) Determine the concentration of Mg2+and F–that will be present in the final volume. Compare the
value of the ion product [Mg2+][F–]2withK . If this value is larger thanK , precipitation will occur.
sp sp
0.1000 L 3.00 10–3MMg(NO ) = 0.3000 L MMg(NO )
32 32
MMg(NO ) = 1.00 10–3M
32
0.2000 L 2.00 10–3MNaF = 0.3000 L MNaF
MNaF = 1.33 10–3M
ion product = (1.00 10–3)(1.33 10–3)2= 1.77 10–9This value is smaller thanK , so no precipitation
sp
will occur.
(d) MgF is less soluble at 27 °C than at 18 °C. Because added heat acts like an added reagent, when it
2
appears on the product side, the Le Châtelier’s principle states that the equilibrium will shift to the
reactants’ side to counter the stress. Consequently, less reagent will dissolve. This situation is found in
our case. Therefore, the reaction is exothermic.
103. BaF , Ca (PO ) , ZnS; each is a salt of a weak acid, and the from perchloric acid reduces the
2 3 42
equilibrium concentration of the anion, thereby increasing the concentration of the cations
105. Effect on amount of solid CaHPO , [Ca2+], [OH–]: (a) increase, increase, decrease; (b) decrease, increase,
4
decrease; (c) no effect, no effect, no effect; (d) decrease, increase, decrease; (e) increase, no effect, no
effect
Chapter 16
1. A reaction has a natural tendency to occur and takes place without the continual input of energy from an
external source.
3. (a) spontaneous; (b) nonspontaneous; (c) spontaneous; (d) nonspontaneous; (e) spontaneous; (f)
spontaneous
5. Although the oxidation of plastics is spontaneous, the rate of oxidation is very slow. Plastics are therefore
kinetically stable and do not decompose appreciably even over relatively long periods of time.
7. There are four initial microstates and four final microstates.
9. The probability for all the particles to be on one side is This probability is noticeably lower than the
result for the four-particle system. The conclusion we can make is that the probability for all the particles
to stay in only one part of the system will decrease rapidly as the number of particles increases, and, for
instance, the probability for all molecules of gas to gather in only one side of a room at room temperature
and pressure is negligible since the number of gas molecules in the room is very large.
11. There is only one initial state. For the final state, the energy can be contained in pairs A-C, A-D, B-C, or B-D.
Thus, there are four final possible states.
13. The masses of these molecules would suggest the opposite trend in their entropies. The observed trend is
a result of the more significant variation of entropy with a physical state. At room temperature, I is a
2
solid, Br is a liquid, and Cl is a gas.
2 2
15. (a) C H OH(l) as it is a larger molecule (more complex and more massive), and so more microstates
3 7
describing its motions are available at any given temperature. (b) C H OH(g) as it is in the gaseous state.
2 5
(c) 2H(g), since entropy is an extensive property, and so two H atoms (or two moles of H atoms) possess
twice as much entropy as one atom (or one mole of atoms).
17. (a) Negative. The relatively ordered solid precipitating decreases the number of mobile ions in solution.
(b) Negative. There is a net loss of three moles of gas from reactants to products. (c) Positive. There is a net
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1197
1183
increase of seven moles of gas from reactants to products.
19.
There are 7.5 moles of gas initially, and 3 + 6 = 9 moles of gas in the end. Therefore, it is likely that the
entropy increases as a result of this reaction, and ΔSis positive.
21. (a) 107 J/K; (b) −86.4 J/K; (c) 133.2 J/K; (d) 118.8 J/K; (e) −326.6 J/K; (f) −171.9 J/K; (g) −7.2 J/K
23. 100.6 J/K
25. (a) −198.1 J/K; (b) −348.9 J/K
27. As ΔS < 0 at each of these temperatures, melting is not spontaneous at either of them. The given values
univ
for entropy and enthalpy are for NaCl at 298 K. It is assumed that these do not change significantly at the
higher temperatures used in the problem.
29. (a) 2.86 J/K; (b) 24.8 J/K; (c) −113.2 J/K; (d) −24.7 J/K; (e) 15.5 J/K; (f) 290.0 J/K
31. The reaction is nonspontaneous at room temperature.
Above 400 K, ΔGwill become negative, and the reaction will become spontaneous.
33. (a) 465.1 kJ nonspontaneous; (b) −106.86 kJ spontaneous; (c) −291.9 kJ spontaneous; (d) −83.4 kJ
spontaneous; (e) −406.7 kJ spontaneous; (f) −154.3 kJ spontaneous
35. (a) The standard free energy of formation is –1124.3 kJ/mol. (b) The calculation agrees with the value in
Appendix Gbecause free energy is a state function (just like the enthalpy and entropy), so its change
depends only on the initial and final states, not the path between them.
37. (a) The reaction is nonspontaneous; (b) Above 566 °C the process is spontaneous.
39. (a) 1.5 102kJ; (b) −21.9 kJ; (c) −5.34 kJ; (d) −0.383 kJ; (e) 18 kJ; (f) 71 kJ
41. (a)K= 41; (b)K= 0.053; (c)K= 6.9 1013; (d)K= 1.9; (e)K= 0.04
43. In each of the following, the value of ΔGis not given at the temperature of the reaction. Therefore, we must
calculate ΔGfrom the values ΔH° and ΔSand then calculate ΔGfrom the relation ΔG= ΔH° −TΔS°. (a)K=
1.07 × 10−13; (b)K= 2.51 10−3; (c)K= 4.83 103; (d)K= 0.219; (e)K= 16.1
45. The standard free energy change is When reactants and products are in
their standard states (1 bar or 1 atm),Q= 1. As the reaction proceeds toward equilibrium, the reaction
shifts left (the amount of products drops while the amount of reactants increases):Q< 1, and becomes
less positive as it approaches zero. At equilibrium,Q=K, and ΔG= 0.
47. The reaction will be spontaneous at temperatures greater than 287 K.
49. K= 5.35 1015; The process is exothermic.
51. 1.0 10−8atm. This is the maximum pressure of the gases under the stated conditions.
53.
55. −0.16 kJ
56. (a) 22.1 kJ; (b) 98.9 kJ/mol
58. 90 kJ/mol
60. (a) Under standard thermodynamic conditions, the evaporation is nonspontaneous; (b)K = 0.031; (c) The
p
evaporation of water is spontaneous; (d) must always be less thanK or less than 0.031 atm. 0.031
p
atm represents air saturated with water vapor at 25 °C, or 100% humidity.
62. (a) Nonspontaneous as (b)
The forward reaction to produce F6P is
spontaneous under these conditions.
64. ΔGis negative as the process is spontaneous. ΔHis positive as with the solution becoming cold, the
dissolving must be endothermic. ΔSmust be positive as this drives the process, and it is expected for the
dissolution of any soluble ionic compound.
66. (a) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield a decrease inQand thus becomes more negative.
(b) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield a decrease inQand thus becomes more negative.
(c) Increasing the oxygen partial pressure will yield an increase inQand thus becomes more positive.
Chapter 17
1. (a) reduction; (b) oxidation; (c) oxidation; (d) reduction
3. (a) (b) (c) (d)
PAGE: 1198
1184
5. Oxidized: (a) Sn2+; (b) Hg; (c) Al; reduced: (a) H O ; (b) PbO ; (c) oxidizing agent: (a) H O ; (b)
2 2 2 2 2
PbO ; (c) reducing agent: (a) Sn2+; (b) Hg; (c) Al
2
7. Oxidized = reducing agent: (a) (b) Mn(OH) ; (c) H ; (d) Al; reduced = oxidizing agent: (a) Cu(OH) ;
2 2 2
(b) O ; (c) (d)
2
9. In basic solution, [OH−] > 1 10−7M> [H+]. Hydrogen ion cannot appear as a reactant because its
concentration is essentially zero. If it were produced, it would instantly react with the excess hydroxide ion
to produce water. Thus, hydrogen ion shouldnotappear as a reactant or product in basic solution.
11. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
13. (a) (b)
15. Species oxidized = reducing agent: (a) Al(s); (b) NO(g); (c) Mg(s); and (d) MnO (s); Species reduced =
2
oxidizing agent: (a) Zr4+(aq); (b) Ag+(aq); (c) ; and (d)
17. Without the salt bridge, the circuit would be open (or broken) and no current could flow. With a salt bridge,
each half-cell remains electrically neutral and current can flow through the circuit.
19. Active electrodes participate in the oxidation-reduction reaction. Since metals form cations, the electrode
would lose mass if metal atoms in the electrode were to oxidize and go into solution. Oxidation occurs at
the anode.
21. (a) +2.115 V (spontaneous); (b) +0.4626 V (spontaneous); (c) +1.0589 V (spontaneous); (d) +0.727 V
(spontaneous)
23. +1.16 V; spontaneous
25. −1.259 V; nonspontaneous
27. (a) 0 kJ/mol; (b) −83.7 kJ/mol; (c) +235.3 kJ/mol
29. (a) standard cell potential: 1.50 V, spontaneous; cell potential under stated conditions: 1.43 V,
spontaneous; (b) standard cell potential: 1.405 V, spontaneous; cell potential under stated conditions:
1.423 V, spontaneous; (c) standard cell potential: −2.749 V, nonspontaneous; cell potential under stated
conditions: −2.757 V, nonspontaneous
31. (a) 1.7 10−10; (b) 2.6 10−21; (c) 4.693 1021; (d) 1.0 10−14
33. (a) (b) 3.5 1015; (c) 5.6 10−9
M
34. Batteries are self-contained and have a limited supply of reagents to expend before going dead.
Alternatively, battery reaction byproducts accumulate and interfere with the reaction. Because a fuel cell
is constantly resupplied with reactants and products are expelled, it can continue to function as long as
reagents are supplied.
36. E , as described in the Nernst equation, has a term that is directly proportional to temperature. At low
cell
temperatures, this term is decreased, resulting in a lower cell voltage provided by the battery to the
device—the same effect as a battery running dead.
38. Mg and Zn
40. Both examples involve cathodic protection. The (sacrificial) anode is the metal that corrodes (oxidizes or
reacts). In the case of iron (−0.447 V) and zinc (−0.7618 V), zinc has a more negative standard reduction
potential and so serves as the anode. In the case of iron and copper (0.34 V), iron has the smaller standard
reduction potential and so corrodes (serves as the anode).
42. While the reduction potential of lithium would make it capable of protecting the other metals, this high
potential is also indicative of how reactive lithium is; it would have a spontaneous reaction with most
substances. This means that the lithium would react quickly with other substances, even those that would
not oxidize the metal it is attempting to protect. Reactivity like this means the sacrificial anode would be
depleted rapidly and need to be replaced frequently. (Optional additional reason: fire hazard in the
presence of water.)
46. (a) (b) (c) (d)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1199
1185
48. 0.79 L
Chapter 18
1. The alkali metals all have a singleselectron in their outermost shell. In contrast, the alkaline earth metals
have a completedssubshell in their outermost shell. In general, the alkali metals react faster and are more
reactive than the corresponding alkaline earth metals in the same period.
3.
5. The possible ways of distinguishing between the two include infrared spectroscopy by comparison of
known compounds, a flame test that gives the characteristic yellow color for sodium (strontium has a red
flame), or comparison of their solubilities in water. At 20 °C, NaCl dissolves to the extent of
compared with for SrCl . Heating to 100 °C provides an easy test, since the solubility of NaCl is
2
but that of SrCl is Density determination on a solid is sometimes difficult, but there is
2
enough difference (2.165 g/mL NaCl and 3.052 g/mL SrCl ) that this method would be viable and perhaps
2
the easiest and least expensive test to perform.
7. (a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
9. 11 lb
11. Yes, tin reacts with hydrochloric acid to produce hydrogen gas.
13. In PbCl , the bonding is ionic, as indicated by its melting point of 501 °C. In PbCl , the bonding is covalent,
2 4
as evidenced by it being an unstable liquid at room temperature.
15.
17. Cathode (reduction): Anode (oxidation): Overall
reaction:
19. 0.5035 g H
2
21. Despite its reactivity, magnesium can be used in construction even when the magnesium is going to come
in contact with a flame because a protective oxide coating is formed, preventing gross oxidation. Only if
the metal is finely subdivided or present in a thin sheet will a high-intensity flame cause its rapid burning.
23. Extract from ore:
Recover:
Sinter:
Dissolve in Na AlF (l) and electrolyze:
3 6
25. 25.83%
27. 39 kg
29. (a) H BPH :
3 3
PAGE: 1200
1186
(b)
(c) BBr :
3
(d) B(CH ) :
33
(e) B(OH) :
3
31. 1s22s22p63s23p23d0.
33. (a) (CH ) SiH:sp3bonding about Si; the structure is tetrahedral; (b) sp3bonding about Si; the
33
structure is tetrahedral; (c) Si H :sp3bonding about each Si; the structure is linear along the Si-Si bond;
2 6
(d) Si(OH) :sp3bonding about Si; the structure is tetrahedral; (e) sp3d2bonding about Si; the
4
structure is octahedral
35. (a) nonpolar; (b) nonpolar; (c) polar; (d) nonpolar; (e) polar
37. (a) tellurium dioxide or tellurium(IV) oxide; (b) antimony(III) sulfide; (c) germanium(IV) fluoride; (d) silane
or silicon(IV) hydride; (e) germanium(IV) hydride
39. Boron has onlysandporbitals available, which can accommodate a maximum of four electron pairs.
Unlike silicon, nodorbitals are available in boron.
41. (a) ΔH° = 87 kJ; ΔG° = 44 kJ; (b) ΔH° = −109.9 kJ; ΔG°= −154.7 kJ; (c) ΔH° = −510 kJ; ΔG° = −601.5 kJ
43. A mild solution of hydrofluoric acid would dissolve the silicate and would not harm the diamond.
45. In the N molecule, the nitrogen atoms have an σ bond and two π bonds holding the two atoms together.
2
The presence of three strong bonds makes N a very stable molecule. Phosphorus is a third-period
2
element, and as such, does not form π bonds efficiently; therefore, it must fulfill its bonding requirement
by forming three σ bonds.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1201
1187
47. (a) H = 1+, C = 2+, and N = 3−; (b) O = 2+ and F = 1−; (c) As = 3+ and Cl = 1−
49. S < Cl < O < F
51. The electronegativity of the nonmetals is greater than that of hydrogen. Thus, the negative charge is better
represented on the nonmetal, which has the greater tendency to attract electrons in the bond to itself.
53. Hydrogen has only one orbital with which to bond to other atoms. Consequently, only one two-electron
bond can form.
55. 0.43 g H
2
57. (a) (b)
(c)
59. (a) NH2−:
(b) N F :
2 4
(c)
(d) NF :
3
(e)
61. Ammonia acts as a Brønsted base because it readily accepts protons and as a Lewis base in that it has an
electron pair to donate.
Brønsted base:
Lewis base:
63. (a) NO :
2
Nitrogen issp2hybridized. The molecule has a bent geometry with an ONO bond angle of approximately
120°.
(b)
Nitrogen issp2hybridized. The molecule has a bent geometry with an ONO bond angle slightly less than
PAGE: 1202
1188
120°.
(c)
Nitrogen issphybridized. The molecule has a linear geometry with an ONO bond angle of 180°.
65. Nitrogen cannot form a NF molecule because it does not havedorbitals to bond with the additional two
5
fluorine atoms.
67. (a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
69. (a) (b) (c) (d)
or (e) or
(f)
71. 291 mL
73. 28 tons
75. (a)
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1203
1189
(c)
(d)
77. (a) P = 3+; (b) P = 5+; (c) P = 3+; (d) P = 5+; (e) P = 3−; (f) P = 5+
79. FrO
2
81. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
83.
85. (a) (b)
(c) (d)
(e)
87. HClO is the stronger acid because, in a series of oxyacids with similar formulas, the higher the
4
electronegativity of the central atom, the stronger is the attraction of the central atom for the electrons of
the oxygen(s). The stronger attraction of the oxygen electron results in a stronger attraction of oxygen for
the electrons in the O-H bond, making the hydrogen more easily released. The weaker this bond, the
stronger the acid.
89. As H SO and H SeO are both oxyacids and their central atoms both have the same oxidation number, the
2 4 2 4
acid strength depends on the relative electronegativity of the central atom. As sulfur is more
electronegative than selenium, H SO is the stronger acid.
2 4
91. SO ,sp24+; SO ,sp2, 6+; H SO ,sp3, 6+
2 3 2 4
93. SF : S = 6+; SO F : S = 6+; KHS: S = 2−
6 2 2
95. Sulfur is able to form double bonds only at high temperatures (substantially endothermic conditions),
which is not the case for oxygen.
97. There are many possible answers including:
and
99. 5.1 104g
101. SnCl is not a salt because it is covalently bonded. A salt must have ionic bonds.
4
103. In oxyacids with similar formulas, the acid strength increases as the electronegativity of the central atom
increases. HClO is stronger than HBrO ; Cl is more electronegative than Br.
3 3
105. (a)
PAGE: 1204
1190
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
107. (a) bromine trifluoride; (b) sodium bromate; (c) phosphorus pentabromide; (d) sodium perchlorate; (e)
potassium hypochlorite
109. (a) I: 7+; (b) I: 7+; (c) Cl: 4+; (d) I: 3+; Cl: 1−; (e) F: 0
111. (a)sp3dhybridized; (b)sp3d2hybridized; (c)sp3hybridized; (d)sp3hybridized; (e)sp3d2hybridized;
113. (a) nonpolar; (b) nonpolar; (c) polar; (d) nonpolar; (e) polar
115. The empirical formula is XeF , and the balanced reactions are:
6
Chapter 19
1. (a) Sc: [Ar]4s23d1; (b) Ti: [Ar]4s23d2; (c) Cr: [Ar]4s13d5; (d) Fe: [Ar]4s23d6; (e) Ru: [Kr]5s24d6
3. (a) La: [Xe]6s25d1, La3+: [Xe]; (b) Sm: [Xe]6s24f6, Sm3+: [Xe]4f5; (c) Lu: [Xe]6s24f145d1, Lu3+: [Xe]4f14
5. Al is used because it is the strongest reducing agent and the only option listed that can provide sufficient
driving force to convert La(III) into La.
7. Mo
9. The CaSiO slag is less dense than the molten iron, so it can easily be separated. Also, the floating slag
3
layer creates a barrier that prevents the molten iron from exposure to O , which would oxidize the Fe back
2
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1205
1191
to Fe O .
2 3
11. 2.57%
13. 0.167 V
15. E° = −0.6 V,E° is negative so this reduction is not spontaneous.E° = +1.1 V
17. (a) (b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
19. (a)
(b) (c) In acid
solution between pH 2 and pH 6, forms which is in equilibrium with dichromate ion.
The reaction is At other acidic pHs, the reaction is
(d)
(e)
(f)
21. (a) (b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
23. As CN−is added,
As more CN−is added,
25. (a) Sc3+; (b) Ti4+; (c) V5+; (d) Cr6+; (e) Mn4+; (f) Fe2+and Fe3+; (g) Co2+and Co3+; (h) Ni2+; (i) Cu+
27. (a) 4, [Zn(OH) ]2−; (b) 6, [Pd(CN) ]2−; (c) 2, [AuCl ]−; (d) 4, [Pt(NH ) Cl ]; (e) 6, K[Cr(NH ) Cl ]; (f) 6,
4 6 2 32 2 32 4
[Co(NH ) ][Cr(CN) ]; (g) 6, [Co(en) Br ]NO
36 6 2 2 3
29. (a) [Pt(H O) Br ]:
2 2 2
(b) [Pt(NH )(py)(Cl)(Br)]:
3
(c) [Zn(NH ) Cl]+:
33
(d) [Pt(NH ) Cl]+:
33
PAGE: 1206
1192
(e) [Ni(H O) Cl ]:
2 4 2
(f) [Co(C O ) Cl ]3−:
2 42 2
31. (a) tricarbonatocobaltate(III) ion; (b) tetraaminecopper(II) ion; (c) tetraaminedibromocobalt(III) sulfate; (d)
tetraamineplatinum(II) tetrachloroplatinate(II); (e)tris-(ethylenediamine)chromium(III) nitrate; (f)
diaminedibromopalladium(II); (g) potassium pentachlorocuprate(II); (h) diaminedichlorozinc(II)
33. (a) none; (b) none; (c) The two Cl ligands can becisortrans. When they arecis, there will also be an optical
isomer.
35.
37.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1207
1193
39. [Co(H O) ]Cl with three unpaired electrons.
2 6 2
41. (a) 4; (b) 2; (c) 1; (d) 5; (e) 0
43. (a) [Fe(CN) ]4−; (b) [Co(NH ) ]3+; (c) [Mn(CN) ]4−
6 36 6
45. The complex does not have any unpaired electrons. The complex does not have any geometric isomers,
but the mirror image is nonsuperimposable, so it has an optical isomer.
47. No. Au+has a complete 5dsublevel.
Chapter 20
1. There are several sets of answers; one is:
(a) C H
5 12
(b) C H
5 10
(c) C H
5 8
3. Both reactions result in bromine being incorporated into the structure of the product. The difference is the
way in which that incorporation takes place. In the saturated hydrocarbon, an existing C–H bond is
broken, and a bond between the C and the Br can then be formed. In the unsaturated hydrocarbon, the
only bond broken in the hydrocarbon is the π bond whose electrons can be used to form a bond to one of
the bromine atoms in Br (the electrons from the Br–Br bond form the other C–Br bond on the other
2
carbon that was part of the π bond in the starting unsaturated hydrocarbon).
5. Unbranched alkanes have free rotation about the C–C bonds, yielding all orientations of the substituents
about these bonds equivalent, interchangeable by rotation. In the unbranched alkenes, the inability to
rotate about the bond results in fixed (unchanging) substituent orientations, thus permitting
different isomers. Since these concepts pertain to phenomena at the molecular level, this explanation
involves the microscopic domain.
7. They are the same compound because each is a saturated hydrocarbon containing an unbranched chain of
six carbon atoms.
9. (a) C H
6 14
PAGE: 1208
1194
(b) C H
6 14
(c) C H
6 12
(d) C H
6 12
(e) C H
6 10
(f) C H
6 10
11. (a) 2,2-dibromobutane; (b) 2-chloro-2-methylpropane; (c) 2-methylbutane; (d) 1-butyne; (e)
4-fluoro-4-methyl-1-octyne; (f)trans-1-chloropropene; (g) 4-methyl-1-pentene
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1209
1195
13.
15.
17. (a) 2,2,4-trimethylpentane; (b) 2,2,3-trimethylpentane, 2,3,4-trimethylpentane, and
2,3,3-trimethylpentane:
19.
21. In the following, the carbon backbone and the appropriate number of hydrogen atoms are shown in
condensed form:
PAGE: 1210
1196
23.
In acetylene, the bonding usessphybrids on carbon atoms andsorbitals on hydrogen atoms. In benzene,
the carbon atoms aresp2hybridized.
25. (a)
(b)
27. 65.2 g
29. 9.328 102kg
31. (a) ethyl alcohol, ethanol: CH CH OH; (b) methyl alcohol, methanol: CH OH; (c) ethylene glycol,
3 2 3
ethanediol: HOCH CH OH; (d) isopropyl alcohol, 2-propanol: CH CH(OH)CH ; (e) glycerine,
2 2 3 3
l,2,3-trihydroxypropane: HOCH CH(OH)CH OH
2 2
33. (a) 1-ethoxybutane, butyl ethyl ether; (b) 1-ethoxypropane, ethyl propyl ether; (c) 1-methoxypropane,
methyl propyl ether
35. HOCH CH OH, two alcohol groups; CH OCH OH, ether and alcohol groups
2 2 3 2
37. (a)
(b) 4.593 102L
39. (a)
(b)
41. (a)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1211
1197
(b)
(c)
43. A ketone contains a group bonded to two additional carbon atoms; thus, a minimum of three carbon
atoms are needed.
45. Since they are both carboxylic acids, they each contain the –COOH functional group and its
characteristics. The difference is the hydrocarbon chain in a saturated fatty acid contains no double or
triple bonds, whereas the hydrocarbon chain in an unsaturated fatty acid contains one or more multiple
bonds.
47. (a) CH CH(OH)CH : all carbons are tetrahedral; (b) the end carbons are tetrahedral and the
3 3
central carbon is trigonal planar; (c) CH OCH : all are tetrahedral; (d) CH COOH: the methyl carbon is
3 3 3
tetrahedral and the acid carbon is trigonal planar; (e) CH CH CH CH(CH )CHCH : all are tetrahedral
3 2 2 3 2
except the right-most two carbons, which are trigonal planar
49.
51. (a)
(b)
PAGE: 1212
1198
53.
55. Trimethyl amine: trigonal pyramidal,sp3; trimethyl ammonium ion: tetrahedral,sp3
57.
59.
61. CH CH =CHCH (sp2) + Cl CH CH(Cl)H(Cl)CH (sp3); 2C H (sp2) + 15O 12CO (sp) + 6H O
3 3 3 3 6 6 2 2 2
63. The carbon in CO 2−, initially atsp2, changes hybridization tospin CO .
3 2
Chapter 21
1. (a) sodium-24; (b) aluminum-29; (c) krypton-73; (d) iridium-194
3. (a) (b) (c) (d)
5. (a) (b) (c) (d)
7. Nuclear reactions usually change one type of nucleus into another; chemical changes rearrange atoms.
Nuclear reactions involve much larger energies than chemical reactions and have measureable mass
changes.
9. (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)
11. (a) A nucleon is any particle contained in the nucleus of the atom, so it can refer to protons and neutrons.
(b) An α particle is one product of natural radioactivity and is the nucleus of a helium atom. (c) A β particle
is a product of natural radioactivity and is a high-speed electron. (d) A positron is a particle with the same
mass as an electron but with a positive charge. (e) Gamma rays compose electromagnetic radiation of high
energy and short wavelength. (f) Nuclide is a term used when referring to a single type of nucleus. (g) The
mass number is the sum of the number of protons and the number of neutrons in an element. (h) The
atomic number is the number of protons in the nucleus of an element.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1213
1199
13. (a) (b) (c) (d)
15. (a) (b) (c) (d)
17. (a) 148.8 MeV per atom; (b) 7.808 MeV/nucleon
19. α (helium nuclei), β (electrons), β+(positrons), and η (neutrons) may be emitted from a radioactive
element, all of which are particles; γ rays also may be emitted.
21. (a) conversion of a neutron to a proton: (b) conversion of a proton to a neutron; the
positron has the same mass as an electron and the same magnitude of positive charge as the electron has
negative charge; when the n:p ratio of a nucleus is too low, a proton is converted into a neutron with the
emission of a positron: (c) In a proton-rich nucleus, an inner atomic electron can be
absorbed. In simplest form, this changes a proton into a neutron:
23. The electron pulled into the nucleus was most likely found in the 1sorbital. As an electron falls from a
higher energy level to replace it, the difference in the energy of the replacement electron in its two energy
levels is given off as an X-ray.
25. Manganese-51 is most likely to decay by positron emission. The n:p ratio for Cr-53 is = 1.21; for
Mn-51, it is = 1.04; for Fe-59, it is = 1.27. Positron decay occurs when the n:p ratio is low. Mn-51
has the lowest n:p ratio and therefore is most likely to decay by positron emission. Besides, is a stable
isotope, and decays by beta emission.
27. (a) β decay; (b) α decay; (c) positron emission; (d) β decay; (e) α decay
29.
31. Half-life is the time required for half the atoms in a sample to decay. Example (answers may vary): For
C-14, the half-life is 5770 years. A 10-g sample of C-14 would contain 5 g of C-14 after 5770 years; a 0.20-g
sample of C-14 would contain 0.10 g after 5770 years.
33. or 97.3%
35. 2 103y
37. 0.12 h–1
39. (a) 3.8 billion years; (b) The rock would be younger than the age calculated in part (a). If Sr was originally
in the rock, the amount produced by radioactive decay would equal the present amount minus the initial
amount. As this amount would be smaller than the amount used to calculate the age of the rock and the
age is proportional to the amount of Sr, the rock would be younger.
41. c= 0; This shows that no Pu-239 could remain since the formation of the earth. Consequently, the
plutonium now present could not have been formed with the uranium.
43. 17.5 MeV
45. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
47. (a) (b) (c)
(d)
49. Two nuclei must collide for fusion to occur. High temperatures are required to give the nuclei enough
kinetic energy to overcome the very strong repulsion resulting from their positive charges.
51. A nuclear reactor consists of the following:
1. A nuclear fuel. A fissionable isotope must be present in large enough quantities to sustain a controlled
chain reaction. The radioactive isotope is contained in tubes called fuel rods.
2. A moderator. A moderator slows neutrons produced by nuclear reactions so that they can be absorbed
by the fuel and cause additional nuclear reactions.
3. A coolant. The coolant carries heat from the fission reaction to an external boiler and turbine where it
is transformed into electricity.
4. A control system. The control system consists of control rods placed between fuel rods to absorb
neutrons and is used to adjust the number of neutrons and keep the rate of the chain reaction at a safe
PAGE: 1214
1200
level.
5. A shield and containment system. The function of this component is to protect workers from
radiation produced by the nuclear reactions and to withstand the high pressures resulting from high-
temperature reactions.
53. The fission of uranium generates heat, which is carried to an external steam generator (boiler). The
resulting steam turns a turbine that powers an electrical generator.
55. Introduction of either radioactive Ag+or radioactive Cl–into the solution containing the stated reaction,
with subsequent time given for equilibration, will produce a radioactive precipitate that was originally
devoid of radiation.
57. (a) (b) 37.6 days
59. Alpha particles can be stopped by very thin shielding but have much stronger ionizing potential than beta
particles, X-rays, and γ-rays. When inhaled, there is no protective skin covering the cells of the lungs,
making it possible to damage the DNA in those cells and cause cancer.
61. (a) 7.64 109Bq; (b) 2.06 10−2Ci
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1215
Index 1201
INDEX
Symbols Amines 1005 basic 697
Δoct 963 Amontons’s law 426 battery 834
π* antibonding molecular amorphous 872 becquerel (Bq) 1063
orbital 396 amorphous solids 510 Beta (β) decay 1032
σs molecular orbital 395 amphiphilic 587 Beta particles 1029
σs*σs* molecular orbital 396 amphiprotic 695 bicarbonate anion 891
amphoteric 695 Bidentate ligands 950
A amplitude 259 bimolecular reaction 631
absolute zero 427 analyte 191 binary acid 102
accuracy 40 anion 72 binary compounds 96
acid 169 anode 821 binding energy per nucleon
acid anhydrides 879 antibonding orbitals 396 1027
acid ionization 694 antimatter 1029 biofuel 239
acid-base indicators 734 aqueous solution 137 Bismuth 866
acid-base reaction 169 aromatic hydrocarbons 993 blackbody 264
acid-ionization constant, Ka Arrhenius 694 body-centered cubic (BCC)
703 Arrhenius equation 627 solid 519
acidic 697 atmosphere (atm) 417 body-centered cubic unit cell
acids 96 atom 19,62 519
actinide series 936 atomic mass 77 Bohr 269,270
actinides 87 atomic mass unit (amu) 71 Bohr’s model 270
actinoid series 936 atomic number (Z) 72 boiling point 495
activated complex 626 atomic orbital 280 boiling point elevation 571
activation energy (Ea) 626 Atwater system 232 boiling point elevation constant
active electrodes 823 Aufbau principle 288 571
activity 582 autoionization 695 Boltzmann 788
actual yield 188 Autumn 481 bomb calorimeter 230
addition reaction 991 average rate 601 bond angle 343
adhesive forces 490 Avogadro’s law 433 bond dipole moment 354
Alcohols 995 Avogadro’s number (NA) 121 bond distance 343
aldehydes 999 axial position 347 bond length 317
alkali metals 87 bond order 400
Alkaline batteries 835 B bonding orbitals 396
alkaline earth metals 87,861 balanced 161 Borates 875
Alkanes 978 Balmer 269 Born 279
alkenes 988 band of stability 1025 Born-Haber cycle 341
alkyl group 984 bar 417 Boyle 694
alkynes 992 barometer 418 Boyle’s law 431
Allotropes 866 Bartlett 920 Bragg 530
alloys 548 base 171 Bragg equation 530
Alpha (α) decay 1032 base anhydrides 904 Brønsted-Lowry acid 694
Alpha particles 1029 Base ionization 694 Brønsted-Lowry base 694
alpha particles (α particles) 69 base-ionization constant (Kb) buffer 724
Amides 1008 704 buffer capacity 727
PAGE: 1216
1202 Index
buret 191 complete ionic equation 165 degenerate orbitals 283,397
compounds 16 density 31
C compressibility factor (Z) 459 deposition 499
calories (cal) 216 concentrated 137 diamagnetic 394
calorimeter 221 concentration 137 Diffraction 530
calorimetry 221 concentration cell 833 diffusion 449
capillary action 490 condensation 493 dilute 137
carbonates 891 containment system 1051 Dilution 141
carbonyl group 999 continuous spectrum 264 dimensional analysis 42
carboxylic acids 1003 control rods 1050 dipole moment 354
Carnot 787 coordinate covalent bond 763 dipole-dipole attraction 482
catalysts 607 coordination compounds 938, Diprotic acids 722
cathode 821 949 diprotic base 724
cathode ray 66 coordination isomers 957 dispersed phase 585
cathodic protection 842 coordination number 517,949 dispersion force 478
cations 72 coordination sphere 949 dispersion medium 585
cell notations 822 core electrons 291 disproportionation reactions
cell potentials, Ecell 824 Corrosion 840 879
cell schematics 822 Cottrell 589 dissociation 554
Celsius (°C) 30 covalent bonds 92,317 dissociation constant (Kd) 765
central metal 949 Covalent network solids 512 dissolved 137
Chadwick 70,1030 covalent radius 296 donor atom 949
chain reaction 1046 crenation 578 double bond 325
chalcogens 87 Crick 532 Downs cell 867
Charles’s law 428 critical mass 1047 dry cell 835
chelate 950 critical point 508 dynamic equilibrium 493
chelating ligands 950 Cronin 82
chemical change 24 crystal field splitting 963 E
chemical equation 160 crystal field theory 962 effective nuclear charge, Zeff
chemical property 24 crystalline solids 510 298
chemical reduction 869 cubic centimeter (cm3) 31 effusion 450
chemical symbol 73 cubic closest packing (CCP) 520 eg orbitals 963
chemical thermodynamics 233 cubic meter (m3) 31 electrode potential (EX) 825
chemistry 11 Curie 1030 electrolysis 843
chemotherapy 1057 curie (Ci) 1063 electrolytes 552
chlor-alkali process 904 electromagnetic radiation 258
cis configuration 955 D electromagnetic spectrum 259
Clausius 787 d orbitals 280 electron 67
Clausius-Clapeyron equation d-block elements 935 electron affinity 302
496 Dalton 19 Electron capture 1033
coefficients 160 Dalton (Da) 71 electron configuration 288
cohesive forces 488 Dalton’s atomic theory 62 electron volts (eV) 1024
colligative properties 564 Dalton’s law of partial electron-pair geometry 345
Collision theory 625 pressures 440 electronegativity 319
colloidal dispersions 583 daughter nuclide 1031 electroplating 846
colloids 583 Davisson 276 element 62
color change interval 735 Davy 694 elementary reaction 630
combustion analysis 195 de Broglie 275 elements 16
combustion reactions 177 Debye 582 empirical formula 81
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1217
Index 1203
empirical formula mass 135 freezing point 499 heat capacity (C) 216
emulsifying agent 586 freezing point depression 573 Heisenberg uncertainty
emulsion 586 freezing point depression principle 278
enantiomers 956 constant 573 hemolysis 578
end point 191 frequency 259 Henderson 729
endothermic process 215 frequency factor 627 Henderson-Hasselbalch
Energy 213 fuel cell 839 equation 729
enthalpy (H) 234 Fuller 313,881 Henry’s law 557,559
enthalpy change (ΔH) 234 functional group 988 Héroult 868
entropy (S) 787 fundamental unit of charge (e) hertz (Hz) 259
equatorial position 347 71 Hess’s law 242,245
equilibrium 658 fusion 1053 heterogeneous catalyst 639
equilibrium constant, K 663 fusion reactor 1054 heterogeneous equilibrium 667
equivalence point 191 heterogeneous mixture 17
esters 1003 G hexagonal closest packing
Ethers 996 galvanic cells 821 (HCP) 521
exact number 34 galvanization 842 high-spin complexes 964
excess reactant 186 Gamma emission (γ emission) holes 525
excited electronic state 271 1032 homogeneous catalyst 636
exothermic process 215 gamma rays (γ) 1029 homogeneous equilibrium 665
expansion work 233 gas 14 homogeneous mixture 17
extensive property 25 Gay-Lussac’s law 426 homonuclear diatomic
external beam radiation Geiger 69 molecules 395
therapy 1056 Geiger counter 1062 Hu 481
Geim 514,882 Hückel 582
F gel 590 Hund’s rule 290
f orbitals 281 Germer 276 Huygens 258
f-block elements 935 Gibbs 797 hybrid orbitals 380
face-centered cubic (FCC) solid Gibbs free energy (G) 797 hybridization 380
520 Gouy 394 hydrates 98
face-centered cubic unit cell Graham’s law of effusion 450 hydrocarbons 237
519 gravimetric analysis 193 hydrogen bonding 483
factor-label method 42 gray (Gy) 1063 hydrogen carbonates 891
Fahrenheit 45 Greaney 481 hydrogen halides 890
first law of thermodynamics ground electronic state 271 hydrogen sulfates 907
233 groups 85 hydrogen sulfites 907
first transition series 936 hydrogenation 887
fissile 1047 H hydrometallurgy 943
fission 1044 Haber process 888 hydrostatic pressure 419
fissionable 1047 half-cells 821 hydroxides 901
formal charge 332 half-life 1035 hypertonic 578
formation constant (Kf) 765 half-life of a reaction (t1/2) 622 hypervalent molecules 331
formula mass 118 half-reaction 174 hypothesis 11
fourth transition series 936 halides 917 hypotonic 578
Franklin 532 Hall 868
Frasch process 913 Hall–Héroult cell 868 I
free energy change (ΔG) 797 halogens 87 ideal gas 433
free radicals 330 Hasselbalch 729 ideal gas constant 433
freezing 499 Heat (q) 215 ideal gas law 433
PAGE: 1218
1204 Index
ideal solution 549 kinetic molecular theory 454 mass 15
immiscible 561 Kohn 398 mass defect 1023
indicators 191 mass number (A) 72
induced dipole 478 L mass percentage 144
inert electrode 823 lanthanide series 936 mass-energy equivalence
inert gases 87 lanthanides 87 equation 1023
inert pair effect 315 lanthanoid series 936 mass-volume percent 146
initial rate 601 lattice energy (ΔHlattice) 340 Matter 14
inner transition metals 87 Lavoisier 437 Maxwell 258
insoluble 166 law of conservation of matter mean free path 449
instantaneous dipole 478 15 melting 498
instantaneous rate 601 law of constant composition 64 melting point 499
integrated rate laws 614 law of definite proportions 64 Mendeleev 85
intensive property 25 law of mass action 663 Metallic solids 511
interference patterns 262 law of multiple proportions 64 metalloid 858
interhalogens 919 laws 12 metalloids 86
intermediates 630 Le Châtelier’s principle 669 metals 86,858
intermolecular forces 476 lead acid battery 838 meter (m) 29
internal energy (U) 233 length 29 method of initial rates 609
internal radiation therapy Lewis 763 Meyer 85
(brachytherapy) 1056 Lewis acid 764 microscopic domain 12
International System of Units Lewis acid-base adduct 764 microstate 788
28 Lewis acid-base chemistry 764 millicurie (mCi) 1063
interstitial sites 515 Lewis base 764 Millikan 67
ion 72 Lewis structures 324 milliliter (mL) 31
ion-dipole attraction 553 Lewis symbol 323 miscible 560
ion-product constant for water, ligands 765,949 mixture 17
Kw 695 limiting reactant 186 Molality 565
ionic bonds 92,314 line spectra 268 molar mass 121
ionic compound 93 linear 344 Molarity (M) 137
Ionic solids 511 linear combination of atomic mole 121
ionization energy 299 orbitals (LCAO) 395 mole fraction (X) 441
Ionization isomers 957 Linkage isomers 956 molecular compounds 95
ionizing radiation 1060 liquid 14 molecular equation 164
isoelectronic 299 liter (L) 31 molecular formula 79
isomers 83 Lithium ion batteries 837 molecular mass 81
isomorphous 520 London 478 molecular orbital (Ψ2) 395
isotonic 578 London dispersion force 478 molecular orbital diagram 399
isotopes 70 lone pairs 324 Molecular orbital theory 395
IUPAC 30,983 low-spin complexes 964 Molecular solids 512
molecular structure 334,345
J M molecularity 631
joule (J) 216 macroscopic domain 12 molecule 20
magic numbers 1026 Molina 637
K magnetic quantum number monatomic ions 91
kelvin (K) 30 282 monodentate 949
ketones 999 main-group elements 87 monoprotic acids 721
kilogram (kg) 30 manometer 420 ms 283
kinetic energy 213 Marsden 69
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1219
Index 1205
N reactions 176 Positron emission (β+ decay
Nagaoka 68 oxides 901 1033
Nernst equation 832 oxidizing agent (oxidant) 175 Positrons 1029
net ionic equation 165 oxyacids 103,715 potential energy 213
neutral 697 Oxyanions 91 pounds per square inch (psi)
neutralization reaction 172 ozone 900 417
neutrons 70 precipitate 166
Newton 258 P precipitation reaction 166
Nickel-cadmium 836 p orbitals 280 precision 40
Nitrates 908 pairing energy (P) 964 pressure 416
nitrogen fixation 893 paramagnetism 393 primary cells 835
noble gases 87 parent nuclide 1031 principal quantum number
node 378 partial pressure 440 279
nodes 263 partially miscible 562 products 160
Nomenclature 96 particle accelerators 1042 proton 70
nonelectrolytes 552 parts per billion (ppb) 147 pure covalent bond 318
nonionizing radiation 1060 parts per million (ppm) 147 pure substance 16
nonmetals 86 pascal (Pa) 417
nonspontaneous process 784 passivation 859 Q
normal boiling point 495 Pauli exclusion principle 284 quantitative analysis 190
Novoselov 514,882 Pauling 320 quantization 263
nuclear binding energy 1023 percent composition 129 quantum mechanics 279
Nuclear chemistry 1022 percent ionization 703 quantum numbers 274
Nuclear fuel 1049 percent yield 188
nuclear moderator 1049 periodic law 85 R
nuclear reactions 1028 periodic table 85 radiation absorbed dose (rad)
nuclear reactor 1048 periods 85 1063
Nuclear transmutation 1042 peroxides 901 Radiation dosimeters 1062
nucleons 1022 Perrier 1031 Radiation therapy 1056
nucleus 69 pH 697 radioactive decay 1031
nuclide 1022 phase diagram 503 radioactive decay series 1034
nutritional calorie (Calorie) 231 photons 266 radioactive label 1055
photosynthesis 900 radioactive tracer 1055
O physical change 23 radioactivity 1026
octahedral 344 physical property 23 radiocarbon dating 1038
octahedral hole 525 pi (π) bonding molecular radioisotope 1026
octet rule 324 orbital 396 radiometric dating 1037
optical isomers 956 pi bond (π bond) 378 Raoult’s law 568
Orbital diagrams 289 Pidgeon process 870 rare earth elements 937
organic compounds 978 plasma 14 rate constant 608
osmosis 576 platinum metals 938 rate equations 607
osmotic pressure (Π) 576 pnictogens 87 rate expression 600
Ostwald process 907 pOH 697 Rate laws 607
overall reaction order 608 polar covalent bond 319 rate of diffusion 450
overlap 376 polar molecule 354 rate of reaction 600
oxidation 174 polarizability 479 rate-limiting step 632
oxidation number 175 polyatomic ions 91 RBE 1063
oxidation state 175 polydentate ligand 950 reactants 160
Oxidation-reduction (redox) polymorphs 876 reaction diagrams 627
PAGE: 1220
1206 Index
reaction mechanism 630 significant digits 35 standard molar volume 436
reaction orders 608 significant figures 35 standard state 237
reaction quotient (Q) 660 Silicates 877 standard temperature and
reactor coolant 1050 simple cubic structure 517 pressure (STP) 436
reducing agent (reductant) 175 simple cubic unit cell 517 Standing waves 263
reduction 175 single bond 324 state function 234
relative biological effectiveness Single-displacement stationary waves 263
1063 (replacement) reactions 177 Steel 942
representative elements 87, skeletal structure 979 stepwise ionization 722
858 Smalley 329,881 stoichiometric factors 181
representative metals 858 smelting 940 stoichiometry 181
resonance 335 Soddy 70 strong acids 170
resonance forms 335 solid 14 strong bases 171
resonance hybrid 335 Solomon 448 strong electrolyte 552
reversible process 787 solubility 166,555 strong nuclear force 1023
Reversible reactions 658 soluble 166 strong-field ligands 964
roentgen equivalent for man solute 137 structural formula 80
(rem) 1063 solution 17 structural isomers 83
root mean square speed 456 solvation 550 subcritical mass 1047
rounding 36 solvent 137 sublimation 499
Rutherford 69,270,1030 sp hybrid orbitals 381 subshell 280
Rydberg 269 sp2 hybrid orbitals 382 substituents 983
sp3 hybrid orbitals 384 substitution reaction 987
S sp3d hybrid orbitals 386 sulfates 907
s orbitals 280 sp3d2 hybrid orbitals 386 sulfites 907
s-p mixing 402 space lattice 528 superconductor 947
sacrificial anodes 842 spatial isomers 84 supercritical fluid 508
salt 172 specific heat capacity (c) 216 supercritical mass 1047
salt bridge 821 spectator ions 165 superoxides 901
saturated 555 spectrochemical series 963 supersaturated 555
saturated hydrocarbons 978 spin quantum number 283 Surface tension 489
scientific method 12 spontaneous process 549,784 surroundings 221
scintillation counter 1062 standard cell potential, E°cell suspensions 583
second (s) 31 824 symbolic domain 13
second law of thermodynamics standard electrode potential, system 221
793 E°X 825
second transition series 936 Standard enthalpy of T
secondary (angular momentum) combustion 237 t2g orbitals 963
quantum number 280 standard enthalpy of formation temperature 45,213
secondary cells 835 ΔHf°ΔHf° 240 termolecular reaction 632
Segre 1031 Standard entropies (S°) 795 tetrahedral 344
selective precipitation 759 standard entropy change (ΔS°) tetrahedral hole 525
semipermeable membranes 795 theoretical yield 188
576 standard free energy changes, theories 12
series 85 ΔG° 798 Thermal energy 213
shells 279 standard free energy of thermochemistry 212
SI Units 28 formation ΔGf° 799 third law of thermodynamics
sievert (Sv) 1063 standard hydrogen electrode 795
sigma bonds (σ bonds) 378 (SHE) 824 third transition series 936
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1221
Index 1207
Thomson 66 Units 28 W
titrant 191 unsaturated 555 Watson 532
titration analysis 191 urms 456 wave 258
titration curve 730 wave-particle duality 266
torr 419 V wavefunctions 279
trans configuration 955 Vacancies 515 wavelength 259
transition metals 87 Valence bond theory 376 weak acids 170
transition state 626 valence electrons 291 weak bases 171
transmutation 1042 valence shell 294 weak electrolyte 552
transuranium elements 1044 Valence shell electron-pair weak-field ligands 964
trigonal bipyramidal 344 repulsion theory (VSEPR Weight 15
trigonal planar 344 theory) 343 Wilkins 532
triple bond 325 van der Waals equation 460 Wohler 977
triple point 506 van der Waals forces 478 work (w) 213
triprotic acid 724 van’t Hoff factor (i) 581
Tyndall effect 584 vapor pressure 493 X
vapor pressure of water 443 X-ray crystallography 530
U vaporization 493
uncertainty 34 vector 354 Y
unified atomic mass unit (u) 71 viscosity 487 Young 258
unimolecular reaction 631 voltaic cells 821
unit cell 516 Volume 31
unit conversion factor 42 volume percentage 146
