PAGE: 23
12 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
structureandfunction,whilebiologistswhostudyanatomyinvestigatethestructureofanentireorganism.Those
biologistsstudyingphysiology,however,focusontheinternalfunctioningofanorganism.Someareasofbiology
focusononlyparticulartypesoflivingthings.Forexample,botanistsexploreplants,whilezoologistsspecialize
in animals.
Scientific Reasoning
One thing is common to all forms of science: an ultimate goal “to know.” Curiosity and inquiry are the driving
forces for the development of science. Scientists seek to understand the world and the way it operates. To do
this, they use two methods of logical thinking: inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning.
Inductivereasoningisaformoflogicalthinkingthatusesrelatedobservationstoarriveatageneralconclusion.
Thistypeofreasoningiscommonindescriptivescience.Alifescientistsuchasabiologistmakesobservations
and records them. These data can be qualitative or quantitative, and one can supplement the raw data with
drawings, pictures, photos, or videos. From many observations, the scientist can infer conclusions (inductions)
based on evidence. Inductive reasoning involves formulating generalizations inferred from careful observation
and analyzing a large amount of data. Brain studies provide an example. In this type of research, scientists
observe many live brains while people are engaged in a specific activity, such as viewing images of food.
The scientist then predicts the part of the brain that “lights up” during this activity to be the part controlling
the response to the selected stimulus, in this case, images of food. Excess absorption of radioactive sugar
derivativesbyactiveareasofthebraincausesthevariousareasto"lightup".Scientistsuseascannertoobserve
the resultant increase in radioactivity. Then, researchers can stimulate that part of the brain to see if similar
responses result.
Deductivereasoningordeductionisthetypeoflogicusedinhypothesis-basedscience.Indeductivereason,the
pattern of thinking moves in the opposite direction as compared to inductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning
is a form of logical thinking that uses a general principle or law to forecast specific results. From those general
principles,ascientistcanextrapolateandpredictthespecificresultsthatwouldbevalidaslongasthegeneral
principlesarevalid.Studiesinclimatechangecanillustratethistypeofreasoning.Forexample,scientistsmay
predict that if the climate becomes warmer in a particular region, then the distribution of plants and animals
should change.
Both types of logical thinking are related to the two main pathways of scientific study: descriptive science and
hypothesis-based science. Descriptive (or discovery) science, which is usually inductive, aims to observe,
explore, and discover, while hypothesis-based science, which is usually deductive, begins with a specific
questionorproblemandapotentialanswerorsolutionthatonecantest.Theboundarybetweenthesetwoforms
ofstudyisoftenblurred,andmostscientificendeavorscombinebothapproaches.Thefuzzyboundarybecomes
apparentwhenthinkingabouthoweasilyobservationcanleadtospecificquestions.Forexample,agentleman
inthe1940sobservedthattheburrseedsthatstucktohisclothesandhisdog’sfurhadatinyhookstructure.On
closer inspection, he discovered that the burrs’ gripping device was more reliable than a zipper. He eventually
experimented to find the best material that acted similar, and produced the hook-and-loop fastener popularly
known today as Velcro. Descriptive science and hypothesis-based science are in continuous dialogue.
The Scientific Method
Biologistsstudythelivingworldbyposingquestionsaboutitandseekingscience-basedresponses.Knownas
scientific method, this approach is common to other sciences as well. The scientific method was used even in
ancienttimes,butEngland’sSirFrancisBacon(1561–1626)firstdocumentedit(Figure1.5).Hesetupinductive
methods for scientific inquiry. The scientific method is not used only by biologists; researchers from almost all
fields of study can apply it as a logical, rational problem-solving method.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 24
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 13
Figure1.5HistorianscreditSirFrancisBacon(1561–1626)asthefirsttodefinethescientificmethod.(credit:Paulvan
Somer)
Thescientificprocesstypicallystartswithanobservation(oftenaproblemtosolve)thatleadstoaquestion.Let’s
thinkaboutasimpleproblemthatstartswithanobservationandapplythescientificmethodtosolvetheproblem.
OneMondaymorning,astudentarrivesatclassandquicklydiscoversthattheclassroomistoowarm.Thatisan
observationthatalsodescribesaproblem:theclassroomistoowarm.Thestudentthenasksaquestion:“Why
is the classroom so warm?”
Proposing a Hypothesis
Recall that a hypothesis is a suggested explanation that one can test. To solve a problem, one can propose
severalhypotheses.Forexample,onehypothesismightbe,“Theclassroomiswarmbecausenooneturnedon
theairconditioning.”However,therecouldbeotherresponsestothequestion,andthereforeonemaypropose
otherhypotheses.Asecondhypothesismightbe,“Theclassroomiswarmbecausethereisapowerfailure,and
so the air conditioning doesn’t work.”
Onceonehasselectedahypothesis,thestudentcanmakeaprediction.Apredictionissimilartoahypothesis
but it typically has the format “If . . . then . . . .” For example, the prediction for the first hypothesis might be, “If
the student turns on the air conditioning,thenthe classroom will no longer be too warm.”
Testing a Hypothesis
Avalidhypothesismustbetestable.Itshouldalsobefalsifiable,meaningthatexperimentalresultscandisprove
it.Importantly,sciencedoesnotclaimto“prove”anythingbecausescientificunderstandingsarealwayssubject
tomodificationwithfurtherinformation.Thisstep—opennesstodisprovingideas—iswhatdistinguishessciences
from non-sciences. The presence of the supernatural, for instance, is neither testable nor falsifiable. To test
a hypothesis, a researcher will conduct one or more experiments designed to eliminate one or more of the
hypotheses.Eachexperimentwillhaveoneormorevariablesandoneormorecontrols.Avariableisanypart
oftheexperimentthatcanvaryorchangeduringtheexperiment.Thecontrolgroupcontainseveryfeatureof
the experimental group except it is not given the manipulation that the researcher hypothesizes. Therefore, if
the experimental group's results differ from the control group, the difference must be due to the hypothesized
manipulation,ratherthansomeoutsidefactor.Lookforthevariablesandcontrolsintheexamplesthatfollow.To
test the first hypothesis, the student would find out if the air conditioning is on. If the air conditioning is turned
on but does not work, there should be another reason, and the student should reject this hypothesis. To test
the second hypothesis, the student could check if the lights in the classroom are functional. If so, there is no
powerfailureandthestudentshouldrejectthishypothesis.Thestudentsshouldtesteachhypothesisbycarrying
out appropriate experiments. Be aware that rejecting one hypothesis does not determine whether or not one
can accept the other hypotheses. It simply eliminates one hypothesis that is not valid (Figure 1.6). Using the
scientific method, the student rejects the hypotheses that are inconsistent with experimental data.
PAGE: 25
14 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
While this “warm classroom” example is based on observational results, other hypotheses and experiments
mighthaveclearercontrols.Forinstance,astudentmightattendclassonMondayandrealizeshehaddifficulty
concentratingonthelecture.Oneobservationtoexplainthisoccurrencemightbe,“WhenIeatbreakfastbefore
class,Iambetterabletopayattention.”Thestudentcouldthendesignanexperimentwithacontroltotestthis
hypothesis.
In hypothesis-based science, researchers predict specific results from a general premise. We call this type of
reasoning deductive reasoning: deduction proceeds from the general to the particular. However, the reverse
of the process is also possible: sometimes, scientists reach a general conclusion from a number of specific
observations. We call this type of reasoning inductive reasoning, and it proceeds from the particular to the
general. Researchers often use inductive and deductive reasoning in tandem to advance scientific knowledge
(Figure 1.7).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 26
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 15
Figure 1.6 The scientific method consists of a series of well-defined steps. If a hypothesis is not supported by
experimental data, one can propose a new hypothesis.
In the example below, the scientific method is used to solve an everyday problem. Order the scientific
method steps (numbered items) with the process of solving the everyday problem (lettered items). Based
on the results of the experiment, is the hypothesis correct? If it is incorrect, propose some alternative
hypotheses.
1. Observation
2. Question
3. Hypothesis (answer)
4. Prediction
5. Experiment
6. Result
a. There is something wrong with the electrical outlet.
b. If something is wrong with the outlet, my coffeemaker also won’t work when plugged into it.
c. My toaster doesn’t toast my bread.
d. I plug my coffee maker into the outlet.
PAGE: 27
16 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
e. My coffeemaker works.
f. Why doesn’t my toaster work?
Figure 1.7 Scientists use two types of reasoning, inductive and deductive reasoning, to advance scientific
knowledge.Asisthecaseinthisexample,theconclusionfrominductivereasoningcanoftenbecomethepremise
for deductive reasoning.
Decide if each of the following is an example of inductive or deductive reasoning.
1. Allflyingbirdsandinsectshavewings.Birdsandinsectsflaptheirwingsastheymovethroughtheair.
Therefore, wings enable flight.
2. Insectsgenerallysurvivemildwintersbetterthanharshones.Therefore,insectpestswillbecomemore
problematic if global temperatures increase.
3. Chromosomes, the carriers of DNA, are distributed evenly between the daughter cells during cell
division. Therefore, each daughter cell will have the same chromosome set as the mother cell.
4. Animals as diverse as humans, insects, and wolves all exhibit social behavior. Therefore, social
behavior must have an evolutionary advantage.
Thescientificmethodmayseemtoorigidandstructured.Itisimportanttokeepinmindthat,althoughscientists
oftenfollowthissequence,thereisflexibility.Sometimesanexperimentleadstoconclusionsthatfavorachange
in approach. Often, an experiment brings entirely new scientific questions to the puzzle. Many times, science
does not operate in a linear fashion. Instead, scientists continually draw inferences and make generalizations,
finding patterns as their research proceeds. Scientific reasoning is more complex than the scientific method
alonesuggests.Notice,too,thatwecanapplythescientific methodtosolvingproblemsthataren’tnecessarily
scientific in nature.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 28
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 17
Two Types of Science: Basic Science and Applied Science
The scientific community has been debating for the last few decades about the value of different types of
science.Isitvaluabletopursuescienceforthesakeofsimplygainingknowledge,ordoesscientificknowledge
only have worth if we can apply it to solving a specific problem or to bettering our lives? This question focuses
on the differences between two types of science: basic science and applied science.
Basic science or “pure” science seeks to expand knowledge regardless of the short-term application of that
knowledge.Itisnotfocusedondevelopingaproductoraserviceofimmediatepublicorcommercialvalue.The
immediate goal of basic science is knowledge for knowledge’s sake, although this does not mean that, in the
end, it may not result in a practical application.
In contrast, applied science or “technology,” aims to use science to solve real-world problems, making it
possible, for example, to improve a crop yield, find a cure for a particular disease, or save animals threatened
by a natural disaster (Figure 1.8). In applied science, the problem is usually defined for the researcher.
Figure 1.8 After Hurricane Irma struck the Caribbean and Florida in 2017, thousands of baby squirrels like this one
were thrown from their nests. Thanks to applied science, scientists knew how to rehabilitate the squirrel. (credit:
audreyjm529, Flickr)
Some individuals may perceive applied science as “useful” and basic science as “useless.” A question these
people might pose to a scientist advocating knowledge acquisition would be, “What for?” However, a careful
look at the history of science reveals that basic knowledge has resulted in many remarkable applications
of great value. Many scientists think that a basic understanding of science is necessary before researchers
develop an application therefore, applied science relies on the results that researchers generate through basic
science. Other scientists think that it is time to move on from basic science in order to find solutions to actual
problems. Both approaches are valid. It is true that there are problems that demand immediate attention;
however,scientistswouldfindfewsolutionswithoutthehelpofthewideknowledgefoundationthatbasicscience
generates.
Oneexampleofhowbasicandappliedsciencecanworktogethertosolvepracticalproblemsoccurredafterthe
discovery of DNA structure led to an understanding of the molecular mechanisms governing DNA replication.
DNA strands, unique in every human, are in our cells, where they provide the instructions necessary for
life. When DNA replicates, it produces new copies of itself, shortly before a cell divides. Understanding DNA
replicationmechanismsenabledscientiststodeveloplaboratorytechniquesthatresearchersnowusetoidentify
genetic diseases, pinpoint individuals who were at a crime scene, and determine paternity. Without basic
science, it is unlikely that applied science would exist.
Another example of the link between basic and applied research is the Human Genome Project, a study in
which researchers analyzed and mapped each human chromosome to determine the precise sequence of
DNA subunits and each gene's exact location. (The gene is the basic unit of heredity. An individual’s complete
collectionofgenesishisorhergenome.)Researchershavestudiedotherlesscomplexorganismsaspartofthis
project in order to gain a better understanding of human chromosomes. The Human Genome Project (Figure
1.9)reliedonbasicresearchwithsimpleorganismsand,later,withthehumangenome.Animportantendgoal
PAGE: 29
18 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
eventuallybecameusingthedataforappliedresearch,seekingcuresandearlydiagnosesforgeneticallyrelated
diseases.
Figure 1.9 The Human Genome Project was a 13-year collaborative effort among researchers working in several
different science fields. Researchers completed the project, which sequenced the entire human genome, in 2003.
(credit: the U.S. Department of Energy Genome Programs (http://genomics.energy.gov (http://openstax.org/l/
genomics_gov))
Whilescientistsusuallycarefullyplanresearcheffortsinbothbasicscienceandappliedscience,notethatsome
discoveries are made by serendipity, that is, by means of a fortunate accident or a lucky surprise. Scottish
biologist Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin when he accidentally left a petri dish of Staphylococcus
bacteria open. An unwanted mold grew on the dish, killing the bacteria. Fleming's curiosity to investigate the
reason behind the bacterial death, followed by his experiments, led to the discovery of the antibiotic penicillin,
which is produced by the fungus Penicillium. Even in the highly organized world of science, luck—when
combined with an observant, curious mind—can lead to unexpected breakthroughs.
Reporting Scientific Work
Whether scientific research is basic science or applied science, scientists must share their findings in order
for other researchers to expand and build upon their discoveries. Collaboration with other scientists—when
planning,conducting,andanalyzingresults—areallimportantforscientificresearch.Forthisreason,important
aspects of a scientist’s work are communicating with peers and disseminating results to peers. Scientists can
share results by presenting them at a scientific meeting or conference, but this approach can reach only the
selectfewwhoarepresent.Instead,mostscientistspresenttheirresultsinpeer-reviewedmanuscriptsthatare
published in scientific journals. Peer-reviewed manuscripts are scientific papers that a scientist’s colleagues
orpeersreview.Thesecolleaguesarequalifiedindividuals,oftenexpertsinthesameresearcharea,whojudge
whether or not the scientist’s work is suitable for publication. The process of peer review helps to ensure that
theresearchinascientificpaperorgrantproposalisoriginal,significant,logical,andthorough.Grantproposals,
which are requests for research funding, are also subject to peer review. Scientists publish their work so other
scientists can reproduce their experiments under similar or different conditions to expand on the findings. The
experimental results must be consistent with the findings of other scientists.
A scientific paper is very different from creative writing. Although creativity is required to design experiments,
there are fixed guidelines when it comes to presenting scientific results. First, scientific writing must be brief,
concise,andaccurate.Ascientificpaperneedstobesuccinctbutdetailedenoughtoallowpeerstoreproduce
the experiments.
The scientific paper consists of several specific sections—introduction, materials and methods, results, and
discussion. This structure is sometimes called the “IMRaD” format. There are usually acknowledgment and
reference sections as well as an abstract (a concise summary) at the beginning of the paper. There might be
additionalsectionsdependingonthetypeofpaperandthejournalwhereitwillbepublished.Forexample,some
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 30
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 19
review papers require an outline.
The introduction starts with brief, but broad, background information about what is known in the field. A good
introductionalsogivestherationaleofthework.Itjustifiestheworkcarriedoutandalsobrieflymentionstheend
of the paper, where the researcher will present the hypothesis or research question driving the research. The
introductionreferstothepublishedscientificworkofothersandthereforerequirescitationsfollowingthestyleof
the journal. Using the work or ideas of others without proper citation isplagiarism.
The materials and methods section includes a complete and accurate description of the substances the
researchers use, and the method and techniques they use to gather data. The description should be thorough
enoughtoallowanotherresearchertorepeattheexperimentandobtainsimilarresults,butitdoesnothavetobe
verbose.Thissectionwillalsoincludeinformationonhowtheresearchersmademeasurementsandthetypesof
calculationsandstatisticalanalysestheyusedtoexaminerawdata.Althoughthematerialsandmethodssection
gives an accurate description of the experiments, it does not discuss them.
Somejournalsrequirearesultssectionfollowedbyadiscussionsection,butitismorecommontocombineboth.
Ifthejournaldoesnotallowcombiningbothsections,theresultssectionsimplynarratesthefindingswithoutany
further interpretation. The researchers present results with tables or graphs, but they do not present duplicate
information.Inthediscussionsection,theresearcherswillinterprettheresults,describehowvariablesmaybe
related,andattempttoexplaintheobservations.Itisindispensabletoconductanextensiveliteraturesearchto
put the results in the context of previously published scientific research. Therefore, researchers include proper
citations in this section as well.
Finally, the conclusion section summarizes the importance of the experimental findings. While the scientific
paperalmostcertainlyanswersoneormorescientificquestionsthattheresearchersstated,anygoodresearch
should lead to more questions. Therefore, a well-done scientific paper allows the researchers and others to
continue and expand on the findings.
Review articles do not follow the IMRAD format because they do not present original scientific findings, or
primary literature. Instead, they summarize and comment on findings that were published as primary literature
and typically include extensive reference sections.
1.2 | Themes and Concepts of Biology
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify and describe the properties of life
• Describe the levels of organization among living things
• Recognize and interpret a phylogenetic tree
• List examples of different subdisciplines in biology
Biology is the science that studies life, but what exactly is life? This may sound like a silly question with an
obvious response, but it is not always easy to define life. For example, a branch of biology called virology
studiesviruses,whichexhibitsomeofthecharacteristicsoflivingentitiesbutlackothers.Althoughvirusescan
attack living organisms, cause diseases, and even reproduce, they do not meet the criteria that biologists use
to define life. Consequently, virologists are not biologists, strictly speaking. Similarly, some biologists study the
earlymolecularevolutionthatgaverisetolife.Sincetheeventsthatprecededlifearenotbiologicalevents,these
scientists are also excluded from biology in the strict sense of the term.
From its earliest beginnings, biology has wrestled with three questions: What are the shared properties that
makesomething“alive”?Onceweknowsomethingisalive,howdowefindmeaningfullevelsoforganizationin
itsstructure?Finally,whenfacedwiththeremarkablediversityoflife,howdoweorganizethedifferentkindsof
organisms so that we can better understand them? As scientists discover new organisms every day, biologists
continue to seek answers to these and other questions.
Properties of Life
All living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the
environment, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, energy processing,
and evolution. When viewed together, these nine characteristics serve to define life.
PAGE: 31
20 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
Order
Figure 1.10 A toad represents a highly organized structure consisting of cells, tissues, organs, and organ systems.
(credit: “Ivengo”/Wikimedia Commons)
Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple,
single-celled organisms are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms comprise molecules. These in turn
comprisecellorganellesandothercellularinclusions.Inmulticellularorganisms(Figure1.10),similarcellsform
tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate to create organs (body structures with a distinct function). Organs work
together to form organ systems.
Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli
Figure1.11Theleavesofthissensitiveplant(Mimosapudica)willinstantlydroopandfoldwhentouched.Afterafew
minutes, the plant returns to normal. (credit: Alex Lomas)
Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences
and walls, or respond to touch (Figure 1.11). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals
(a process called chemotaxis) or light (phototaxis). Movement toward a stimulus is a positive response, while
movement away from a stimulus is a negative response.
Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/movement_plants) to see how plants respond to a
stimulus—from opening to light, to wrapping a tendril around a branch, to capturing prey.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 32
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 21
Reproduction
Single-celledorganismsreproducebyfirstduplicatingtheirDNA,andthendividingitequallyasthecellprepares
todividetoformtwonewcells.Multicellularorganismsoftenproducespecializedreproductivegermline,gamete,
oocyte,andspermcells.Afterfertilization(thefusionofanoocyteandaspermcell),anewindividualdevelops.
When reproduction occurs, DNA containing genes are passed along to an organism’s offspring. These genes
ensurethattheoffspringwillbelongtothesamespeciesandwillhavesimilarcharacteristics,suchassizeand
shape.
Growth and Development
Organisms grow and develop as a result of genes providing specific instructions that will direct cellular growth
and development. This ensures that a species’ young (Figure 1.12) will grow up to exhibit many of the same
characteristics as its parents.
Figure1.12Althoughnotwolookalike,thesekittenshaveinheritedgenesfrombothparentsandsharemanyofthe
same characteristics. (credit: Rocky Mountain Feline Rescue)
Regulation
Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal
functions, respond to stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two examples of internal functions
regulated in an organism are nutrient transport and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working together)
perform specific functions, suchascarryingoxygenthroughout the body,removingwastes, delivering nutrients
to every cell, and cooling the body.
Homeostasis
Figure 1.13 Polar bears (Ursus maritimus) and other mammals living in ice-covered regions maintain their body
temperature by generating heat and reducing heat loss through thick fur and a dense layer of fat under their skin.
(credit: “longhorndave”/Flickr)
In order to function properly, cells require appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and
appropriate concentration of diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to
the next. Organisms are able to maintain internal conditions within a narrow range almost constantly, despite
PAGE: 33
22 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
environmental changes, through homeostasis (literally, “steady state”). For example, an organism needs to
regulatebodytemperaturethroughthethermoregulationprocess.Organismsthatliveincoldclimates,suchas
the polar bear (Figure 1.13), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve
body heat. Structures that aid in this type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubber, and fat. In hot climates,
organisms have methods (such as perspiration in humans or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess
body heat.
Energy Processing
Figure1.14TheCaliforniacondor(Gymnogypscalifornianus)useschemicalenergyderivedfromfoodtopowerflight.
California condors are an endangered species. This bird has a wing tag that helps biologists identify the individual.
(credit: Pacific Southwest Region U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
All organisms use a source of energy for their metabolic activities. Some organisms capture energy from the
sun and convert it into chemical energy in food. Others use chemical energy in molecules they take in as food
(Figure 1.14).
Levels of Organization of Living Things
Living things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy that we can examine on a scale
from small to large. The atom is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus
surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A molecule is a chemical structure consisting of at least
two atoms held together by one or more chemical bonds. Many molecules that are biologically important are
macromolecules, large molecules that are typically formed by polymerization (a polymer is a large molecule
thatismadebycombiningsmallerunitscalledmonomers,whicharesimplerthanmacromolecules).Anexample
of a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (Figure 1.15), which contains the instructions for the
structure and functioning of all living organisms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 34
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 23
Figure 1.15 All molecules, including this DNA molecule, are comprised of atoms. (credit: “brian0918”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/rotating_DNA) that animates the three-dimensional
structure of the DNA molecule inFigure 1.15.
Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes. We call these organelles.
Organelles are small structures that exist within cells. Examples of organelles include mitochondria and
chloroplasts, which carry out indispensable functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while
chloroplasts enable green plants to utilize the energy in sunlight to make sugars. All living things are made
of cells. The cell itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living organisms. (This
requirement is why scientists do not consider viruses living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses,
they have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell. Only then can they obtain the
materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular.
Scientists classify cells as prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Prokaryotes are single-celled or colonial organisms that
donothavemembrane-boundnuclei.Incontrast,thecellsofeukaryotesdohavemembrane-boundorganelles
and a membrane-bound nucleus.
In larger organisms, cells combine to make tissues, which are groups of similar cells carrying out similar or
related functions. Organs are collections of tissues grouped together performing a common function. Organs
PAGE: 35
24 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
are present not only in animals but also in plants. An organ system is a higher level of organization that
consistsoffunctionallyrelatedorgans.Mammalshavemanyorgansystems.Forinstance,thecirculatorysystem
transports blood through the body and to and from the lungs. It includes organs such as the heart and blood
vessels.Organismsareindividuallivingentities.Forexample,eachtreeinaforestisanorganism.Single-celled
prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also organisms, which biologists typically call microorganisms.
Biologistscollectivelycallalltheindividualsofaspecieslivingwithinaspecificareaapopulation.Forexample,
a forest may include many pine trees, which represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different
populationsmayliveinthesamespecificarea.Forexample,theforestwiththepinetreesincludespopulations
of flowering plants, insects, and microbial populations. A community is the sum of populations inhabiting a
particulararea.Forinstance,allofthetrees,flowers,insects,andotherpopulationsinaforestformtheforest’s
community.Theforestitselfisanecosystem.Anecosystemconsistsofallthelivingthingsinaparticulararea
together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water. At the
highestleveloforganization (Figure 1.16),thebiosphere isthecollectionofallecosystems, anditrepresents
the zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and even the atmosphere to a certain extent.
Figure 1.16 shows the biological levels of organization of living things. From a single organelle to the entire
biosphere,livingorganismsarepartsofahighlystructuredhierarchy.(credit“organelles”:modificationofworkby
UmbertoSalvagnin;credit“cells”:modificationofworkbyBruceWetzel,HarrySchaefer/NationalCancerInstitute;
credit “tissues”: modification of work by Kilbad; Fama Clamosa; Mikael Häggström; credit “organs”: modification
ofworkbyMarianaRuizVillareal;credit“organisms”:modificationofworkby"Crystal"/Flickr;credit“ecosystems”:
modification of work by US Fish and Wildlife Service Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: modification of work by
NASA)
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Tissues exist within organs which exist within organ systems.
b. Communities exist within populations which exist within ecosystems.
c. Organelles exist within cells which exist within tissues.
d. Communities exist within ecosystems which exist in the biosphere.
The Diversity of Life
The fact that biology, as a science, has such a broad scope has to do with the tremendous diversity of life on
earth. The source of this diversity is evolution, the process of gradual change during which new species arise
fromolderspecies.Evolutionarybiologistsstudytheevolutionoflivingthingsineverythingfromthemicroscopic
world to ecosystems.
A phylogenetic tree (Figure 1.17) can summarize the evolution of various life forms on Earth. It is a diagram
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 36
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 25
showingtheevolutionaryrelationshipsamongbiologicalspeciesbasedonsimilaritiesanddifferencesingenetic
or physical traits or both. Nodes and branches comprise a phylogenetic tree. The internal nodes represent
ancestors and are points in evolution when, based on scientific evidence, researchers believe an ancestor has
diverged to form two new species. The length of each branch is proportional to the time elapsed since the split.
Figure1.17MicrobiologistCarlWoeseconstructedthisphylogenetictreeusingdatathatheobtainedfromsequencing
ribosomalRNAgenes.Thetreeshowstheseparationoflivingorganismsintothreedomains:Bacteria,Archaea,and
Eukarya. Bacteria andArchaeaareprokaryotes, single-celledorganismslackingintracellular organelles. (credit: Eric
Gaba; NASA Astrobiology Institute)
PAGE: 37
26 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
Carl Woese and the Phylogenetic Tree
In the past, biologists grouped living organisms into five kingdoms: animals, plants, fungi, protists, and
bacteria. They based the organizational scheme mainly on physical features, as opposed to physiology,
biochemistry, or molecular biology, all of which modern systematics use. American microbiologist Carl
Woese'spioneeringworkintheearly1970shasshown,however,thatlifeonEarthhasevolvedalongthree
lineages, now called domains—Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. The first two are prokaryotic cells with
microbes that lack membrane-enclosed nuclei and organelles. The third domain contains the eukaryotes
and includes unicellular microorganisms (protists), together with the three remaining kingdoms (fungi,
plants,andanimals).WoesedefinedArchaeaasanewdomain,andthisresultedinanewtaxonomictree
(Figure 1.17). Many organisms belonging to the Archaea domain live under extreme conditions and are
calledextremophiles.Toconstructhistree,Woeseusedgeneticrelationshipsratherthansimilaritiesbased
on morphology (shape).
Woese constructed his tree from universally distributed comparative gene sequencing that are present
in every organism, and conserved (meaning that these genes have remained essentially unchanged
throughout evolution). Woese’s approach was revolutionary because comparing physical features are
insufficient to differentiate between the prokaryotes that appear fairly similar in spite of their tremendous
biochemical diversity and genetic variability (Figure 1.18). Comparing homologous DNA and RNA
sequences provided Woese with a sensitive device that revealed the extensive variability of prokaryotes,
and which justified separating the prokaryotes into two domains: bacteria and archaea.
Figure 1.18 These images represent different domains. The (a) bacteria in this micrograph belong to Domain
Bacteria, while the (b) extremophiles (not visible) living in this hot vent belong to Domain Archaea. Both the
(c) sunflower and (d) lion are part of Domain Eukarya. (credit a: modification of work by Drew March; credit b:
modificationofworkbySteveJurvetson;creditc:modificationofworkbyMichaelArrighi;creditd:modificationof
work by Leszek Leszcynski)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 38
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 27
Branches of Biological Study
The scope of biology is broad and therefore contains many branches and subdisciplines. Biologists may
pursue one of those subdisciplines and work in a more focused field. For instance, molecular biology and
biochemistry study biological processes at the molecular and chemical level, including interactions among
moleculessuchasDNA,RNA,andproteins,aswellasthewaytheyareregulated.Microbiology,thestudyof
microorganisms,isthestudyofthestructureandfunctionofsingle-celledorganisms.Itisquiteabroadbranch
itself,anddependingonthesubjectofstudy,therearealsomicrobialphysiologists,ecologists,andgeneticists,
among others.
Forensic Scientist
Forensic science is the application of science to answer questions related to the law. Biologists as well
as chemists and biochemists can be forensic scientists. Forensic scientists provide scientific evidence for
use in courts, and their job involves examining trace materials associated with crimes. Interest in forensic
science has increased in the last few years, possibly because of popular television shows that feature
forensicscientistsonthejob.Also,developingmoleculartechniquesandestablishingDNAdatabaseshave
expandedthetypesofworkthatforensicscientistscando.Theirjobactivitiesareprimarilyrelatedtocrimes
against people such as murder, rape, and assault. Their work involves analyzing samples such as hair,
blood,andotherbodyfluidsandalsoprocessingDNA(Figure1.19)foundinmanydifferentenvironments
andmaterials.Forensicscientistsalsoanalyzeotherbiologicalevidenceleftatcrimescenes,suchasinsect
larvaeorpollengrains.Studentswhowanttopursuecareersinforensicsciencewillmostlikelyhavetotake
chemistry and biology courses as well as some intensive math courses.
Figure 1.19 This forensic scientist works in a DNA extraction room at the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation
Laboratory at Fort Gillem, GA. (credit: United States Army CID Command Public Affairs)
Another field of biological study, neurobiology, studies the biology of the nervous system, and although it
is a branch of biology, it is also an interdisciplinary field of study known as neuroscience. Because of its
interdisciplinary nature, this subdiscipline studies different nervous system functions using molecular, cellular,
developmental, medical, and computational approaches.
PAGE: 39
28 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
Figure 1.20Researchers work on excavating dinosaur fossils at a site in Castellón, Spain. (credit: Mario Modesto)
Paleontology,anotherbranchofbiology,usesfossilstostudylife’shistory(Figure1.20).Zoologyandbotany
arethestudyofanimalsandplants,respectively.Biologistscanalsospecializeasbiotechnologists,ecologists,
or physiologists, to name just a few areas. This is just a small sample of the many fields that biologists can
pursue.
Biology is the culmination of the achievements of the natural sciences from their inception to today. Excitingly,
it is the cradle of emerging sciences, such as the biology of brain activity, genetic engineering of custom
organisms,andthebiologyofevolutionthatusesthelaboratorytoolsofmolecularbiologytoretracetheearliest
stages of life on Earth. A scan of news headlines—whether reporting on immunizations, a newly discovered
species,sportsdoping,oragenetically-modifiedfood—demonstratesthewaybiologyisactiveinandimportant
to our everyday world.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 40
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 29
KEY TERMS
abstract opening section of a scientific paper that summarizes the research and conclusions
applied science form of science that aims to solve real-world problems
atom smallest and most fundamental unit of matter
basic science science that seeks to expand knowledge and understanding regardless of the short-term
application of that knowledge
biochemistry study of the chemistry of biological organisms
biology the study of living organisms and their interactions with one another and their environments
biosphere collection of all the ecosystems on Earth
botany study of plants
cell smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living things
community set of populations inhabiting a particular area
conclusion section of a scientific paper that summarizes the importance of the experimental findings
control part of an experiment that does not change during the experiment
deductive reasoning formoflogicalthinkingthatusesageneralinclusivestatementtoforecastspecificresults
descriptive science (also, discovery science) form of science that aims to observe, explore, and investigate
discussion section of a scientific paper in which the author interprets experimental results, describes how
variables may be related, and attempts to explain the phenomenon in question
ecosystem all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that environment
eukaryote organism with cells that have nuclei and membrane-bound organelles
evolution process of gradual change during which new species arise from older species and some species
become extinct
falsifiable able to be disproven by experimental results
homeostasis ability of an organism to maintain constant internal conditions
hypothesis suggested explanation for an observation, which one can test
hypothesis-based science form of science that begins with a specific question and potential testable answers
inductive reasoning form of logical thinking that uses related observations to arrive at a general conclusion
introduction opening section of a scientific paper, which provides background information about what was
known in the field prior to the research reported in the paper
life science field of science, such as biology, that studies living things
macromolecule large molecule, typically formed by the joining of smaller molecules
materials and methods section of a scientific paper that includes a complete description of the substances,
methods, and techniques that the researchers used to gather data
microbiology study of the structure and function of microorganisms
PAGE: 41
30 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
molecular biology study of biological processes and their regulation at the molecular level, including
interactions among molecules such as DNA, RNA, and proteins
molecule chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemical bonds
natural science field of science that is related to the physical world and its phenomena and processes
neurobiology study of the biology of the nervous system
organ collection of related tissues grouped together performing a common function
organ system level of organization that consists of functionally related interacting organs
organelle small structures that exist within cells and carry out cellular functions
organism individual living entity
paleontology study of life’s history by means of fossils
peer-reviewed manuscript scientific paper that a scientist’s colleagues review who are experts in the field of
study
phylogenetic tree diagramshowingtheevolutionaryrelationshipsamongvariousbiologicalspeciesbasedon
similarities and differences in genetic or physical traits or both; in essence, a hypothesis concerning
evolutionary connections
physical science field of science, such as geology, astronomy, physics, and chemistry, that studies nonliving
matter
plagiarism using other people’s work or ideas without proper citation, creating the false impression that those
are the author’s original ideas
population all of the individuals of a species living within a specific area
prokaryote single-celled organism that lacks organelles and does not have nuclei surrounded by a nuclear
membrane
results sectionofascientificpaperinwhichtheauthornarratestheexperimentalfindingsandpresentsrelevant
figures, pictures, diagrams, graphs, and tables, without any further interpretation
review article paper that summarizes and comments on findings that were published as primary literature
science knowledge that covers general truths or the operation of general laws, especially when acquired and
tested by the scientific method
scientific method methodofresearchwithdefinedstepsthatincludeobservation,formulationofahypothesis,
testing, and confirming or falsifying the hypothesis
serendipity fortunate accident or a lucky surprise
theory tested and confirmed explanation for observations or phenomena
tissue group of similar cells carrying out related functions
variable part of an experiment that the experimenter can vary or change
zoology study of animals
CHAPTER SUMMARY
1.1The Science of Biology
Biology is the science that studies living organisms and their interactions with one another and their
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 42
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 31
environments. Science attempts to describe and understand the nature of the universe in whole or in part by
rational means. Science has many fields. Those fields related to the physical world and its phenomena are
natural sciences.
Science can be basic or applied. The main goal of basic science is to expand knowledge without any
expectation of short-term practical application of that knowledge. The primary goal of applied research,
however, is to solve practical problems.
Science uses two types of logical reasoning. Inductive reasoning uses particular results to produce general
scientific principles. Deductive reasoning is a form of logical thinking that predicts results by applying general
principles. The common thread throughout scientific research is using the scientific method, a step-based
process that consists of making observations, defining a problem, posing hypotheses, testing these
hypotheses, and drawing one or more conclusions. The testing uses proper controls. Scientists present their
results in peer-reviewed scientific papers published in scientific journals. A scientific research paper consists of
several well-defined sections: introduction, materials and methods, results, and, finally, a concluding
discussion. Review papers summarize the conducted research in a particular field over a period of time.
1.2Themes and Concepts of Biology
Biology is the science of life. All living organisms share several key properties such as order, sensitivity or
response to stimuli, reproduction, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, and energy processing.
Living things are highly organized parts of a hierarchy that includes atoms, molecules, organelles, cells,
tissues, organs, and organ systems. In turn, biologists group organisms as populations, communities,
ecosystems, and the biosphere. The great diversity of life today evolved from less-diverse ancestral organisms
over billions of years. We can use a phylogenetic tree to show evolutionary relationships among organisms.
Biology is very broad and includes many branches and subdisciplines. Examples include molecular biology,
microbiology, neurobiology, zoology, and botany, among others.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 1.6In the example below, the scientific 1. All flying birds and insects have wings. Birds
method is used to solve an everyday problem. Order and insects flap their wings as they move
the scientific method steps (numbered items) with the through the air. Therefore, wings enable
process of solving the everyday problem (lettered flight.
items). Based on the results of the experiment, is the 2. Insects generally survive mild winters better
hypothesis correct? If it is incorrect, propose some than harsh ones. Therefore, insect pests will
alternative hypotheses. become more problematic if global
1. Observation temperatures increase.
2. Question 3. Chromosomes, the carriers of DNA,
3. Hypothesis (answer) separate into daughter cells during cell
4. Prediction division. Therefore, each daughter cell will
5. Experiment have the same chromosome set as the
6. Result mother cell.
4. Animals as diverse as humans, insects, and
a. There is something wrong with the electrical wolves all exhibit social behavior. Therefore,
outlet. social behavior must have an evolutionary
b. If something is wrong with the outlet, my advantage.
coffeemaker also won’t work when plugged
3.Figure 1.16Which of the following statements is
into it.
false?
c. My toaster doesn’t toast my bread.
a. Tissues exist within organs which exist
d. I plug my coffee maker into the outlet.
within organ systems.
e. My coffeemaker works.
b. Communities exist within populations which
f. Why doesn’t my toaster work?
exist within ecosystems.
2.Figure 1.7Decide if each of the following is an c. Organelles exist within cells which exist
example of inductive or deductive reasoning. within tissues.
d. Communities exist within ecosystems which
exist in the biosphere.
PAGE: 43
32 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The first forms of life on Earth were ________. 10.The smallest unit of biological structure that
meets the functional requirements of “living” is the
a. plants ________.
b. microorganisms a. organ
c. birds b. organelle
d. dinosaurs c. cell
d. macromolecule
5.A suggested and testable explanation for an event
is called a ________. 11.Viruses are not considered living because they
a. hypothesis ________.
b. variable a. are not made of cells
c. theory b. lack cell nuclei
d. control c. do not contain DNA or RNA
d. cannot reproduce
6.Which of the following sciences is not considered a
natural science? 12.The presence of a membrane-enclosed nucleus
a. biology is a characteristic of ________.
b. astronomy a. prokaryotic cells
c. physics b. eukaryotic cells
d. computer science c. living organisms
d. bacteria
7.The type of logical thinking that uses related
observations to arrive at a general conclusion is 13.A group of individuals of the same species living
called ________. in the same area is called a(n) ________.
a. deductive reasoning a. family
b. the scientific method b. community
c. hypothesis-based science c. population
d. inductive reasoning d. ecosystem
8.The process of ________ helps to ensure that a 14.Which of the following sequences represents the
scientist’s research is original, significant, logical, and hierarchy of biological organization from the most
thorough. inclusive to the least complex level?
a. publication a. organelle, tissue, biosphere, ecosystem,
b. public speaking population
c. peer review b. organ, organism, tissue, organelle, molecule
d. the scientific method c. organism, community, biosphere, molecule,
tissue, organ
9.A person notices that her houseplants that are
d. biosphere, ecosystem, community,
regularly exposed to music seem to grow more
population, organism
quickly than those in rooms with no music. As a
result, she determines that plants grow better when 15.Where in a phylogenetic tree would you expect to
exposed to music. This example most closely find the organism that had evolved most recently?
resembles which type of reasoning?
a. inductive reasoning a. at the base
b. deductive reasoning b. within the branches
c. neither, because no hypothesis was made c. at the nodes
d. both inductive and deductive reasoning d. at the branch tips
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Although the scientific method is used by most of would fall outside the realm of biology.
the sciences, it can also be applied to everyday
19.Thinking about the topic of cancer, write a basic
situations. Think about a problem that you may have
science question and an applied science question
at home, at school, or with your car, and apply the
that a researcher interested in this topic might ask.
scientific method to solve it.
20.Select two items that biologists agree are
17.Give an example of how applied science has had
necessary in order to consider an organism “alive.”
a direct effect on your daily life.
For each, give an example of a nonliving object that
18.Name two topics that are likely to be studied by otherwise fits the definition of “alive.”
biologists, and two areas of scientific study that
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 44
Chapter 1 | The Study of Life 33
21.Consider the levels of organization of the 22.You go for a long walk on a hot day. Give an
biological world, and place each of these items in example of a way in which homeostasis keeps your
order from smallest level of organization to most body healthy.
encompassing: skin cell, elephant, water molecule,
23.Using examples, explain how biology can be
planet Earth, tropical rainforest, hydrogen atom, wolf
studied from a microscopic approach to a global
pack, liver.
approach.
PAGE: 45
34 Chapter 1 | The Study of Life
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 46
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 35
2 | THE CHEMICAL
FOUNDATION OF LIFE
Figure 2.1 Atoms are the building blocks of molecules in the universe—air, soil, water, rocks . . . and also the cells
of all living organisms. In this model of an organic molecule, the atoms of carbon (black), hydrogen (white), nitrogen
(blue),oxygen(red),andsulfur(yellow)areinproportionalatomicsize.Thesilverrodsindicatechemicalbonds.(credit:
modification of work by Christian Guthier)
Chapter Outline
2.1:Atoms, Isotopes, Ions, and Molecules: The Building Blocks
2.2:Water
2.3:Carbon
Introduction
Elements in various combinations comprise all matter, including living things. Some of the most abundant
elements in living organisms include carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and phosphorus. These form
the nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates, and lipids that are the fundamental components of living matter.
Biologistsmustunderstandtheseimportantbuildingblocksandtheuniquestructuresoftheatomsthatcomprise
molecules, allowing for cells, tissues, organ systems, and entire organisms to form.
All biological processes follow the laws of physics and chemistry, so in order to understand how biological
systemswork,itisimportanttounderstandtheunderlyingphysicsandchemistry.Forexample,theflowofblood
within the circulatory system follows the laws of physics that regulate the modes of fluid flow. The breakdown
ofthelarge,complexmoleculesoffoodintosmallermolecules—andtheconversionofthesetoreleaseenergy
to be stored in adenosine triphosphate (ATP)—is a series of chemical reactions that follow chemical laws. The
propertiesofwaterandtheformationofhydrogenbondsarekeytounderstandinglivingprocesses.Recognizing
the properties of acids and bases is important, for example, to our understanding of the digestive process.
Therefore,thefundamentalsofphysicsandchemistryareimportantforgaininginsightintobiologicalprocesses.
PAGE: 47
36 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
2.1 | Atoms, Isotopes, Ions, and Molecules: The
Building Blocks
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define matter and elements
• Describe the interrelationship between protons, neutrons, and electrons
• Compare the ways in which electrons can be donated or shared between atoms
• Explain the ways in which naturally occurring elements combine to create molecules, cells, tissues,
organ systems, and organisms
At its most fundamental level, life is made up of matter. Matter is any substance that occupies space and
has mass. Elements are unique forms of matter with specific chemical and physical properties that cannot
breakdownintosmallersubstancesbyordinarychemicalreactions.Thereare118elements,butonly98occur
naturally. The remaining elements are unstable and require scientists to synthesize them in laboratories.
Each element is designated by its chemical symbol, which is a single capital letter or, when the first letter is
already“taken”byanotherelement,acombinationoftwoletters.SomeelementsfollowtheEnglishtermforthe
element, such as C for carbon and Ca for calcium. Other elements’ chemical symbols derive from their Latin
names. For example, the symbol for sodium is Na, referring tonatrium, the Latin word for sodium.
Thefourelementscommontoalllivingorganismsareoxygen(O),carbon(C),hydrogen(H),andnitrogen(N).In
thenonlivingworld,elementsarefoundindifferentproportions,andsomeelementscommontolivingorganisms
arerelativelyrareontheearthasawhole,asTable2.1shows.Forexample,theatmosphereisrichinnitrogen
and oxygen but contains little carbon and hydrogen, while the earth’s crust, although it contains oxygen and a
smallamountofhydrogen,haslittlenitrogenandcarbon.Inspiteoftheirdifferencesinabundance,allelements
andthechemicalreactionsbetweenthemobeythesamechemicalandphysicallawsregardlessofwhetherthey
are a part of the living or nonliving world.
Approximate Percentage of Elements in Living Organisms (Humans) Compared
to the Nonliving World
Element Life (Humans) Atmosphere Earth’s Crust
Oxygen (O) 65% 21% 46%
Carbon (C) 18% trace trace
Hydrogen (H) 10% trace 0.1%
Nitrogen (N) 3% 78% trace
Table 2.1
The Structure of the Atom
Tounderstandhowelementscometogether,wemustfirstdiscusstheelement'ssmallestcomponentorbuilding
block,theatom.Anatomisthesmallestunitofmatterthatretainsalloftheelement'schemicalproperties.For
example, one gold atom has all of the properties of gold in that it is a solid metal at room temperature. A gold
coinissimplyaverylargenumberofgoldatomsmoldedintotheshapeofacoinandcontainssmallamountsof
otherelementsknownasimpurities.Wecannotbreakdowngoldatomsintoanythingsmallerwhilestillretaining
the properties of gold.
An atom is composed of two regions: the nucleus, which is in the atom's center and contains protons and
neutrons.Theatom'soutermostregionholdsitselectronsinorbitaroundthenucleus,asFigure2.2illustrates.
Atoms contain protons, electrons, and neutrons, among other subatomic particles. The only exception is
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 48
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 37
hydrogen (H), which is made of one proton and one electron with no neutrons.
Figure 2.2 Elements, such as helium, depicted here, are made up of atoms. Atoms are made up of protons and
neutrons located within the nucleus, with electrons in orbitals surrounding the nucleus.
-24
Protonsandneutronshaveapproximatelythesamemass,about1.67×10 grams.Scientistsarbitrarilydefine
this amount of mass as one atomic mass unit (amu) or one Dalton, as Table 2.2 shows. Although similar in
mass, protons and neutrons differ in their electric charge. A proton is positively charged; whereas, a neutron
is uncharged. Therefore, the number of neutrons in an atom contributes significantly to its mass, but not to its
-28
charge.Electronsaremuchsmallerinmassthanprotons,weighingonly9.11×10 grams,orabout1/1800of
anatomicmassunit.Hence,theydonotcontributemuchtoanelement’soverallatomicmass.Therefore,when
considering atomic mass, it is customary to ignore the mass of any electrons and calculate the atom’s mass
basedonthenumberofprotonsandneutronsalone.Althoughnotsignificantcontributorstomass,electronsdo
contribute greatly to the atom’s charge, as each electron has a negative charge equal to the proton's positive
charge. In uncharged, neutral atoms, the number of electrons orbiting the nucleus is equal to the number of
protonsinsidethenucleus.Intheseatoms,thepositiveandnegativechargescanceleachotherout,leadingto
an atom with no net charge.
Accounting for the sizes of protons, neutrons, and electrons, most of the atom's volume—greater than 99
percent—isemptyspace.Withallthisemptyspace,onemightaskwhyso-calledsolidobjectsdonotjustpass
throughoneanother.Thereasontheydonotisthattheelectronsthatsurroundallatomsarenegativelycharged
and negative charges repel each other.
Protons, Neutrons, and Electrons
Charge Mass (amu) Location
Proton +1 1 nucleus
Neutron 0 1 nucleus
Electron –1 0 orbitals
Table 2.2
Atomic Number and Mass
Atoms of each element contain a characteristic number of protons and electrons. The number of protons
determines an element’s atomic number, which scientists use to distinguish one element from another. The
number of neutrons is variable, resulting in isotopes, which are different forms of the same atom that vary only
inthenumberofneutronstheypossess.Together,thenumberofprotonsandneutronsdetermineanelement’s
massnumber,asFigure2.3illustrates.Notethatwedisregardthesmallcontributionofmassfromelectronsin
calculatingthemassnumber.Wecanusethisapproximationofmasstoeasilycalculatehowmanyneutronsan
element has by simply subtracting the number of protons from the mass number. Since an element’s isotopes
will have slightly different mass numbers, scientists also determine the atomic mass, which is the calculated
mean of the mass number for its naturally occurring isotopes. Often, the resulting number contains a fraction.
PAGE: 49
38 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Forexample,theatomicmassofchlorine(Cl)is35.45becausechlorineiscomposedofseveralisotopes,some
(themajority)withatomicmass35(17protonsand18neutrons)andsomewithatomicmass37(17protonsand
20 neutrons).
Figure 2.3 Carbon has an atomic number of six, and two stable isotopes with mass numbers of twelve and
thirteen, respectively. Its relative atomic mass is 12.011
How many neutrons do carbon-12 and carbon-13 have, respectively?
Isotopes
Isotopes are different forms of an element that have the same number of protons but a different number
of neutrons. Some elements—such as carbon, potassium, and uranium—have naturally occurring isotopes.
Carbon-12 contains six protons, six neutrons, and six electrons; therefore, it has a mass number of 12 (six
protonsandsixneutrons).Carbon-14containssixprotons,eightneutrons,andsixelectrons;itsatomicmassis
14(sixprotonsandeightneutrons).Thesetwoalternateformsofcarbonareisotopes.Someisotopesmayemit
neutrons,protons,andelectrons,andattainamorestableatomicconfiguration(lowerlevelofpotentialenergy);
theseareradioactiveisotopes,orradioisotopes.Radioactivedecay(carbon-14decayingtoeventuallybecome
nitrogen-14) describes the energy loss that occurs when an unstable atom’s nucleus releases radiation.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 50
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 39
Carbon Dating
Carbon is normally present in the atmosphere in the form of gaseous compounds like carbon dioxide and
14
methane. Carbon-14 ( C) is a naturally occurring radioisotope that is created in the atmosphere from
14
atmospheric N (nitrogen) by the addition of a neutron and the loss of a proton because of cosmic rays.
14 14
This is a continuous process, so more C is always being created. As a living organism incorporates C
14
initially as carbon dioxide fixed in the process of photosynthesis, the relative amount of C in its body is
14 14
equaltotheconcentrationof Cintheatmosphere.Whenanorganismdies,itisnolongeringesting C,
14 12 14 14
so the ratio between C and C will decline as C decays gradually to N by a process called beta
decay—electrons or positrons emission. This decay emits energy in a slow process.
14 14
After approximately 5,730 years, half of the starting concentration of C will convert back to N. We call
thetimeittakesforhalfoftheoriginalconcentrationofanisotopetodecaybacktoitsmorestableformits
14
half-life.Becausethehalf-lifeof Cislong,scientistsuseittodateformerlylivingobjectssuchasoldbones
14 14
orwood.Comparingtheratioofthe Cconcentrationinanobjecttotheamountof Cintheatmosphere,
scientists can determine the amount of the isotope that has not yet decayed. On the basis of this amount,
Figure2.4showsthatwecancalculatetheageofthematerial,suchasthepygmymammoth,withaccuracy
if it is not much older than about 50,000 years. Other elements have isotopes with different half lives. For
40 235
example, K (potassium-40) has a half-life of 1.25 billion years, and U (Uranium 235) has a half-life of
about 700 million years. Through the use of radiometric dating, scientists can study the age of fossils or
other remains of extinct organisms to understand how organisms have evolved from earlier species.
Figure2.4Scientistscandeterminetheageofcarbon-containingremainslessthanabout50,000yearsold,such
as this pygmy mammoth, using carbon dating. (credit: Bill Faulkner, NPS)
To learn more about atoms, isotopes, and how to tell one isotope from another, run the simulation.
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66430/1.3/#eip-
id1165071748010)
PAGE: 51
40 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
The Periodic Table
The periodic table organizes and displays different elements. Devised by Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev
(1834–1907) in 1869, the table groups elements that, although unique, share certain chemical properties with
other elements. The properties of elements are responsible for their physical state at room temperature: they
maybegases,solids,orliquids.Elementsalsohavespecificchemicalreactivity,theabilitytocombineandto
chemically bond with each other.
IntheperiodictableinFigure2.5,theelementsareorganizedanddisplayedaccordingtotheiratomicnumber
andarearrangedinaseriesofrowsandcolumnsbasedonsharedchemicalandphysicalproperties.Inaddition
to providing the atomic number for each element, the periodic table also displays the element’s atomic mass.
Looking at carbon, for example, its symbol (C) and name appear, as well as its atomic number of six (in the
upper left-hand corner) and its atomic mass of 12.11.
Figure 2.5 The periodic table shows each element's atomic mass and atomic number. The atomic number appears
above the symbol for the element and the approximate atomic mass appears below it.
Theperiodictablegroupselementsaccordingtochemicalproperties.Scientistsbasethedifferencesinchemical
reactivity between the elements on the number and spatial distribution of an atom’s electrons. Atoms that
chemically react and bond to each other form molecules. Molecules are simply two or more atoms chemically
bondedtogether.Logically,whentwoatomschemicallybondtoformamolecule,theirelectrons,whichformthe
outermost region of each atom, come together first as the atoms form a chemical bond.
Electron Shells and the Bohr Model
Note that there is a connection between the number of protons in an element, the atomic number that
distinguishesoneelementfromanother,andthenumberofelectronsithas.Inallelectricallyneutralatoms,the
numberofelectronsisthesameasthenumberofprotons.Thus,eachelement,atleastwhenelectricallyneutral,
has a characteristic number of electrons equal to its atomic number.
In1913,DanishscientistNielsBohr(1885–1962)developedanearlymodeloftheatom.TheBohrmodelshows
theatomasacentralnucleuscontainingprotonsandneutrons,withtheelectronsincircularorbitalsatspecific
distances from the nucleus, as Figure 2.6 illustrates. These orbits form electron shells or energy levels, which
areawayofvisualizingthenumberofelectronsintheoutermostshells.Theseenergylevelsaredesignatedby
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 52
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 41
a number and the symbol “n.” For example, 1n represents the first energy level located closest to the nucleus.
Figure2.6In1913,NielsBohrsdevelopedtheBohrmodelinwhichelectronsexistwithinprincipalshells.Anelectron
normallyexistsinthelowestenergyshellavailable,whichistheoneclosesttothenucleus.Energyfromaphotonof
lightcanbumpituptoahigherenergyshell,butthissituationisunstable,andtheelectronquicklydecaysbacktothe
ground state. In the process, it releases a photon of light.
Electronsfillorbitalsinaconsistentorder:theyfirstfilltheorbitalsclosesttothenucleus,thentheycontinueto
fill orbitals of increasing energy further from the nucleus. If there are multiple orbitals of equal energy, they fill
withoneelectronineachenergylevelbeforeaddingasecondelectron.Theelectronsoftheoutermostenergy
leveldeterminetheatom'senergeticstabilityanditstendencytoformchemicalbondswithotheratomstoform
molecules.
Under standard conditions, atoms fill the inner shells first, often resulting in a variable number of electrons in
the outermost shell. The innermost shell has a maximum of two electrons but the next two electron shells can
each have a maximum of eight electrons. This is known as the octet rule, which states, with the exception of
the innermost shell, that atoms are more stable energetically when they have eight electrons in their valence
shell, the outermost electron shell. Figure 2.7 shows examples of some neutral atoms and their electron
configurations. Notice that in Figure 2.7, helium has a complete outer electron shell, with two electrons filling
its first and only shell. Similarly, neon has a complete outer 2n shell containing eight electrons. In contrast,
chlorineandsodiumhavesevenandoneintheiroutershells,respectively,buttheoreticallytheywouldbemore
energetically stable if they followed the octet rule and had eight.
PAGE: 53
42 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure2.7Bohrdiagramsindicatehowmanyelectronsfilleachprincipalshell.Group18elements(helium,neon,
and argon) have a full outer, or valence, shell. A full valence shell is the most stable electron configuration.
Elementsinothergroupshavepartiallyfilledvalenceshellsandgainorloseelectronstoachieveastableelectron
configuration.
Anatommaygive,take,orshareelectronswithanotheratomtoachieveafullvalenceshell,themoststable
electron configuration. Looking at this figure, how many electrons do elements in group 1 need to lose in
order to achieve a stable electron configuration? How many electrons do elements in groups 14 and 17
need to gain to achieve a stable configuration?
Understanding that the periodic table's organization is based on the total number of protons (and electrons)
helpsusknowhowelectronsdistributethemselvesamongtheshells.Theperiodictableisarrangedincolumns
and rows based on the number of electrons and their location. Examine more closely some of the elements in
the table’s far right column in Figure 2.5. The group 18 atoms helium (He), neon (Ne), and argon (Ar) all have
filledouterelectronshells,makingitunnecessaryforthemtoshareelectronswithotheratomstoattainstability.
They are highly stable as single atoms. Because they are non reactive, scientists coin them inert (or noble
gases). Compare this to the group 1 elements in the left-hand column. These elements, including hydrogen
(H), lithium (Li), and sodium (Na), all have one electron in their outermost shells. That means that they can
achieve astable configuration and afilled outer shell bydonating orsharing one electron with another atom or
amoleculesuchaswater.Hydrogenwilldonateorshareitselectrontoachievethisconfiguration,whilelithium
andsodiumwilldonatetheirelectrontobecomestable.Asaresultoflosinganegativelychargedelectron,they
become positively charged ions. Group 17 elements, including fluorine and chlorine, have seven electrons in
their outmost shells, so they tend to fill this shell with an electron from other atoms or molecules, making them
negativelychargedions.Group14elements,ofwhichcarbonisthemostimportanttolivingsystems,havefour
electronsintheiroutershellallowingthemtomakeseveralcovalentbonds(discussedbelow)withotheratoms.
Thus, theperiodictable's columnsrepresentthepotential sharedstate oftheseelements’ outerelectronshells
that is responsible for their similar chemical characteristics.
Electron Orbitals
Although useful to explain the reactivity and chemical bonding of certain elements, the Bohr model does not
accurately reflect how electrons spatially distribute themselves around the nucleus. They do not circle the
nucleus like the earth orbits the sun, but we find them in electron orbitals. These relatively complex shapes
resultfromthefactthatelectronsbehavenotjustlikeparticles,butalsolikewaves.Mathematicalequationsfrom
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 54
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 43
quantummechanics,whichscientistscallwavefunctions,canpredictwithinacertainlevelofprobabilitywhere
an electron might be at any given time. Scientists call the area where an electron is most likely to be found its
orbital.
Recall that the Bohr model depicts an atom’s electron shell configuration. Within each electron shell are
subshells, and each subshell has a specified number of orbitals containing electrons. While it is impossible to
calculate exactly an electron's location, scientists know that it is most probably located within its orbital path.
The letter s, p, d, and f designate the subshells. The s subshell is spherical in shape and has one orbital.
Principalshell1nhasonlyasinglesorbital,whichcanholdtwoelectrons.Principalshell2nhasonesandone
psubshell,andcanholdatotalofeightelectrons.Thepsubshellhasthreedumbbell-shapedorbitals,asFigure
2.8 illustrates. Subshells d and f have more complex shapes and contain five and seven orbitals, respectively.
Wedonotshowtheseintheillustration.Principalshell3nhass,p,anddsubshellsandcanhold18electrons.
Principalshell4nhass,p,dandforbitalsandcanhold32electrons.Movingawayfromthenucleus,thenumber
of electrons and orbitals in the energy levels increases. Progressing from one atom to the next in the periodic
table, we can determine the electron structure by fitting an extra electron into the next available orbital.
Figure2.8Thessubshellsareshapedlikespheres.Boththe1nand2nprincipalshellshaveansorbital,butthesize
of the sphere is larger in the 2n orbital. Each sphere is a single orbital. Three dumbbell-shaped orbitals comprise p
subshells. Principal shell 2n has apsubshell, but shell 1 does not.
The closest orbital to the nucleus, the 1s orbital, can hold up to two electrons. This orbital is equivalent to the
Bohrmodel'sinnermostelectronshell.Scientistscallitthe1sorbitalbecauseitissphericalaroundthenucleus.
The 1s orbital is the closest orbital to the nucleus, and it is always filled first, before any other orbital fills.
1
Hydrogenhasoneelectron;therefore,itoccupiesonlyonespotwithinthe1sorbital.Wedesignatethisas1s ,
wherethesuperscripted1referstotheoneelectronwithinthe1sorbital.Heliumhastwoelectrons;therefore,it
2
cancompletelyfillthe1sorbitalwithitstwoelectrons.Wedesignatethisas1s ,referringtothetwoelectronsof
heliuminthe1sorbital.OntheperiodictableFigure2.5,hydrogenandheliumaretheonlytwoelementsinthe
firstrow(period).Thisisbecausetheyonlyhaveelectronsintheirfirstshell,the1sorbital.Hydrogenandhelium
are the only two elements that have the 1sand no other electron orbitals in the electrically neutral state.
Thesecondelectronshellmaycontaineightelectrons.Thisshellcontainsanothersphericalsorbitalandthree
“dumbbell”shapedporbitals,eachofwhichcanholdtwoelectrons,asFigure2.8shows.Afterthe1sorbitalfills,
thesecondelectronshellfills,firstfillingits2sorbitalandthenitsthreeporbitals.Whenfillingtheporbitals,each
takes a single electron. Once each p orbital has an electron, it may add a second. Lithium (Li) contains three
electronsthatoccupythefirstandsecondshells.Twoelectronsfillthe1sorbital,andthethirdelectronthenfills
2 1
the2sorbital.Itselectronconfigurationis1s 2s .Neon(Ne),alternatively,hasatotaloftenelectrons:twoare
in its innermost 1s orbital and eight fill its second shell (two each in the 2s and three p orbitals). Thus it is an
PAGE: 55
44 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
inertgasandenergeticallystableasasingleatomthatwillrarelyformachemicalbondwithotheratoms.Larger
elements have additional orbitals, comprising the third electron shell. While the concepts of electron shells
and orbitals are closely related, orbitals provide a more accurate depiction of an atom's electron configuration
becausetheorbitalmodelspecifiesthedifferentshapesandspecialorientationsofalltheplacesthatelectrons
may occupy.
Watch this visual animation to see the spatial arrangement of the p and s orbitals. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66430/1.3/#eip-id5846277)
Chemical Reactions and Molecules
All elements are most stable when their outermost shell is filled with electrons according to the octet rule. This
isbecauseitisenergeticallyfavorableforatomstobeinthatconfigurationanditmakesthemstable.However,
since not all elements have enough electrons to fill their outermost shells, atoms form chemical bonds with
other atoms thereby obtaining the electrons they need to attain a stable electron configuration. When two or
moreatomschemicallybondwitheachother,theresultantchemicalstructureisamolecule.Thefamiliarwater
molecule, H2O, consists of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. These bond together to form water, as
Figure 2.9 illustrates. Atoms can form molecules by donating, accepting, or sharing electrons to fill their outer
shells.
Figure 2.9 Two or more atoms may bond with each other to form a molecule. When two hydrogens and an oxygen
share electrons via covalent bonds it forms a water molecule.
Chemical reactions occur when two or more atoms bond together to form molecules or when bonded atoms
break apart. Scientists call the substances used in the beginning of a chemical reaction reactants (usually on
theleftsideofachemicalequation),andwecallthesubstancesattheendofthereactionproducts(usuallyon
therightsideofachemicalequation).Wetypicallydrawanarrowbetweenthereactantsandproductstoindicate
the chemical reaction's direction. This direction is not always a “one-way street.” To create the water molecule
above, the chemical equation would be:
2H + O → H O
2
An example of a simple chemical reaction is breaking down hydrogen peroxide molecules, each of which
consists of two hydrogen atoms bonded to two oxygen atoms (H2O2). The reactant hydrogen peroxide breaks
downintowater,containingoneoxygenatomboundtotwohydrogenatoms(H2O),andoxygen,whichconsists
oftwobondedoxygenatoms(O2).Intheequationbelow,thereactionincludestwohydrogenperoxidemolecules
and two water molecules. This is an example of a balanced chemical equation, wherein each element's
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 56
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 45
number of atoms is the same on each side of the equation. According to the law of conservation of matter, the
number of atoms before and after a chemical reaction should be equal, such that no atoms are, under normal
circumstances, created or destroyed.
2H O (hydrogen peroxide) → 2H O (water) + O (oxygen)
2 2 2 2
Even though all of the reactants and products of this reaction are molecules (each atom remains bonded to at
least one other atom), in this reaction only hydrogen peroxide and water are representatives of compounds:
they contain atoms of more than one type of element. Molecular oxygen, alternatively, as Figure 2.10 shows,
consists of two doubly bonded oxygen atoms and is not classified as a compound but as a hononuclear
molecule.
Figure 2.10A double bond joins the oxygen atoms in an O2molecule.
Some chemical reactions, such as the one above, can proceed in one direction until they expend all the
reactants. The equations that describe these reactions contain a unidirectional arrow and are irreversible.
Reversible reactions are those that can go in either direction. In reversible reactions, reactants turn into
products,butwhentheproduct'sconcentrationgoesbeyondacertainthreshold(characteristicoftheparticular
reaction), some of these products convert back into reactants. At this point, product and reactant designations
reverse.Thisbackandforthcontinuesuntilacertainrelativebalancebetweenreactantsandproductsoccurs—a
state called equilibrium. A chemical equation with a double headed arrow pointing towards both the reactants
and products often denote these reversible reaction situations.
+ -
For example, in human blood, excess hydrogen ions (H ) bind to bicarbonate ions (HCO3) forming an
equilibriumstatewithcarbonicacid(H2CO3).Ifweaddedcarbonicacidtothissystem,someofitwouldconvert
to bicarbonate and hydrogen ions.
HCO − + H + ↔H CO
3 2 3
However,biologicalreactionsrarelyobtainequilibriumbecausetheconcentrations ofthereactantsorproducts
orbothareconstantlychanging,oftenwithonereaction'sproductareactantforanother.Toreturntotheexample
of excess hydrogen ions in the blood, forming carbonic acid will be the reaction's major direction. However,
the carbonic acid can also leave the body as carbon dioxide gas (via exhalation) instead of converting back to
bicarbonateion,thusdrivingthereactiontotherightbythelawofmassaction.Thesereactionsareimportant
for maintaining homeostasis in our blood.
HCO − + H + ↔ H CO ↔ CO + H O
3 2 3 2 2
Ions and Ionic Bonds
Someatomsaremorestablewhentheygainorloseanelectron(orpossiblytwo)andformions.Thisfillstheir
outermostelectronshellandmakesthemenergeticallymorestable.Becausethenumberofelectronsdoesnot
equalthenumberofprotons,eachionhasanetcharge.Cationsarepositiveionsthatformbylosingelectrons.
Negative ions form by gaining electrons, which we call anions. We designate anions by their elemental name
and change the ending to “-ide”, thus the anion of chlorine is chloride, and the anion of sulfur is sulfide.
Scientistsrefertothismovementofelectronsfromoneelementtoanotheraselectrontransfer.AsFigure2.11
illustrates,sodium(Na)onlyhasoneelectroninitsouterelectronshell.Ittakeslessenergyforsodiumtodonate
thatoneelectronthanitdoestoacceptsevenmoreelectronstofilltheoutershell.Ifsodiumlosesanelectron,
itnowhas11protons,11neutrons,andonly10electrons,leavingitwithanoverallchargeof+1.Wenowrefer
toitasasodiumion.Chlorine(Cl)initslowestenergystate(calledthegroundstate)hassevenelectronsinits
outer shell. Again, it is more energy-efficient for chlorine to gain one electron than to lose seven. Therefore, it
tendstogainanelectrontocreateanionwith17protons,17neutrons,and18electrons,givingitanetnegative
(–1)charge.Wenowrefertoitasachlorideion.Inthisexample,sodiumwilldonateitsoneelectrontoemptyits
shell,andchlorinewillacceptthatelectrontofillitsshell.Bothionsnowsatisfytheoctetruleandhavecomplete
outermostshells.Becausethenumberofelectronsisnolongerequaltothenumberofprotons,eachisnowan
PAGE: 57
46 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
ionandhasa+1(sodiumcation)or–1(chlorideanion)charge.Notethatthesetransactionscannormallyonly
takeplacesimultaneously:inorderforasodiumatomtoloseanelectron,itmustbeinthepresenceofasuitable
recipient like a chlorine atom.
Figure2.11Intheformationofanioniccompound,metalsloseelectronsandnonmetalsgainelectronstoachievean
octet.
Ionic bonds form between ions with opposite charges. For instance, positively charged sodium ions and
negatively charged chloride ions bond together to make crystals of sodium chloride, or table salt, creating a
crystalline molecule with zero net charge.
Physiologists refer to certain salts as electrolytes (including sodium, potassium, and calcium), ions necessary
for nerve impulse conduction, muscle contractions, and water balance. Many sports drinks and dietary
supplements provide these ions to replace those lost from the body via sweating during exercise.
Covalent Bonds and Other Bonds and Interactions
Anotherwaytosatisfytheoctetrulebysharingelectronsbetweenatomstoformcovalentbonds.Thesebonds
are stronger and much more common than ionic bonds in the molecules of living organisms. We commonly
find covalent bonds in carbon-based organic molecules, such as our DNA and proteins. We also find covalent
bondsininorganicmoleculeslikeH2O,CO2,andO2.Thebondsmayshareone,two,orthreepairsofelectrons,
makingsingle,double,andtriplebonds,respectively.Themorecovalentbondsbetweentwoatoms,thestronger
their connection. Thus, triple bonds are the strongest.
The strength of different levels of covalent bonding is one of the main reasons living organisms have a difficult
time in acquiring nitrogen for use in constructing their molecules, even though molecular nitrogen, N2, is the
mostabundantgasintheatmosphere.Molecularnitrogenconsistsoftwonitrogenatomstriplebondedtoeach
other and, as with all molecules, sharing these three pairs of electrons between the two nitrogen atoms allows
for filling their outer electron shells, making the molecule more stable than the individual nitrogen atoms. This
strongtriplebondmakesitdifficultforlivingsystemstobreakapartthisnitrogeninordertouseitasconstituents
of proteins and DNA.
Forming water molecules provides an example of covalent bonding. Covalent bonds bind the hydrogen and
oxygenatomsthatcombinetoformwatermoleculesasFigure2.9shows.Theelectronfromthehydrogensplits
its time between the hydrogen atoms' incomplete outer shell and the oxygen atoms' incomplete outer shell. To
completely fill the oxygen's outer shell, which has six electrons but which would be more stable with eight, two
electrons (one from each hydrogen atom) are needed: hence, the well-known formula H2O. The two elements
share the electrons to fill the outer shell of each, making both elements more stable.
View this short video to see an animation of ionic and covalent bonding. (This multimedia resource will open
in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66430/1.3/#eip-id1166283807593)
Polar Covalent Bonds
There are two types of covalent bonds: polar and nonpolar. In a polar covalent bond, Figure 2.12 shows
atoms unequally share the electrons and are attracted more to one nucleus than the other. Because of the
unequalelectrondistributionbetweentheatomsofdifferentelements,aslightlypositive(δ+)orslightlynegative
(δ–) charge develops. This partial charge is an important property of water and accounts for many of its
characteristics.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 58
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 47
Waterisapolarmolecule,withthehydrogenatomsacquiringapartialpositivechargeandtheoxygenapartial
negative charge. This occurs because the oxygen atom's nucleus is more attractive to the hydrogen atoms'
electronsthanthehydrogennucleusistotheoxygen’selectrons.Thus,oxygenhasahigherelectronegativity
than hydrogen and the shared electrons spend more time near the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen atoms'
nucleus, giving the oxygen and hydrogen atoms slightly negative and positive charges, respectively. Another
wayofstatingthisisthattheprobabilityoffindingasharedelectronnearanoxygennucleusismorelikelythan
finding it near a hydrogen nucleus. Either way, the atom’s relative electronegativity contributes to developing
partialchargeswheneveroneelementissignificantlymoreelectronegativethantheother,andthechargesthat
these polar bonds generate may then be used to form hydrogen bonds based on the attraction of opposite
partialcharges.(Hydrogenbonds,whichwediscussindetailbelow,areweakbondsbetweenslightlypositively
chargedhydrogenatomstoslightlynegativelychargedatomsinothermolecules.)Sincemacromoleculesoften
have atoms within them that differ in electronegativity, polar bonds are often present in organic molecules.
Nonpolar Covalent Bonds
Nonpolar covalent bonds form between two atoms of the same element or between different elements that
share electrons equally. For example, molecular oxygen (O2) is nonpolar because the electrons distribute
equally between the two oxygen atoms.
Figure 2.12 also shows another example of a nonpolar covalent bond—methane (CH4). Carbon has four
electronsinitsoutermostshellandneedsfourmoretofillit.Itobtainsthesefourfromfourhydrogenatoms,each
atomprovidingone,makingastableoutershellofeightelectrons.Carbonandhydrogendonothavethesame
electronegativity but are similar; thus, nonpolar bonds form. The hydrogen atoms each need one electron for
theiroutermostshell,whichisfilledwhenitcontainstwoelectrons.Theseelementssharetheelectronsequally
among the carbons and the hydrogen atoms, creating a nonpolar covalent molecule.
Figure2.12Whetheramoleculeispolarornonpolardependsbothonbondtypeandmolecularshape.Bothwaterand
carbondioxidehavepolarcovalentbonds,butcarbondioxideislinear,sothepartialchargesonthemoleculecancel
each other out.
Hydrogen Bonds and Van Der Waals Interactions
Ionicandcovalentbondsbetweenelementsrequireenergytobreak.Ionicbondsarenotasstrongascovalent,
which determines their behavior in biological systems. However, not all bonds are ionic or covalent bonds.
Weaker bonds can also form between molecules. Two weak bonds that occur frequently are hydrogen bonds
andvanderWaalsinteractions.Withoutthesetwotypesofbonds,lifeasweknowitwouldnotexist.Hydrogen
bondsprovidemanyofthecritical,life-sustainingpropertiesofwaterandalsostabilizethestructuresofproteins
and DNA, the building block of cells.
When polar covalent bonds containing hydrogen form, the hydrogen in that bond has a slightly positive charge
because hydrogen’s electron is pulled more strongly toward the other element and away from the hydrogen.
Because the hydrogen is slightly positive, it will be attracted to neighboring negative charges. When this
+
happens, a weak interaction occurs between the hydrogen's δ from one molecule and another molecule's δ–
PAGE: 59
48 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
chargeonthemoreelectronegativeatoms,usuallyoxygenornitrogen,orwithinthesamemolecule.Scientists
call this interaction a hydrogen bond. This type of bond is common and occurs regularly between water
molecules. Individual hydrogen bonds are weak and easily broken; however, they occur in very large numbers
in water and in organic polymers, creating a major force in combination. Hydrogen bonds are also responsible
for zipping together the DNA double helix.
Likehydrogenbonds,vanderWaalsinteractionsareweakattractionsorinteractionsbetweenmolecules.Van
der Waals attractions can occur between any two or more molecules and are dependent on slight fluctuations
of the electron densities, which are not always symmetrical around an atom. For these attractions to happen,
the molecules need to be very close to one another. These bonds—along with ionic, covalent, and hydrogen
bonds—contribute to the proteins' three-dimensional structure in our cells that is necessary for their proper
function.
Pharmaceutical Chemist
Pharmaceutical chemists are responsible for developing new drugs and trying to determine the mode of
actionofbotholdandnewdrugs.Theyareinvolvedineverystepofthedrugdevelopmentprocess.Wecan
finddrugsinthenaturalenvironmentorwecansynthesizetheminthelaboratory.Inmanycases,chemists
chemically change potential drugs from nature chemically in the laboratory to make them safer and more
effective, and sometimes synthetic versions of drugs substitute for the version we find in nature.
Afteradrug'sinitialdiscoveryorsynthesis,thechemistthendevelopsthedrug,perhapschemicallyaltering
it, testing it to see if it is toxic, and then designing methods for efficient large-scale production. Then, the
processofapprovingthedrugforhumanusebegins.IntheUnitedStates,theFoodandDrugAdministration
(FDA) handles drug approval. This involves a series of large-scale experiments using human subjects to
ensurethedrugisnotharmfulandeffectivelytreatstheconditionforwhichitisintended.Thisprocessoften
takes several years and requires the participation of physicians and scientists, in addition to chemists, to
complete testing and gain approval.
AnexampleofadrugthatwasoriginallydiscoveredinalivingorganismisPaclitaxel(Taxol),ananti-cancer
drug used to treat breast cancer. This drug was discovered in the bark of the pacific yew tree. Another
exampleisaspirin,originallyisolatedfromwillowtreebark.Findingdrugsoftenmeanstestinghundredsof
samples of plants, fungi, and other forms of life to see if they contain any biologically active compounds.
Sometimes, traditional medicine can give modern medicine clues as to where to find an active compound.
Forexample,mankindhasusedwillowbarktomakemedicineforthousandsofyears,datingbacktoancient
Egypt. However, it was not until the late 1800s that scientists and pharmaceutical companies purified and
marketed the aspirin molecule, acetylsalicylic acid, for human use.
Occasionally, drugs developed for one use have unforeseen effects that allow usage in other, unrelated
ways.Forexample,scientistsoriginallydevelopedthedrugminoxidil(Rogaine)totreathighbloodpressure.
When tested on humans, researchers noticed that individuals taking the drug would grow new hair.
Eventuallythepharmaceuticalcompanymarketedthedrugtomenandwomenwithbaldnesstorestorelost
hair.
Apharmaceuticalchemist'scareermayinvolvedetectivework,experimentation,anddrugdevelopment,all
with the goal of making human beings healthier.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 60
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 49
2.2 | Water
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the properties of water that are critical to maintaining life
• Explain why water is an excellent solvent
• Provide examples of water’s cohesive and adhesive properties
• Discuss the role of acids, bases, and buffers in homeostasis
Whydoscientistsspendtimelookingforwateronotherplanets?Whyiswatersoimportant?Itisbecausewater
is essential to life as we know it. Water is one of the more abundant molecules and the one most critical to life
onEarth.Watercomprisesapproximately60–70percentofthehumanbody.Withoutit,lifeasweknowitsimply
would not exist.
The polarity of the water molecule and its resulting hydrogen bonding make water a unique substance with
specialpropertiesthatareintimatelytiedtotheprocessesoflife.Lifeoriginallyevolvedinawateryenvironment,
and most of an organism’s cellular chemistry and metabolism occur inside the watery contents of the cell’s
cytoplasm. Special properties of water are its high heat capacity and heat of vaporization, its ability to dissolve
polarmolecules,itscohesiveandadhesiveproperties,anditsdissociationintoionsthatleadstogeneratingpH.
Understanding these characteristics of water helps to elucidate its importance in maintaining life.
Water’s Polarity
One of water’s important properties is that it is composed of polar molecules: the hydrogen and oxygen within
water molecules (H2O) form polar covalent bonds. While there is no net charge to a water molecule, water's
polarity creates a slightly positive charge on hydrogen and a slightly negative charge on oxygen, contributing
to water’s properties of attraction. Water generates charges because oxygen is more electronegative than
hydrogen, making it more likely that a shared electron would be near the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen
nucleus, thus generating the partial negative charge near theoxygen.
As a result of water’s polarity, each water molecule attracts other water molecules because of the opposite
charges between water molecules, forming hydrogen bonds. Water also attracts or is attracted to other polar
molecules and ions. We call a polar substance that interacts readily with or dissolves in water hydrophilic
(hydro-=“water”;-philic=“loving”).Incontrast,nonpolarmoleculessuchasoilsandfatsdonotinteractwellwith
water,asFigure2.13shows.Agoodexampleofthisisvinegarandoilsaladdressing(anacidicwatersolution).
We call such nonpolar compoundshydrophobic(hydro- = “water”; -phobic = “fearing”).
PAGE: 61
50 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure2.13Oilandwaterdonotmix.Asthismacroimageofoilandwatershows,oildoesnotdissolveinwaterbut
forms droplets instead. This is because it is a nonpolar compound. (credit: Gautam Dogra).
Water’s States: Gas, Liquid, and Solid
Theformationofhydrogenbondsisanimportantqualityoftheliquidwaterthatiscrucialtolifeasweknowit.As
water molecules make hydrogen bonds with each other, water takes on some unique chemical characteristics
compared to other liquids and, since living things have a high water content, understanding these chemical
features is key to understanding life. In liquid water, hydrogen bonds constantly form and break as the water
moleculesslidepasteachother.Thewatermolecules'motion(kineticenergy)causesthebondstobreakdueto
theheatcontainedinthesystem.Whentheheatrisesaswaterboils,thewatermolecules'higherkineticenergy
causesthehydrogenbondstobreakcompletelyandallowswatermoleculestoescapeintotheairasgas(steam
or water vapor). Alternatively, when water temperature reduces and water freezes, the water molecules form a
crystallinestructuremaintainedbyhydrogenbonding(thereisnotenoughenergytobreakthehydrogenbonds)
that makes ice less dense than liquid water, a phenomenon that we do not see when other liquids solidify.
Water’s lower density in its solid form is due to the way hydrogen bonds orient as they freeze: the water
molecules push farther apart compared to liquid water. With most other liquids, solidification when the
temperaturedropsincludesloweringkineticenergybetweenmolecules,allowingthemtopackevenmoretightly
than in liquid form and giving the solid a greater density than the liquid.
Thelowerdensityofice,asFigure2.14depicts,ananomalycausesittofloatatthesurfaceofliquidwater,such
asinanicebergoricecubesinaglassofwater.Inlakesandponds,icewillformonthewater'ssurfacecreating
an insulating barrier that protects the animals and plant life in the pond from freezing. Without this insulating
icelayer,plantsandanimalslivinginthepondwouldfreezeinthesolidblockoficeandcouldnotsurvive.The
expansion of ice relative to liquid water causes the detrimental effect of freezing on living organisms. The ice
crystalsthatformuponfreezingrupturethedelicatemembranesessentialforlivingcellstofunction,irreversibly
damaging them. Cells can only survive freezing if another liquid like glycerol temporarily replaces the water in
them.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 62
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 51
Figure 2.14 Hydrogen bonding makes ice less dense than liquid water. The (a) lattice structure of ice makes it less
densethantheliquidwater'sfreelyflowingmolecules,enablingitto(b)floatonwater.(credita:modificationofwork
[1]
byJaneWhitney,imagecreatedusingVisualMolecularDynamics(VMD)software ;creditb:modificationofworkby
Carlos Ponte)
Click here (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ice_lattice2) to see a 3-D animation of an ice lattice structure.
[2]
(Image credit: Jane Whitney. Image created using Visual Molecular Dynamics VMD software. )
Water’s High Heat Capacity
Water’shighheatcapacityisapropertythathydrogenbondingamongwatermoleculescauses.Waterhasthe
highest specific heat capacity of any liquids. We define specific heat as the amount of heat one gram of a
substancemustabsorborlosetochangeitstemperaturebyonedegreeCelsius.Forwater,thisamountisone
calorie.Itthereforetakeswateralongtimetoheatandalongtimetocool.Infact,water'sspecificheatcapacity
is about five times more than that of sand. This explains why the land cools faster than the sea. Due to its
high heat capacity, warm blooded animals use water to more evenly disperse heat in their bodies: it acts in a
similar manner to a car’s cooling system, transporting heat from warm places to cool places, causing the body
to maintain a more even temperature.
Water’s Heat of Vaporization
Water also has a high heat of vaporization, the amount of energy required to change one gram of a liquid
substance to a gas. A considerable amount of heat energy (586 cal) is required to accomplish this change in
water.Thisprocessoccursonthewater'ssurface.Asliquidwaterheatsup,hydrogenbondingmakesitdifficult
to separate the liquid water molecules from each other, which is required for it to enter its gaseous phase
(steam). As a result, water acts as a heat sink or heat reservoir and requires much more heat to boil than
doesaliquidsuchasethanol(grainalcohol),whosehydrogenbondingwithotherethanolmoleculesisweaker
thanwater’shydrogenbonding.Eventually,aswaterreachesitsboilingpointof100°Celsius(212°Fahrenheit),
the heat is able to break the hydrogen bonds between the water molecules, and the kinetic energy (motion)
betweenthewatermoleculesallowsthemtoescapefromtheliquidasagas.Evenwhenbelowitsboilingpoint,
water’s individual molecules acquire enough energy from other water molecules such that some surface water
molecules can escape and vaporize: we call this processevaporation.
The fact that hydrogen bonds need to be broken for water to evaporate means that bonds use a substantial
amount of energy in the process. As the water evaporates, energy is taken up by the process, cooling
the environment where the evaporation is taking place. In many living organisms, including in humans, the
1. W. Humphrey W., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, “VMD—Visual Molecular Dynamics,”Journal of Molecular Graphics14 (1996): 33-38.
2. W. Humphrey W., A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, “VMD—Visual Molecular Dynamics,”Journal of Molecular Graphics14 (1996): 33-38.
PAGE: 63
52 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
evaporationofsweat,whichis90percentwater,allowstheorganismtocoolsothatitcanmaintainhomeostasis
of body temperature.
Water’s Solvent Properties
Sincewaterisapolarmoleculewithslightlypositiveandslightlynegativecharges,ionsandpolarmoleculescan
readily dissolve in it. Therefore, we refer to water as a solvent, a substance capable of dissolving other polar
molecules and ionic compounds. The charges associated with these molecules will form hydrogen bonds with
water,surroundingtheparticlewithwatermolecules.Werefertothisasasphereofhydration,orahydration
shell, asFigure 2.15illustrates and serves to keep the particles separated or dispersed in the water.
When we add ionic compounds to water, the individual ions react with the water molecules' polar regions and
their ionic bonds are disrupted in the process of dissociation. Dissociation occurs when atoms or groups of
atomsbreakofffrommoleculesandformions.Considertablesalt(NaCl,orsodiumchloride):whenweaddNaCl
+ –
crystals to water, the NaCl molecules dissociate into Na and Cl ions, and spheres of hydration form around
theions,asFigure2.15illustrates.Thepartiallynegativechargeofthewatermolecule’soxygensurroundsthe
positively charged sodium ion. The hydrogen's partially positive charge on the water molecule surrounds the
negatively charged chloride ion.
Figure 2.15When we mix table salt (NaCl) in water, it forms spheres of hydration around the ions.
Water’s Cohesive and Adhesive Properties
Haveyoueverfilledaglassofwatertotheverytopandthenslowlyaddedafewmoredrops?Beforeitoverflows,
the water forms a dome-like shape above the rim of the glass. This water can stay above the glass because
of the property of cohesion. In cohesion, water molecules are attracted to each other (because of hydrogen
bonding),keepingthemoleculestogetherattheliquid-gas(water-air)interface,althoughthereisnomoreroom
in the glass.
Cohesion allows for surface tension, the capacity of a substance to withstand rupturing when placed under
tensionorstress.Thisisalsowhywaterformsdropletswhenonadrysurfaceratherthanflatteningbygravity.
Whenweplaceasmallscrapofpaperontoawaterdroplet,thepaperfloatsontopeventhoughpaperisdenser
(heavier) than the water. Cohesion and surface tension keep the water molecules' hydrogen bonds intact and
supporttheitemfloatingonthetop.It’sevenpossibleto“float”aneedleontopofaglassofwaterifyouplaceit
gently without breaking the surface tension, asFigure 2.16shows.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 64
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 53
Figure 2.16 A needle's weight pulls the surface downward. At the same time, the surface tension pulls it up,
suspendingitonthewater'ssurfacepreventingitfromsinking.Noticetheindentationinthewateraroundtheneedle.
(credit: Cory Zanker)
These cohesive forces are related to water’s property of adhesion, or the attraction between water molecules
and other molecules. This attraction is sometimes stronger than water’s cohesive forces, especially when the
waterisexposedtochargedsurfacessuchasthoseontheinsideofthinglasstubesknownascapillarytubes.
Weobserveadhesionwhenwater“climbs”upthetubeplacedinaglassofwater:noticethatthewaterappears
to be higher on the tube's sides than in the middle. This is because the water molecules are attracted to the
capillary'schargedglasswallsmorethantheyaretoeachotherandthereforeadheretoit.Wecallthistypeof
adhesioncapillary action, asFigure 2.17illustrates.
Figure 2.17 The adhesive forces exerted by the glass' internal surface exceeding the cohesive forces between the
water molecules themselves causes capillary action in a glass tube. (credit: modification of work by Pearson-Scott
Foresman, donated to the Wikimedia Foundation)
Why are cohesive and adhesive forces important for life? Cohesive and adhesive forces are important for
transportingwaterfromtherootstotheleavesinplants.Theseforcescreatea“pull”onthewatercolumn.This
pullresultsfromthetendencyofwatermoleculesevaporatingontheplant'ssurfacetostayconnectedtowater
moleculesbelowthem,andsotheyarepulledalong.Plantsusethisnaturalphenomenontohelptransportwater
from their roots to their leaves. Without these properties of water, plants would be unable to receive the water
and the dissolved minerals they require. In another example, insects such as the water strider, as Figure 2.18
shows, use the water's surface tension to stay afloat on the water's surface layer and even mate there.
PAGE: 65
54 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure 2.18 Water’s cohesive and adhesive properties allow this water strider (Gerris sp.) to stay afloat. (credit: Tim
Vickers)
pH, Buffers, Acids, and Bases
The pH of a solution indicates its acidity or alkalinity.
H O⎛I⎞↔H +⎛aq⎞+OH-⎛aq⎞
2 ⎝⎠ ⎝ ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
You may have used litmus or pH paper, filter paper treated with a natural water-soluble dye for use as a pH
indicator,testshowmuchacid(acidity)orbase(alkalinity)existsinasolution.Youmighthaveevenusedsome
totestwhetherthewaterinaswimmingpoolisproperlytreated.Inbothcases,thepHtestmeasureshydrogen
ions' concentration in a given solution.
Hydrogen ions spontaneously generate in pure water by the dissociation (ionization) of a small percentage of
+ -
water moleculesinto equalnumbersofhydrogen(H )ionsandhydroxide(OH)ions. While the hydroxideions
arekeptinsolutionbytheirhydrogenbondingwithotherwatermolecules,thehydrogenions,consistingofnaked
+
protons,immediatelyattracttoun-ionizedwatermolecules,forminghydroniumions(H30 ).Still,byconvention,
scientists refer to hydrogen ions and their concentration as if they were free in this state in liquid water.
-7 +
The concentration of hydrogen ions dissociating from pure water is 1 × 10 moles H ions per liter of water.
Moles (mol) are a way to express the amount of a substance (which can be atoms, molecules, ions, etc.).
One mole represents the atomic weight of a substance, expressed in grams, which equals the amount of the
12
substance containing as many units as there are atoms in 12 grams of C. Mathematically, one mole is equal
23 23
to 6.02 × 10 particles of the substance. Therefore, 1 mole of water is equal to 6.02 × 10 water molecules.
-7
WecalculatethepHasthenegativeofthebase10logarithmofthisconcentration.Thelog10of1×10 is-7.0,
andthenegativeofthisnumber(indicatedbythe“p”of“pH”)yieldsapHof7.0,whichisalsoaneutralpH.The
pH inside of human cells and blood are examples of two body areas where near-neutral pH is maintained.
Non-neutralpHreadingsresultfromdissolvingacidsorbasesinwater.Usingthenegativelogarithmtogenerate
positiveintegers,highconcentrationsofhydrogenionsyieldalowpHnumber;whereas,lowlevelsofhydrogen
+
ions result in a high pH. An acid is a substance that increases hydrogen ions' (H ) concentration in a solution,
–
usually by having one of its hydrogen atoms dissociate. A base provides either hydroxide ions (OH ) or other
negatively charged ions that combine with hydrogen ions, reducing their concentration in the solution and
therebyraisingthepH.Incaseswherethebasereleaseshydroxideions,theseionsbindtofreehydrogenions,
generating new water molecules.
+
The stronger the acid, the more readily it donates H . For example, hydrochloric acid (HCl) completely
dissociates into hydrogen and chloride ions and is highly acidic; whereas the acids in tomato juice or vinegar
do not completely dissociate and are weak acids. Conversely, strong bases are those substances that readily
–
donate OH or take up hydrogen ions. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and many household cleaners are highly
–
alkaline and give up OH rapidly when we place them in water, thereby raising the pH. An example of a weak
basicsolutionisseawater,whichhasapHnear8.0ThisiscloseenoughtoaneutralpHthatmarineorganisms
have adapted in order to live and thrive in a saline environment.
The pH scale is, as we previously mentioned, an inverse logarithm and ranges from 0 to 14 (Figure 2.19).
Anything below 7.0 (ranging from 0.0 to 6.9) is acidic, and anything above 7.0 (from 7.1 to 14.0) is alkaline.
ExtremesinpHineitherdirectionfrom7.0areusuallyinhospitabletolife.ThepHinsidecells(6.8)andthepHin
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 66
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 55
theblood(7.4)arebothveryclosetoneutral.However,theenvironmentinthestomachishighlyacidic,withapH
of1to2.Asaresult,howdostomachcellssurviveinsuchanacidicenvironment?Howdotheyhomeostatically
maintain the near neutral pH inside them? The answer is that they cannot do it and are constantly dying. The
stomach constantly produces new cells to replace dead ones, which stomach acids digest. Scientists estimate
that the human body completely replaces the stomach lining every seven to ten days.
Figure 2.19 The pH scale measures hydrogen ions' (H+) concentration in a solution. (credit: modification of work by
Edward Stevens)
Watch this video for a straightforward explanation of pH and its logarithmic scale. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser..) (http://cnx.org/content/m66434/1.3/#eip-id1170503069363)
How can organisms whose bodies require a near-neutral pH ingest acidic and basic substances (a human
+ –
drinkingorangejuice,forexample)andsurvive?Buffersarethekey.BuffersreadilyabsorbexcessH orOH ,
keeping the body's pH carefully maintained in the narrow range required for survival. Maintaining a constant
blood pH is critical to a person’s well-being. The buffer maintaining the pH of human blood involves carbonic
–
acid (H2CO3), bicarbonate ion (HCO3 ), and carbon dioxide (CO2). When bicarbonate ions combine with free
hydrogen ions and become carbonic acid, it removes hydrogen ions and moderates pH changes. Similarly, as
Figure2.20shows,excesscarbonicacidcanconverttocarbondioxidegaswhichweexhalethroughthelungs.
Thispreventstoomanyfreehydrogenionsfrombuildingupinthebloodanddangerouslyreducingtheblood’s
–
pH. Likewise, if too much OH enters into the system, carbonic acid will combine with it to create bicarbonate,
lowering the pH. Without this buffer system, the body’s pH would fluctuate enough to put survival in jeopardy.
PAGE: 67
56 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure2.20Thisdiagramshowsthebody’sbufferingofbloodpHlevels.Thebluearrowsshowtheprocessofraising
pHasmoreCO2ismade.Thepurplearrowsindicatethereverseprocess:theloweringofpHasmorebicarbonateis
created.
Other examples of buffers are antacids that some people use to combat excess stomach acid. Many of these
over-the-counter medications work in the same way as blood buffers, usually with at least one ion capable of
absorbing hydrogen and moderating pH, bringing relief to those who suffer “heartburn” after eating. Water's
unique properties that contribute to this capacity to balance pH—as well as water’s other characteristics—are
essential to sustaining life on Earth.
To learn more about water, visit the U.S. Geological Survey Water Science for Schools
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/all_about_water)All About Water! website.
2.3 | Carbon
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain why carbon is important for life
• Describe the role of functional groups in biological molecules
Many complex molecules called macromolecules, such as proteins, nucleic acids (RNA and DNA),
carbohydrates,andlipidscomprisecells.Themacromoleculesareasubsetoforganicmolecules(anycarbon-
containingliquid,solid,orgas)thatareespeciallyimportantforlife.Thefundamentalcomponentforallofthese
macromolecules is carbon. The carbon atom has unique properties that allow it to form covalent bonds to as
manyasfourdifferentatoms,makingthisversatileelementidealtoserveasthebasicstructuralcomponent,or
“backbone,” of the macromolecules.
Individualcarbonatomshaveanincompleteoutermostelectronshell.Withanatomicnumberof6(sixelectrons
and six protons), the first two electrons fill the inner shell, leaving four in the second shell. Therefore, carbon
atoms can form up to four covalent bonds with other atoms to satisfy the octet rule. The methane molecule
providesanexample:ithasthechemicalformulaCH4.Eachofitsfourhydrogenatomsformsasinglecovalent
bond with the carbon atom by sharing a pair of electrons. This results in a filled outermost shell.
Hydrocarbons
Hydrocarbons are organic molecules consisting entirely of carbon and hydrogen, such as methane (CH4)
described above. We often use hydrocarbons in our daily lives as fuels—like the propane in a gas grill or
the butane in a lighter. The many covalent bonds between the atoms in hydrocarbons store a great amount
of energy, which releases when these molecules burn (oxidize). Methane, an excellent fuel, is the simplest
hydrocarbon molecule, with a central carbon atom bonded to four different hydrogen atoms, as Figure 2.21
illustrates. The shape of its electron orbitals determines the shape of the methane molecule's geometry, where
the atoms reside in three dimensions. The carbons and the four hydrogen atoms form a tetrahedron, with four
triangular faces. For this reason, we describe methane as having tetrahedral geometry.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 68
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 57
Figure 2.21Methane has a tetrahedral geometry, with each of the four hydrogen atoms spaced 109.5° apart.
Asthebackboneofthelargemoleculesoflivingthings,hydrocarbonsmayexistaslinearcarbonchains,carbon
rings, or combinations of both. Furthermore, individual carbon-to-carbon bonds may be single, double, or triple
covalentbonds,andeachtypeofbondaffectsthemolecule'sgeometryinaspecificway.Thisthree-dimensional
shape or conformation of the large molecules of life (macromolecules) is critical to how they function.
Hydrocarbon Chains
Successive bonds between carbon atoms form hydrocarbon chains. These may be branched or unbranched.
Furthermore, a molecule's different geometries of single, double, and triple covalent bonds alter the overall
molecule's geometry as Figure 2.22 illustrates. The hydrocarbons ethane, ethene, and ethyne serve as
examples of how different carbon-to-carbon bonds affect the molecule's geometry. The names of all three
moleculesstartwiththeprefix“eth-,”whichistheprefixfortwocarbonhydrocarbons.Thesuffixes“-ane,”“-ene,”
and “-yne” refer to the presence of single, double, or triple carbon-carbon bonds, respectively. Thus, propane,
propene, and propyne follow the same pattern with three carbon molecules, butane, butene, and butyne for
fourcarbonmolecules,andsoon.Doubleandtriplebondschangethemolecule'sgeometry:singlebondsallow
rotationalongthebond'saxis;whereas,doublebondsleadtoaplanarconfigurationandtriplebondstoalinear
one. These geometries have a significant impact on the shape a particular molecule can assume.
Figure2.22Whencarbonformssinglebondswithotheratoms,theshapeistetrahedral.Whentwocarbonatomsform
a double bond, the shape is planar, or flat. Single bonds, like those in ethane, are able to rotate. Double bonds, like
those in ethene cannot rotate, so the atoms on either side are locked in place.
Hydrocarbon Rings
Sofar,thehydrocarbonswehavediscussedhavebeenaliphatichydrocarbons,whichconsistoflinearchains
of carbon atoms. Another type of hydrocarbon, aromatic hydrocarbons, consists of closed rings of carbon
atoms. We find ring structures in hydrocarbons, sometimes with the presence of double bonds, which we
can see by comparing cyclohexane's structure to benzene in Figure 2.23. Examples of biological molecules
that incorporate the benzene ring include some amino acids and cholesterol and its derivatives, including the
hormonesestrogenandtestosterone.Wealsofindthebenzeneringintheherbicide2,4-D.Benzeneisanatural
component of crude oil and has been classified as a carcinogen. Some hydrocarbons have both aliphatic and
aromatic portions. Beta-carotene is an example of such a hydrocarbon.
PAGE: 69
58 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure2.23Carboncanformfive-andsix-memberedrings.Singleordoublebondsmayconnectthecarbonsinthe
ring, and nitrogen may be substituted for carbon.
Isomers
The three-dimensional placement of atoms and chemical bonds within organic molecules is central to
understanding their chemistry. We call molecules that share the same chemical formula but differ in the
placement (structure) of their atoms and/or chemical bonds isomers. Structural isomers (like butane and
isobutene in Figure 2.24a) differ in the placement of their covalent bonds: both molecules have four carbons
andtenhydrogens(C4H10),butthedifferentatomarrangementwithinthemoleculesleadstodifferencesintheir
chemicalproperties.Forexample,butaneissuitedforuseasafuelforcigarettelightersandtorches;whereas,
isobutene is suited for use as a refrigerant and a propellant in spray cans.
Geometricisomers,alternativelyhavesimilarplacementsoftheircovalentbondsbutdifferinhowthesebonds
aremadetothesurroundingatoms,especiallyincarbon-to-carbondoublebonds.Inthesimplemoleculebutene
(C4H8),thetwomethylgroups(CH3)canbeoneithersideofthedoublecovalentbondcentraltothemolecule,
as Figure 2.24b illustrates. When the carbons are bound on the same side of the double bond, this is the
cis configuration. If they are on opposite sides of the double bond, it is a trans configuration. In the trans
configuration, the carbons form a more or less linear structure; whereas, the carbons in the cis configuration
make a bend (change in direction) of the carbon backbone.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 70
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 59
Figure 2.24 We call molecules that have the same number and type of atoms arranged differently isomers.
(a) Structural isomers have a different covalent arrangement of atoms. (b) Geometric isomers have a different
arrangement of atoms around a double bond. (c) Enantiomers are mirror images of each other.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Molecules with the formulas CH3CH2COOH and C3H6O2could be structural isomers.
b. Molecules must have a double bond to becis-transisomers.
c. To be enantiomers, a molecule must have at least three different atoms or groups connected to a
central carbon.
d. Tobeenantiomers,amoleculemusthaveatleastfourdifferentatomsorgroupsconnectedtoacentral
carbon.
Intriglycerides(fatsandoils),longcarbonchainsknownasfattyacidsmaycontaindoublebonds,whichcanbe
in either the cis or trans configuration, as Figure 2.25 illustrates. Fats with at least one double bond between
carbonatomsareunsaturatedfats.Whensomeofthesebondsareinthecisconfiguration,theresultingbendin
thechain'scarbonbackbonemeansthattriglyceridemoleculescannotpacktightly,sotheyremainliquid(oil)at
roomtemperature.Alternatively,triglycerideswithtransdoublebonds(popularlycalledtransfats),haverelatively
PAGE: 71
60 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
linearfattyacidsthatareabletopacktightlytogetheratroomtemperatureandformsolidfats.Inthehumandiet,
transfatsarelinkedtoanincreasedriskofcardiovasculardisease,somanyfoodmanufacturershavereduced
oreliminatedtheiruseinrecentyears.Incontrasttounsaturatedfats,wecalltriglycerideswithoutdoublebonds
between carbon atoms saturated fats, meaning that they contain all the hydrogen atoms available. Saturated
fats are a solid at room temperature and usually of animal origin.
Figure2.25Thesespace-fillingmodelsshowacis(oleicacid)andatrans(eliadicacid)fattyacid.Noticethebendin
the molecule caused by thecisconfiguration.
Enantiomers
Enantiomersaremoleculesthatsharethesamechemicalstructureandchemicalbondsbutdifferinthethree-
dimensional placement of atoms so that they are non-superimposable mirror images. Figure 2.26 shows an
amino acid alanine example, where the two structures are nonsuperimposable. In nature, only the L-forms of
aminoacidsmakeproteins.SomeDformsofaminoacidsareseeninthecellwallsofbacteria,butneverintheir
proteins.Similarly,theD-formofglucoseisthemainproductofphotosynthesisandwerarelyseethemolecule's
L-form in nature.
Figure2.26D-alanineandL-alanineareexamplesofenantiomersormirrorimages.OnlytheL-formsofaminoacids
are used to make proteins.
Functional Groups
Functionalgroupsaregroupsofatomsthatoccurwithinmoleculesandconferspecificchemicalpropertiesto
thosemolecules.Wefindthemalongthe“carbonbackbone”ofmacromolecules.Chainsand/orringsofcarbon
atoms with the occasional substitution of an element such as nitrogen or oxygen form this carbon backbone.
Molecules with other elements in their carbon backbone aresubstituted hydrocarbons.
The functional groups in a macromolecule are usually attached to the carbon backbone at one or several
differentplacesalongitschainand/orringstructure.Eachofthefourtypesofmacromolecules—proteins,lipids,
carbohydrates,andnucleicacids—hasitsowncharacteristicsetoffunctionalgroupsthatcontributesgreatlyto
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 72
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 61
its differing chemical properties and its function in living organisms.
A functional group can participate in specific chemical reactions. Figure 2.27 shows some of the important
functionalgroupsinbiologicalmolecules.Theyinclude:hydroxyl,methyl,carbonyl,carboxyl,amino,phosphate,
andsulfhydryl.ThesegroupsplayanimportantroleinformingmoleculeslikeDNA,proteins,carbohydrates,and
lipids.Weusuallyclassifyfunctionalgroupsashydrophobicorhydrophilicdependingontheirchargeorpolarity
characteristics. An example of a hydrophobic group is the nonpolar methyl molecule. Among the hydrophilic
functional groups is the carboxyl group in amino acids, some amino acid side chains, and the fatty acids that
+
formtriglyceridesandphospholipids.Thiscarboxylgroupionizestoreleasehydrogenions(H )fromtheCOOH
-
group resulting in the negatively charged COO group. This contributes to the hydrophilic nature of whatever
molecule on which it is found. Other functional groups, such as the carbonyl group, have a partially negatively
charged oxygen atom that may form hydrogen bonds with water molecules, again making the molecule more
hydrophilic.
Figure 2.27 These functional groups are in many different biological molecules. R, also known as R-group, is an
abbreviation for any group in which a carbon or hydrogen atom is attached to the rest of the molecule.
Hydrogen bonds between functional groups (within the same molecule or between different molecules) are
important to the function of many macromolecules and help them to fold properly into and maintain the
appropriateshapeforfunctioning.Hydrogenbondsarealsoinvolvedinvariousrecognitionprocesses,suchas
DNA complementary base pairing and the binding of an enzyme to its substrate, asFigure 2.28illustrates.
PAGE: 73
62 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
Figure 2.28Hydrogen bonds connect two strands of DNA together to create the double-helix structure.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 74
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 63
KEY TERMS
acid molecule that donates hydrogen ions and increases the concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution
adhesion attraction between water molecules and other molecules
aliphatic hydrocarbon hydrocarbon consisting of a linear chain of carbon atoms
anion negative ion that is formed by an atom gaining one or more electrons
aromatic hydrocarbon hydrocarbon consisting of closed rings of carbon atoms
atom the smallest unit of matter that retains all of the chemical properties of an element
atomic mass calculated mean of the mass number for an element’s isotopes
atomic number total number of protons in an atom
balanced chemical equation statementofachemicalreactionwiththenumberofeachtypeofatomequalized
for both the products and reactants
base molecule that donates hydroxide ions or otherwise binds excess hydrogen ions and decreases the
hydrogen ions' concentration in a solution
buffer substance that prevents a change in pH by absorbing or releasing hydrogen or hydroxide ions
calorie amount of heat required to change the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius
capillary action occurs because water molecules are attracted to charges on the inner surfaces of narrow
tubular structures such as glass tubes, drawing the water molecules to the tubes' sides
cation positive ion that is formed by an atom losing one or more electrons
chemical bond interactionbetweentwoormoreofthesameordifferentatomsthatresultsinformingmolecules
chemical reaction process leading to rearranging atoms in molecules
chemical reactivity the ability to combine and to chemically bond with each other
cohesion intermolecularforcesbetweenwatermoleculescausedbythepolarnatureofwater;responsiblefor
surface tension
compound substance composed of molecules consisting of atoms of at least two different elements
covalent bond typeofstrongbondformedbetweentwoatomsofthesameordifferentelements; formswhen
electrons are shared between atoms
dissociation releaseofanionfromamoleculesuchthattheoriginalmoleculenowconsistsofanionandthe
+ -
charged remains of the original, such as when water dissociates into H and OH
electrolyte ion necessary for nerve impulse conduction, muscle contractions, and water balance
electron negativelychargedsubatomicparticlethatresidesoutsideofthenucleusintheelectronorbital;lacks
functional mass and has a negative charge of –1 unit
electron configuration arrangement of electrons in an atom’s electron shell (for example, 1s 2 2s 2 2p 6 )
electron orbital how electrons are spatially distributed surrounding the nucleus; the area where we are most
likely to find an electron
electron transfer movement of electrons from one element to another; important in creating ionic bonds
electronegativity ability of some elements to attract electrons (often of hydrogen atoms), acquiring partial
PAGE: 75
64 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
negative charges in molecules and creating partial positive charges on the hydrogen atoms
element one of 118 unique substances that cannot break down into smaller substances; each element has
unique properties and a specified number of protons
enantiomers moleculesthatshareoverallstructureandbondingpatterns,butdifferinhowtheatomsarethree
dimensionally placed such that they are mirror images of each other
equilibrium steady state of relative reactant and product concentration in reversible chemical reactions in a
closed system
evaporation change from liquid to gaseous state at a body of water's surface, plant leaves, or an organism's
skin
functional group group of atoms that provides or imparts a specific function to a carbon skeleton
geometric isomer isomerwithsimilarbondingpatternsdifferingintheplacementofatomsalongsideadouble
covalent bond
heat of vaporization of water high amount of energy required for liquid water to turn into water vapor
hydrocarbon molecule that consists only of carbon and hydrogen
hydrogen bond weakbondbetweenslightlypositivelychargedhydrogenatomsandslightlynegativelycharged
atoms in other molecules
hydrophilic describes ions or polar molecules that interact well with other polar molecules such as water
hydrophobic describes uncharged nonpolar molecules that do not interact well with polar molecules such as
water
inert gas (also, noble gas) element with filled outer electron shell that is unreactive with other atoms
ion atom or chemical group that does not contain equal numbers of protons and electrons
ionic bond chemical bond that forms between ions with opposite charges (cations and anions)
irreversible chemical reaction chemical reaction where reactants proceed unidirectionally to form products
isomers molecules that differ from one another even though they share the same chemical formula
isotope one or more forms of an element that have different numbers of neutrons
law of mass action chemical law stating that the rate of a reaction is proportional to the concentration of the
reacting substances
litmus paper (also,pHpaper)filterpapertreatedwithanaturalwater-solubledyethatchangesitscolorasthe
pH of the environment changes in order to use it as a pH indicator
mass number total number of protons and neutrons in an atom
matter anything that has mass and occupies space
molecule two or more atoms chemically bonded together
neutron uncharged particle that resides in an atom's nucleus; has a mass of one amu
noble gas see inert gas
nonpolar covalent bond type of covalent bond that forms between atoms when electrons are shared equally
between them
nucleus core of an atom; contains protons and neutrons
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 76
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 65
octet rule rule that atoms are most stable when they hold eight electrons in their outermost shells
orbital region surrounding the nucleus; contains electrons
organic molecule any molecule containing carbon (except carbon dioxide)
periodic table organizational chart of elements indicating each element's atomic number and atomic mass;
provides key information about the elements' properties
pH paper see litmus paper
pH scale scale ranging from zero to 14 that is inversely proportional to the hydrogen ions' concentration in a
solution
polar covalent bond type of covalent bond that forms as a result of unequal electron sharing, resulting in
creating slightly positive and negative charged molecule regions
product molecule that is result of chemical reaction
proton positively charged particle that resides in the atom's nucleus; has a mass of one amu and a charge of
+1
radioisotope isotope that emits radiation comprised of subatomic particles to form more stable elements
reactant molecule that takes part in a chemical reaction
reversible chemical reaction chemical reaction that functions bidirectionally, where products may turn into
reactants if their concentration is great enough
solvent substance capable of dissolving another substance
specific heat capacity the amount of heat one gram of a substance must absorb or lose to change its
temperature by one degree Celsius
sphere of hydration when a polar water molecule surrounds charged or polar molecules thus keeping them
dissolved and in solution
structural isomers moleculesthatshareachemicalformulabutdifferintheplacementoftheirchemicalbonds
substituted hydrocarbon hydrocarbonchainorringcontaininganatomofanotherelementinplaceofoneof
the backbone carbons
surface tension tensionatthesurfaceofabodyofliquidthatpreventsthemoleculesfromseparating;created
by the attractive cohesive forces between the liquid's molecules
valence shell outermost shell of an atom
van der Waals interaction very weak interaction between molecules due to temporary charges attracting
atoms that are very close together
CHAPTER SUMMARY
2.1Atoms, Isotopes, Ions, and Molecules: The Building Blocks
Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. It is comprised of elements. All of the 98 elements that
occur naturally have unique qualities that allow them to combine in various ways to create molecules, which in
turn combine to form cells, tissues, organ systems, and organisms. Atoms, which consist of protons, neutrons,
and electrons, are the smallest units of an element that retain all of the properties of that element. Electrons
can transfer, share, or cause charge disparities between atoms to create bonds, including ionic, covalent, and
hydrogen bonds, as well as van der Waals interactions.
PAGE: 77
66 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
2.2Water
Water has many properties that are critical to maintaining life. It is a polar molecule, allowing for forming
hydrogen bonds. Hydrogen bonds allow ions and other polar molecules to dissolve in water. Therefore, water is
an excellent solvent. The hydrogen bonds between water molecules cause the water to have a high heat
capacity, meaning it takes considerable added heat to raise its temperature. As the temperature rises, the
hydrogen bonds between water continually break and form anew. This allows for the overall temperature to
remain stable, although energy is added to the system. Water also exhibits a high heat of vaporization, which is
key to how organisms cool themselves by evaporating sweat. Water’s cohesive forces allow for the property of
surface tension; whereas, we see its adhesive properties as water rises inside capillary tubes. The pH value is
a measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution and is one of many chemical characteristics that is highly
regulated in living organisms through homeostasis. Acids and bases can change pH values, but buffers tend to
moderate the changes they cause. These properties of water are intimately connected to the biochemical and
physical processes performed by living organisms, and life would be very different if these properties were
altered, if it could exist at all.
2.3Carbon
The unique properties of carbon make it a central part of biological molecules. Carbon binds to oxygen,
hydrogen, and nitrogen covalently to form the many molecules important for cellular function. Carbon has four
electrons in its outermost shell and can form four bonds. Carbon and hydrogen can form hydrocarbon chains or
rings. Functional groups are groups of atoms that confer specific properties to hydrocarbon (or substituted
hydrocarbon) chains or rings that define their overall chemical characteristics and function.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 2.3How many neutrons do carbon-12 and false?
carbon-13 have, respectively? a. Molecules with the formulas CH3CH2COOH
2.Figure 2.7An atom may give, take, or share
and C3H6O2could be structural isomers.
b. Molecules must have a double bond to be
electrons with another atom to achieve a full valence
cis-transisomers.
shell, the most stable electron configuration. Looking
c. To be enantiomers, a molecule must have at
at this figure, how many electrons do elements in
least three different atoms or groups
group 1 need to lose in order to achieve a stable
connected to a central carbon.
electron configuration? How many electrons do
d. To be enantiomers, a molecule must have at
elements in groups 14 and 17 need to gain to
least four different atoms or groups
achieve a stable configuration?
connected to a central carbon.
3.Figure 2.24Which of the following statements is
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.If xenon has an atomic number of 54 and a mass a. shells 1 and 2 are full, and shell 3 has nine
number of 108, how many neutrons does it have? electrons
b. shells 1, 2 and 3 are full and shell 4 has
a. 54 three electrons
b. 27 c. shells 1, 2 and 3 are full and shell 4 has one
c. 100 electron
d. 108 d. shells 1, 2 and 3 are full and no other
electrons are present
5.Atoms that vary in the number of neutrons found in
their nuclei are called ________. 7.Which type of bond represents a weak chemical
a. ions bond?
b. neutrons a. hydrogen bond
c. neutral atoms b. atomic bond
d. isotopes c. covalent bond
d. nonpolar covalent bond
6.Potassium has an atomic number of 19. What is its
electron configuration? 8.Which of the following statements is not true?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 78
Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life 67
a. Water is polar. a. Acids and bases cannot mix together.
b. Water stabilizes temperature. b. Acids and bases will neutralize each other.
c. Water is essential for life. c. Acids, but not bases, can change the pH of
d. Water is the most abundant molecule in the a solution.
Earth’s atmosphere. d. Acids donate hydroxide ions (OH – ); bases
9.When acids are added to a solution, the pH should donate hydrogen ions (H + ).
________.
12.Each carbon molecule can bond with as many
a. decrease
as________ other atom(s) or molecule(s).
b. increase
a. one
c. stay the same
b. two
d. cannot tell without testing
c. six
10.We call a molecule that binds up excess d. four
hydrogen ions in a solution a(n) ________.
13.Which of the following is not a functional group
a. acid
that can bond with carbon?
b. isotope
a. sodium
c. base
b. hydroxyl
d. donator
c. phosphate
11.Which of the following statements is true? d. carbonyl
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
14.What makes ionic bonds different from covalent 17.Why can some insects walk on water?
bonds?
18.What property of carbon makes it essential for
15.Why are hydrogen bonds and van der Waals organic life?
interactions necessary for cells?
19.Compare and contrast saturated and unsaturated
16.Discuss how buffers help prevent drastic swings triglycerides.
in pH.
PAGE: 79
68 Chapter 2 | The Chemical Foundation of Life
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 80
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 69
3 | BIOLOGICAL
MACROMOLECULES
Figure3.1Foodssuchasbread,fruit,andcheesearerichsourcesofbiologicalmacromolecules.(credit:modification
of work by Bengt Nyman)
Chapter Outline
3.1:Synthesis of Biological Macromolecules
3.2:Carbohydrates
3.3:Lipids
3.4:Proteins
3.5:Nucleic Acids
Introduction
Food provides the body with the nutrients it needs to survive. Many of these critical nutrients are biological
macromolecules, or large molecules, necessary for life. Different smaller organic molecule (monomer)
combinationsbuildthesemacromolecules(polymers).Whatspecificbiologicalmacromoleculesdolivingthings
require? How do these molecules form? What functions do they serve? We explore these questions in this
chapter.
PAGE: 81
70 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
3.1 | Synthesis of Biological Macromolecules
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand macromolecule synthesis
• Explain dehydration (or condensation) and hydrolysis reactions
As you’ve learned, biological macromolecules are large molecules, necessary for life, that are built from
smaller organic molecules. There are four major biological macromolecule classes (carbohydrates, lipids,
proteins, and nucleic acids). Each is an important cell component and performs a wide array of functions.
Combined,thesemoleculesmakeupthemajorityofacell’sdrymass(recallthatwatermakesupthemajorityof
itscompletemass).Biologicalmacromoleculesareorganic,meaningtheycontaincarbon.Inaddition,theymay
contain hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and additional minor elements.
Dehydration Synthesis
Most macromolecules are made from single subunits, or building blocks, called monomers. The monomers
combine with each other using covalent bonds to form larger molecules known as polymers. In doing so,
monomers release water molecules as byproducts. This type of reaction is dehydration synthesis, which
means “to put together while losing water.”
Figure3.2Inthedehydrationsynthesisreactionabove,twoglucosemoleculeslinktoformthedisaccharidemaltose.
In the process, it forms a water molecule.
In a dehydration synthesis reaction (Figure 3.2), the hydrogen of one monomer combines with the hydroxyl
group of another monomer, releasing a water molecule. At the same time, the monomers share electrons and
formcovalentbonds.Asadditionalmonomersjoin,thischainofrepeatingmonomersformsapolymer.Different
monomer types can combine in many configurations, giving rise to a diverse group of macromolecules. Even
onekindofmonomercancombineinavarietyofwaystoformseveraldifferentpolymers.Forexample,glucose
monomers are the constituents of starch, glycogen, and cellulose.
Hydrolysis
Polymers break down into monomers during hydrolysis. A chemical reaction occurs when inserting a water
molecule across the bond. Breaking a covalent bond with this water molecule in the compound achieves this
(Figure3.3).Duringthesereactions,thepolymerbreaksintotwocomponents:onepartgainsahydrogenatom
(H+) and the other gains a hydroxyl molecule (OH–) from a split water molecule.
Figure3.3Inthehydrolysisreactionhere,thedisaccharidemaltosebreaksdowntoformtwoglucosemonomersby
adding a water molecule. Note that this reaction is the reverse of the synthesis reaction inFigure 3.2.
Dehydrationandhydrolysisreactionsarecatalyzed,or“spedup,”byspecificenzymes;dehydrationreactions
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 82
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 71
involvetheformationofnewbonds,requiringenergy,whilehydrolysisreactionsbreakbondsandreleaseenergy.
These reactions are similar for most macromolecules, but each monomer and polymer reaction is specific for
its class. For example, catalytic enzymes in the digestive system hydrolyze or break down the food we ingest
into smaller molecules. This allows cells in our body to easily absorb nutrients in the intestine. A specific
enzyme breaks down each macromolecule. For instance, amylase, sucrase, lactase, or maltase break down
carbohydrates. Enzymes called proteases, such as pepsin and peptidase, and hydrochloric acid break down
proteins. Lipases break down lipids. These broken down macromolecules provide energy for cellular activities.
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/hydrolysis) to see visual representations of dehydration
synthesis and hydrolysis.
3.2 | Carbohydrates
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the role of carbohydrates in cells and in the extracellular materials of animals and plants
• Explain carbohydrate classifications
• List common monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides
Most people are familiar with carbohydrates, one type of macromolecule, especially when it comes to what we
eat. To lose weight, some individuals adhere to “low-carb” diets. Athletes, in contrast, often “carb-load” before
importantcompetitionstoensurethattheyhaveenoughenergytocompeteatahighlevel.Carbohydratesare,in
fact,anessentialpartofourdiet.Grains,fruits,andvegetablesareallnaturalcarbohydratesourcesthatprovide
energytothebody,particularlythroughglucose,asimplesugarthatisacomponentofstarchandaningredient
in many staple foods. Carbohydrates also have other important functions in humans, animals, and plants.
Molecular Structures
The stoichiometric formula (CH2O)n, where n is the number of carbons in the molecule represents
carbohydrates. In other words, the ratio of carbon to hydrogen to oxygen is 1:2:1 in carbohydrate molecules.
This formula also explains the origin of the term “carbohydrate”: the components are carbon (“carbo”) and
the components of water (hence, “hydrate”). Scientists classify carbohydrates into three subtypes:
monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides.
Monosaccharides
Monosaccharides (mono- = “one”; sacchar- = “sweet”) are simple sugars, the most common of which is
glucose.Inmonosaccharides,thenumberofcarbonsusuallyrangesfromthreetoseven.Mostmonosaccharide
names end with the suffix -ose. If the sugar has an aldehyde group (the functional group with the structure R-
CHO), it is an aldose, and if it has a ketone group (the functional group with the structure RC(=O)R'), it is a
ketose. Depending on the number of carbons in the sugar, they can be trioses (three carbons), pentoses (five
carbons), and/or hexoses (six carbons).Figure 3.4illustrates monosaccharides.
PAGE: 83
72 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.4 Scientists classify monosaccharides based on the position of their carbonyl group and the number of
carbons in the backbone. Aldoses have a carbonyl group (indicated in green) at the end of the carbon chain, and
ketoseshaveacarbonylgroupinthemiddleofthecarbonchain.Trioses,pentoses,andhexoseshavethree-,five-,
and six- carbon backbones, respectively.
The chemical formula for glucose is C6H12O6. In humans, glucose is an important source of energy. During
cellular respiration, energy releases from glucose, and that energy helps make adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
Plants synthesize glucose using carbon dioxide and water, and glucose in turn provides energy requirements
for the plant. Humans and other animals that feed on plants often store excess glucose as catabolized (cell
breakdown of larger molecules) starch.
Galactose (part of lactose, or milk sugar) and fructose (found in sucrose, in fruit) are other common
monosaccharides. Although glucose, galactose, and fructose all have the same chemical formula (C6H12O6),
they differ structurally and chemically (and are isomers) because of the different arrangement of functional
groups around the asymmetric carbon. All these monosaccharides have more than one asymmetric carbon
(Figure 3.5).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 84
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 73
Figure3.5Glucose,galactose,andfructoseareallhexoses.Theyarestructuralisomers,meaningtheyhavethe
same chemical formula (C6H12O6) but a different atom arrangement.
What kind of sugars are these, aldose or ketose?
Glucose, galactose, and fructose are isomeric monosaccharides (hexoses), meaning they have the same
chemical formula but have slightly different structures. Glucose and galactose are aldoses, and fructose is a
ketose.
Monosaccharidescanexistasalinearchainorasring-shapedmolecules.Inaqueoussolutionstheyareusually
in ring forms (Figure 3.6). Glucose in a ring form can have two different hydroxyl group arrangements (OH)
aroundtheanomericcarbon(carbon1thatbecomesasymmetricintheringformation process).Ifthehydroxyl
groupisbelowcarbonnumber1inthesugar,itisinthealpha(α)position,andifitisabovetheplane,itisinthe
beta (β) position.
PAGE: 85
74 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.6 Five and six carbon monosaccharides exist in equilibrium between linear and ring forms. When the ring
forms,thesidechainitclosesonlocksintoanαorβposition.Fructoseandribosealsoformrings,althoughtheyform
five-membered rings as opposed to the six-membered ring of glucose.
Disaccharides
Disaccharides(di-=“two”)formwhentwomonosaccharidesundergoadehydrationreaction(oracondensation
reaction or dehydration synthesis). During this process, one monosaccharide's hydroxyl group combines with
anothermonosaccharide'shydrogen,releasingawatermoleculeandformingacovalentbond.Acovalentbond
forms between a carbohydrate molecule and another molecule (in this case, between two monosaccharides).
Scientists call this a glycosidic bond (Figure 3.7). Glycosidic bonds (or glycosidic linkages) can be an alpha
orbetatype.AnalphabondisformedwhentheOHgrouponthecarbon-1ofthefirstglucoseisbelowthering
plane, and a beta bond is formed when the OH group on the carbon-1 is above the ring plane.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 86
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 75
Figure 3.7 Sucrose forms when a glucose monomer and a fructose monomer join in a dehydration reaction to form
a glycosidic bond. In the process, a water molecule is lost. By convention, the carbon atoms in a monosaccharide
arenumberedfromtheterminalcarbonclosesttothecarbonylgroup.Insucrose,aglycosidiclinkageformsbetween
carbon 1 in glucose and carbon 2 in fructose.
Commondisaccharidesincludelactose,maltose,andsucrose(Figure3.8).Lactoseisadisaccharideconsisting
ofthemonomersglucoseandgalactose.Itisnaturallyinmilk.Maltose,ormaltsugar,isadisaccharideformed
byadehydrationreactionbetweentwoglucosemolecules.Themostcommondisaccharideissucrose,ortable
sugar, which is comprised of glucose and fructose monomers.
PAGE: 87
76 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.8Common disaccharides include maltose (grain sugar), lactose (milk sugar), and sucrose (table sugar).
Polysaccharides
A long chain of monosaccharides linked by glycosidic bonds is a polysaccharide (poly- = “many”). The chain
maybebranchedorunbranched,anditmaycontaindifferenttypesofmonosaccharides.Themolecularweight
may be 100,000 daltons or more depending on the number of joined monomers. Starch, glycogen, cellulose,
and chitin are primary examples of polysaccharides.
Plantsstorestarchintheformofsugars.Inplants,anamyloseandamylopecticmixture(bothglucosepolymers)
comprise these sugars. Plants are able to synthesize glucose, and they store the excess glucose, beyond the
their immediate energy needs, as starch in different plant parts, including roots and seeds. The starch in the
seedsprovidesfoodfortheembryoasitgerminatesandcanalsoactasafoodsourceforhumansandanimals.
Enzymes break down the starch that humans consume. For example, an amylase present in saliva catalyzes,
orbreaksdownthisstarchintosmallermolecules,suchasmaltoseandglucose.Thecellscanthenabsorbthe
glucose.
Glucose starch comprises monomers that are joined by α 1-4 or α 1-6 glycosidic bonds. The numbers 1-4 and
1-6refertothecarbonnumberofthetworesiduesthathavejoinedtoformthebond.AsFigure3.9illustrates,
unbranchedglucosemonomerchains(onlyα1-4linkages)formthestarch;whereas,amylopectinisabranched
polysaccharide (α1-6 linkages at the branch points).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 88
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 77
Figure3.9Amyloseandamylopectinaretwodifferentstarchforms.Unbranchedglucosemonomerchainscomprise
amylosebyα1-4glycosidiclinkages.Unbranchedglucosemonomerchainscompriseamylopectinbyα1-4andα1-6
glycosidiclinkages.Becauseofthewaythesubunitsarejoined,theglucosechainshaveahelicalstructure.Glycogen
(not shown) is similar in structure to amylopectin but more highly branched.
Glycogen is the storage form of glucose in humans and other vertebrates and is comprised of monomers of
glucose.Glycogenistheanimalequivalentofstarchandisahighlybranchedmoleculeusuallystoredinliverand
musclecells.Wheneverbloodglucoselevelsdecrease,glycogenbreaksdowntoreleaseglucoseinaprocess
scientists call glycogenolysis.
Celluloseisthemostabundantnaturalbiopolymer.Cellulosemostlycomprisesaplant'scellwall.Thisprovides
the cell structural support. Wood and paper are mostly cellulosic in nature. Glucose monomers comprise
cellulose thatβ1-4 glycosidic bonds link (Figure 3.10).
PAGE: 89
78 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure3.10Incellulose,glucosemonomersarelinkedinunbranchedchainsbyβ1-4glycosidiclinkages.Becauseof
thewaytheglucosesubunitsarejoined,everyglucosemonomerisflippedrelativetothenextoneresultinginalinear,
fibrous structure.
AsFigure3.10shows,everyotherglucosemonomerincelluloseisflippedover,andthemonomersarepacked
tightlyasextendedlongchains.Thisgivescelluloseitsrigidityandhightensilestrength—whichissoimportant
toplantcells.Whilehumandigestiveenzymescannotbreakdowntheβ1-4linkage,herbivoressuchascows,
koalas,andbuffalosareable,withthehelpofthespecializedfloraintheirstomach,todigestplantmaterialthat
isrichincelluloseanduseitasafoodsource.Insomeoftheseanimals,certainspeciesofbacteriaandprotists
reside in the rumen (part of the herbivore's digestive system) and secrete the enzyme cellulase. The appendix
ofgrazinganimalsalsocontainsbacteriathatdigestcellulose,givingitanimportantroleinruminants'digestive
systems. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose monomers that animals use as an energy source.
Termitesarealsoabletobreakdowncellulosebecauseofthepresenceofotherorganismsintheirbodiesthat
secrete cellulases.
Carbohydratesservevariousfunctionsindifferentanimals.Arthropods(insects,crustaceans,andothers)have
an outer skeleton, the exoskeleton, which protects their internal body parts (as we see in the bee in Figure
3.11). This exoskeleton is made of the biological macromolecule chitin, which is a polysaccharide-containing
nitrogen. It is made of repeating N-acetyl-β-d-glucosamine units, which are a modified sugar. Chitin is also a
major component of fungal cell walls. Fungi are neither animals nor plants and form a kingdom of their own in
the domain Eukarya.
Figure 3.11Insects have a hard outer exoskeleton made of chitin, a type of polysaccharide. (credit: Louise Docker)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 90
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 79
Registered Dietitian
Obesity is a worldwide health concern, and many diseases such as diabetes and heart disease are
becomingmoreprevalentbecauseofobesity.Thisisoneofthereasonswhypeopleincreasinglyseekout
registered dietitians for advice. Registered dietitians help plan nutrition programs for individuals in various
settings.Theyoftenworkwithpatientsinhealthcarefacilities,designingnutritionplanstotreatandprevent
diseases. For example, dietitians may teach a patient with diabetes how to manage blood sugar levels by
eatingthecorrecttypesandamountsofcarbohydrates.Dietitiansmayalsoworkinnursinghomes,schools,
and private practices.
To become a registered dietitian, one needs to earn at least a bachelor’s degree in dietetics, nutrition,
food technology, or a related field. In addition, registered dietitians must complete a supervised internship
program and pass a national exam. Those who pursue careers in dietetics take courses in nutrition,
chemistry, biochemistry, biology, microbiology, and human physiology. Dietitians must become experts in
the chemistry and physiology (biological functions) of food (proteins, carbohydrates, and fats).
Benefits of Carbohydrates
Are carbohydrates good for you? Some often tell people who wish to lose weight that carbohydrates are bad
and they should avoid them. Some diets completely forbid carbohydrate consumption, claiming that a low-
carbohydrate diet helps people to lose weight faster. However, carbohydrates have been an important part of
thehumandietforthousandsofyears.Artifactsfromancientcivilizationsshowthepresenceofwheat,rice,and
corn in our ancestors’ storage areas.
Aspartofawellbalanceddiet,weshouldsupplementcarbohydrateswithproteins,vitamins,andfats.Calorie-
wise, a gram of carbohydrate provides 4.3 Kcal. For comparison, fats provide 9 Kcal/g, a less desirable ratio.
Carbohydrates contain soluble and insoluble elements. The insoluble part, fiber, is mostly cellulose. Fiber
has many uses. It promotes regular bowel movement by adding bulk, and it regulates the blood glucose
consumption rate. Fiber also helps to remove excess cholesterol from the body. Fiber binds to the cholesterol
in the small intestine, then attaches to the cholesterol and prevents the cholesterol particles from entering the
bloodstream.Cholesterolthenexitsthebodyviathefeces.Fiber-richdietsalsohaveaprotectiveroleinreducing
the occurrence of colon cancer. In addition, a meal containing whole grains and vegetables gives a feeling
of fullness. As an immediate source of energy, glucose breaks down during the cellular respiration process,
whichproducesATP,thecell'senergycurrency.Withoutconsumingcarbohydrates,wereducetheavailabilityof
“instant energy”. Eliminating carbohydrates from the diet is not the best way to lose weight. A low-calorie diet
thatisrichinwholegrains,fruits,vegetables,andleanmeat,togetherwithplentyofexerciseandplentyofwater,
is the more sensible way to lose weight.
For an additional perspective on carbohydrates, explore “Biomolecules: the Carbohydrates” through this
interactive animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/carbohydrates).
PAGE: 91
80 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
3.3 | Lipids
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the four major types of lipids
• Explain the role of fats in storing energy
• Differentiate between saturated and unsaturated fatty acids
• Describe phospholipids and their role in cells
• Define the basic structure of a steroid and some steroid functions
• Explain how cholesterol helps maintain the plasma membrane's fluid nature
Lipids include a diverse group of compounds that are largely nonpolar in nature. This is because they are
hydrocarbonsthatincludemostlynonpolarcarbon–carbonorcarbon–hydrogenbonds.Non-polarmoleculesare
hydrophobic(“waterfearing”),orinsolubleinwater.Lipidsperformmanydifferentfunctionsinacell.Cellsstore
energy for long-term use in the form of fats. Lipids also provide insulation from the environment for plants and
animals(Figure3.12).Forexample,theyhelpkeepaquaticbirdsandmammalsdrywhenformingaprotective
layeroverfurorfeathersbecauseoftheirwater-repellanthydrophobicnature.Lipidsarealsothebuildingblocks
of many hormones and are an important constituent of all cellular membranes. Lipids include fats, oils, waxes,
phospholipids, and steroids.
Figure3.12Hydrophobiclipidsinaquaticmammals'fur,suchasthisriverotter,protectthemfromtheelements.(credit:
Ken Bosma)
Fats and Oils
A fat molecule consists of two main components—glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol is an organic compound
(alcohol) with three carbons, five hydrogens, and three hydroxyl (OH) groups. Fatty acids have a long chain of
hydrocarbonstowhichacarboxylgroupisattached,hencethename“fattyacid.”Thenumberofcarbonsinthe
fattyacidmayrangefrom4to36.Themostcommonarethosecontaining12–18carbons.Inafatmolecule,the
fatty acids attach to each of the glycerol molecule's three carbons with an ester bond through an oxygen atom
(Figure 3.13).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 92
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 81
Figure3.13Joiningthreefattyacidstoaglycerolbackboneinadehydrationreactionformstriacylglycerol.Threewater
molecules release in the process.
Duringthisesterbondformation,threewatermoleculesarereleased.Thethreefattyacidsinthetriacylglycerol
may be similar or dissimilar. We also call fats triacylglycerols or triglycerides because of their chemical
structure. Some fatty acids have common names that specify their origin. For example, palmitic acid, a
saturatedfattyacid,isderivedfromthepalmtree.ArachidicacidisderivedfromArachishypogea,thescientific
name for groundnuts or peanuts.
Fatty acids may be saturated or unsaturated. In a fatty acid chain, if there are only single bonds between
neighboring carbons in the hydrocarbon chain, the fatty acid is saturated. Saturated fatty acids are saturated
with hydrogen. In other words, the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon skeleton is maximized.
Stearic acid is an example of a saturated fatty acid (Figure 3.14).
PAGE: 93
82 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.14Stearic acid is a common saturated fatty acid.
Whenthehydrocarbonchaincontainsadoublebond,thefattyacidisunsaturated.Oleicacidisanexampleof
an unsaturated fatty acid (Figure 3.15).
Figure 3.15Oleic acid is a common unsaturated fatty acid.
Most unsaturated fats are liquid at room temperature. We call these oils. If there is one double bond in the
molecule,thenitisamonounsaturatedfat(e.g.,oliveoil),andifthereismorethanonedoublebond,thenitisa
polyunsaturated fat (e.g., canola oil).
When a fatty acid has no double bonds, it is a saturated fatty acid because it is not possible to add more
hydrogentothechain'scarbonatoms.Afatmaycontainsimilarordifferentfattyacidsattachedtoglycerol.Long
straight fatty acids with single bonds generally pack tightly and are solid at room temperature. Animal fats with
stearic acid and palmitic acid (common in meat) and the fat with butyric acid (common in butter) are examples
of saturated fats. Mammals store fats in specialized cells, or adipocytes, where fat globules occupy most of
the cell’s volume. Plants store fat or oil in many seeds and use them as a source of energy during seedling
development. Unsaturated fats or oils are usually of plant origin and contain cis unsaturated fatty acids. Cis
and trans indicate the configuration of the molecule around the double bond. If hydrogens are present in the
same plane, it is a cis fat. If the hydrogen atoms are on two different planes, it is a trans fat. The cis double
bond causes a bend or a “kink” that prevents the fatty acids from packing tightly, keeping them liquid at room
temperature (Figure 3.16). Olive oil, corn oil, canola oil, and cod liver oil are examples of unsaturated fats.
Unsaturatedfatshelptolowerbloodcholesterollevels;whereas,saturatedfatscontributetoplaqueformationin
the arteries.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 94
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 83
Figure 3.16 Saturated fatty acids have hydrocarbon chains connected by single bonds only. Unsaturated fatty acids
haveoneormoredoublebonds.Eachdoublebondmaybeinacisortransconfiguration.Inthecisconfiguration,both
hydrogensareonthesamesideofthehydrocarbonchain.Inthetransconfiguration,thehydrogensareonopposite
sides. Acisdouble bond causes a kink in the chain.
Trans Fats
Thefoodindustryartificiallyhydrogenatesoilstomakethemsemi-solidandofaconsistencydesirableformany
processed food products. Simply speaking, hydrogen gas is bubbled through oils to solidify them. During this
hydrogenation process, double bonds of the cis-conformation in the hydrocarbon chain mayconvert to double
bonds in thetrans- conformation.
Margarine, some types of peanut butter, and shortening are examples of artificially hydrogenated trans fats.
Recent studies have shown that an increase in trans fats in the human diet may lead to higher levels of low-
density lipoproteins (LDL), or “bad” cholesterol, which in turn may lead to plaque deposition in the arteries,
resultinginheartdisease.Manyfastfoodrestaurantshaverecentlybannedusingtransfats,andfoodlabelsare
required to display the trans fat content.
Omega Fatty Acids
Essentialfattyacidsarethosethatthehumanbodyrequiresbutdoesnotsynthesize.Consequently,theyhave
to be supplemented through ingestion via the diet. Omega-3 fatty acids (like those in Figure 3.17) fall into this
categoryandareoneofonlytwoknownforhumans(theotherisomega-6fattyacid).Thesearepolyunsaturated
fattyacidsandareomega-3becauseadoublebondconnectsthethirdcarbonfromthehydrocarbonchain'send
to its neighboring carbon.
PAGE: 95
84 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure3.17Alpha-linolenicacidisanexampleofanomega-3fattyacid.Ithasthreecisdoublebondsand,asaresult,
acurvedshape.Forclarity,thediagramdoesnotshowthecarbons.Eachsinglybondedcarbonhastwohydrogens
associated with it, which the diagram also does not show.
The farthest carbon away from the carboxyl group is numbered as the omega (ω) carbon, and if the double
bond is between the third and fourth carbon from that end, it is an omega-3 fatty acid. Nutritionally important
becausethebodydoesnotmakethem,omega-3fattyacidsincludealpha-linoleicacid(ALA),eicosapentaenoic
acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), all of which are polyunsaturated. Salmon, trout, and tuna are
good sources of omega-3 fatty acids. Research indicates that omega-3 fatty acids reduce the risk of sudden
death from heart attacks, lower triglycerides in the blood, decrease blood pressure, and prevent thrombosis by
inhibitingbloodclotting.Theyalsoreduceinflammation,andmayhelplowertheriskofsomecancersinanimals.
Likecarbohydrates,fatshavereceivedconsiderablebadpublicity.Itistruethateatinganexcessoffriedfoods
and other “fatty” foods leads to weight gain. However, fats do have important functions. Many vitamins are
fat soluble, and fats serve as a long-term storage form of fatty acids: a source of energy. They also provide
insulation for the body. Therefore, we should consume “healthy” fats in moderate amounts on a regular basis.
Waxes
Waxcoverssomeaquaticbirds'feathersandsomeplants'leafsurfaces.Becauseofwaxes'hydrophobicnature,
they prevent water from sticking on the surface (Figure 3.18). Long fatty acid chains esterified to long-chain
alcohols comprise waxes.
Figure 3.18Lipids comprise waxy coverings on some leaves. (credit: Roger Griffith)
Phospholipids
Phospholipids are major plasma membrane constituents that comprise cells' outermost layer. Like fats, they
are comprised of fatty acid chains attached to a glycerol or sphingosine backbone. However, instead of three
fattyacidsattachedasintriglycerides,therearetwofattyacidsformingdiacylglycerol,andamodifiedphosphate
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 96
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 85
group occupies the glycerol backbone's third carbon (Figure 3.19). A phosphate group alone attached to a
diaglyceroldoesnotqualifyasaphospholipid.Itisphosphatidate(diacylglycerol3-phosphate),theprecursorof
phospholipids. An alcohol modifies the phosphate group. Phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylserine are two
important phospholipids that are in plasma membranes.
Figure3.19Aphospholipidisamoleculewithtwofattyacidsandamodifiedphosphategroupattachedtoaglycerol
backbone. Adding a charged or polar chemical group may modify the phosphate.
Aphospholipidisanamphipathicmolecule,meaningithasahydrophobicandahydrophilicpart.Thefattyacid
chainsarehydrophobicandcannotinteractwithwater;whereas,thephosphate-containinggroupishydrophilic
and interacts with water (Figure 3.20).
Figure3.20Thephospholipidbilayeristhemajorcomponentofallcellularmembranes.Thehydrophilicheadgroups
of the phospholipids face the aqueous solution. The hydrophobic tails are sequestered in the middle of the bilayer.
The head is the hydrophilic part, and the tail contains the hydrophobic fatty acids. In a membrane, a bilayer of
phospholipidsformsthestructure'smatrix,phospholipids'fattyacidtailsfaceinside,awayfromwater;whereas,
the phosphate group faces the outside, aqueous side (Figure 3.20).
Phospholipidsareresponsiblefortheplasmamembrane'sdynamicnature.Ifadropofphospholipidsisplaced
inwater,itspontaneouslyformsastructurethatscientistscallamicelle,wherethehydrophilicphosphateheads
face the outside and the fatty acids face the structure's interior.
Steroids
Unlike the phospholipids and fats that we discussed earlier, steroids have a fused ring structure. Although
they do not resemble the other lipids, scientists group them with them because they are also hydrophobic and
PAGE: 97
86 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
insolubleinwater.Allsteroidshavefourlinkedcarbonringsandseveralofthem,likecholesterol,haveashorttail
(Figure 3.21). Many steroids also have the –OH functional group, which puts them in the alcohol classification
(sterols).
Figure 3.21Four fused hydrocarbon rings comprise steroids such as cholesterol and cortisol.
Cholesterolisthemostcommonsteroid.Theliversynthesizescholesterolandistheprecursortomanysteroid
hormones such as testosterone and estradiol, which gonads and endocrine glands secrete. It is also the
precursor to Vitamin D. Cholesterol is also the precursor of bile salts, which help emulsifying fats and their
subsequentabsorptionbycells.Althoughlaypeopleoftenspeaknegativelyaboutcholesterol,itisnecessaryfor
the body's proper functioning. Sterols (cholesterol in animal cells, phytosterol in plants) are components of the
plasma membrane of cells and are found within the phospholipid bilayer.
For an additional perspective on lipids, explore the interactive animation “Biomolecules: The Lipids”
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/lipids).
3.4 | Proteins
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the functions proteins perform in the cell and in tissues
• Discuss the relationship between amino acids and proteins
• Explain the four levels of protein organization
• Describe the ways in which protein shape and function are linked
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 98
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 87
Proteins are one of the most abundant organic molecules in living systems and have the most diverse range
of functions of all macromolecules. Proteins may be structural, regulatory, contractile, or protective. They may
serveintransport,storage,ormembranes;ortheymaybetoxinsorenzymes.Eachcellinalivingsystemmay
contain thousands of proteins, each with a unique function. Their structures, like their functions, vary greatly.
They are all, however, amino acid polymers arranged in a linear sequence.
Types and Functions of Proteins
Enzymes, which living cells produce, are catalysts in biochemical reactions (like digestion) and are usually
complexorconjugatedproteins.Eachenzymeisspecificforthesubstrate(areactantthatbindstoanenzyme)
upon which it acts. The enzyme may help in breakdown, rearrangement, or synthesis reactions. We call
enzymes that break down their substrates catabolic enzymes. Those that build more complex molecules from
theirsubstratesareanabolicenzymes,andenzymesthataffecttherateofreactionarecatalyticenzymes.Note
that all enzymes increase the reaction rate and, therefore, are organic catalysts. An example of an enzyme is
salivary amylase, which hydrolyzes its substrate amylose, a component of starch.
Hormones are chemical-signaling molecules, usually small proteins or steroids, secreted by endocrine cells
thatacttocontrolorregulatespecificphysiologicalprocesses,includinggrowth,development,metabolism,and
reproduction. For example, insulin is a protein hormone that helps regulate the blood glucose level. Table 3.1
lists the primary types and functions of proteins.
Protein Types and Functions
Type Examples Functions
Digestive Help in food by catabolizing nutrients into monomeric
Amylase, lipase, pepsin, trypsin
Enzymes units
Carry substances in the blood or lymph throughout the
Transport Hemoglobin, albumin
body
Structural Actin, tubulin, keratin Construct different structures, like the cytoskeleton
Hormones Insulin, thyroxine Coordinate different body systems' activity
Defense Immunoglobulins Protect the body from foreign pathogens
Contractile Actin, myosin Effect muscle contraction
Legume storage proteins, egg white Provide nourishment in early embryo development and
Storage
(albumin) the seedling
Table 3.1
Proteins have different shapes and molecular weights. Some proteins are globular in shape; whereas, others
are fibrous in nature. For example, hemoglobin is a globular protein, but collagen, located in our skin, is a
fibrousprotein.Proteinshapeiscriticaltoitsfunction,andmanydifferenttypesofchemicalbondsmaintainthis
shape.Changesintemperature,pH,andexposuretochemicalsmayleadtopermanentchangesintheprotein's
shape,leadingtolossoffunction,ordenaturation.Differentarrangementsofthesame20typesofaminoacids
comprise all proteins. Two rare new amino acids were discovered recently (selenocystein and pirrolysine), and
additional new discoveries may be added to the list.
Amino Acids
Aminoacidsarethemonomersthatcompriseproteins.Eachaminoacidhasthesamefundamentalstructure,
which consists of a central carbon atom, or the alpha (α) carbon, bonded to an amino group (NH2), a carboxyl
group(COOH),andtoahydrogenatom.Everyaminoacidalsohasanotheratomorgroupofatomsbondedto
the central atom known as the R group (Figure 3.22).
PAGE: 99
88 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.22 Amino acids have a central asymmetric carbon to which an amino group, a carboxyl group, a hydrogen
atom, and a side chain (R group) are attached.
Scientistsusethename"aminoacid"becausetheseacidscontainbothaminogroupandcarboxyl-acid-groupin
theirbasicstructure.Aswementioned,thereare20commonaminoacidspresentinproteins.Nineoftheseare
essential aminoacidsinhumansbecausethehumanbodycannot producethemandweobtain themfromour
diet. For each amino acid, the R group (or side chain) is different (Figure 3.23).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 100
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 89
Figure3.23Thereare20commonaminoacidscommonlyfoundinproteins,eachwithadifferentRgroup(variant
group) that determines its chemical nature.
Which categories of amino acid would you expect to find on a soluble protein's surface and which would
you expect to find in the interior? What distribution of amino acids would you expect to find in a protein
embedded in a lipid bilayer?
The chemical nature of the side chain determines the amino acid's nature (that is, whether it is acidic, basic,
polar,ornonpolar).Forexample,theaminoacidglycinehasahydrogenatomastheRgroup.Aminoacidssuch
as valine, methionine, and alanine are nonpolar or hydrophobic in nature, while amino acids such as serine,
threonine, and cysteine are polar and have hydrophilic side chains. The side chains of lysine and arginine are
positively charged, and therefore these amino acids are also basic amino acids. Proline has an R group that
is linked to the amino group, forming a ring-like structure. Proline is an exception to the amino acid's standard
structure since its amino group is not separate from the side chain (Figure 3.23).
A single upper case letter or a three-letter abbreviation represents amino acids. For example, the letter V or
the three-letter symbol val represent valine. Just as some fatty acids are essential to a diet, some amino acids
alsoarenecessary.Theseessentialaminoacidsinhumansincludeisoleucine,leucine,andcysteine.Essential
aminoacidsrefertothosenecessarytobuildproteinsinthebody,butnotthosethatthebodyproduces.Which
amino acids are essential varies from organism to organism.
The sequence and the number of amino acids ultimately determine the protein's shape, size, and function. A
covalentbond,orpeptidebond,attachestoeachaminoacid,whichadehydrationreactionforms.Oneamino
acid's carboxyl group and the incoming amino acid's amino group combine, releasing a water molecule. The
resulting bond is the peptide bond (Figure 3.24).
PAGE: 101
90 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure3.24Peptidebondformationisadehydrationsynthesisreaction.Thecarboxylgroupofoneaminoacidislinked
to the incoming amino acid's amino group. In the process, it releases a water molecule.
Theproductsthatsuchlinkagesformarepeptides.Asmoreaminoacidsjointothisgrowingchain,theresulting
chain is a polypeptide. Each polypeptide has a free amino group at one end. This end the N terminal, or
the amino terminal, and the other end has a free carboxyl group, also the C or carboxyl terminal. While the
terms polypeptide and protein are sometimes used interchangeably, a polypeptide is technically a polymer of
amino acids, whereas the term protein is used for a polypeptide or polypeptides that have combined together,
often have bound non-peptide prosthetic groups, have a distinct shape, and have a unique function. After
proteinsynthesis(translation),mostproteinsaremodified.Theseareknownaspost-translationalmodifications.
They may undergo cleavage, phosphorylation, or may require adding other chemical groups. Only after these
modifications is the protein completely functional.
Click through the steps of protein synthesis in this interactive tutorial (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
protein_synth).
The Evolutionary Significance of Cytochrome c
Cytochrome c is an important component of the electron transport chain, a part of cellular respiration, and
itisnormallylocatedinthecellularorganelle,themitochondrion.Thisproteinhasahemeprostheticgroup,
andtheheme'scentralionalternatelyreducesandoxidizesduringelectrontransfer.Becausethisessential
protein’sroleinproducingcellularenergyiscrucial,ithaschangedverylittleovermillionsofyears.Protein
sequencinghasshownthatthereisaconsiderableamountofcytochromecaminoacidsequencehomology
among different species. In other words, we can assess evolutionary kinship by measuring the similarities
or differences among various species’ DNA or protein sequences.
Scientists have determined that human cytochrome c contains 104 amino acids. For each cytochrome c
moleculefromdifferentorganismsthatscientistshavesequencedtodate,37oftheseaminoacidsappearin
thesamepositioninallcytochromecsamples.Thisindicatesthattheremayhavebeenacommonancestor.
Oncomparingthehumanandchimpanzeeproteinsequences,scientistsdidnotfindasequencedifference.
Whenresearcherscomparedhumanandrhesusmonkeysequences,thesingledifferencewasinoneamino
acid. In another comparison, human to yeast sequencing shows a difference in the 44th position.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 102
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 91
Protein Structure
Aswediscussedearlier,aprotein'sshapeiscriticaltoitsfunction.Forexample,anenzymecanbindtoaspecific
substrate at an active site. If this active site is altered because of local changes or changes in overall protein
structure,theenzymemaybeunabletobindtothesubstrate.Tounderstandhowtheproteingetsitsfinalshape
or conformation, we need to understand the four levels of protein structure: primary, secondary, tertiary, and
quaternary.
Primary Structure
Amino acids' unique sequence in a polypeptide chain is its primary structure. For example, the pancreatic
hormone insulin has two polypeptide chains, A and B, and they are linked together by disulfide bonds. The N
terminal amino acid of the A chain is glycine; whereas, the C terminal amino acid is asparagine (Figure 3.25).
The amino acid sequences in the A and B chains are unique to insulin.
Figure3.25Bovineseruminsulinisaproteinhormonecomprisedoftwopeptidechains,A(21aminoacidslong)and
B(30aminoacidslong).Ineachchain,three-letterabbreviationsthatrepresenttheaminoacids'namesintheorder
theyarepresentindicateprimarystructure.Theaminoacidcysteine(cys)hasasulfhydryl(SH)groupasasidechain.
Twosulfhydrylgroupscanreactinthepresenceofoxygentoformadisulfide(S-S)bond.Twodisulfidebondsconnect
theAandBchainstogether,andathirdhelpstheAchainfoldintothecorrectshape.Notethatalldisulfidebondsare
the same length, but we have drawn them different sizes for clarity.
The gene encoding the protein ultimately determines the unique sequence for every protein. A change in
nucleotide sequence of the gene’s coding region may lead to adding a different amino acid to the growing
polypeptide chain, causing a change in protein structure and function. In sickle cell anemia, the hemoglobin β
chain(asmallportionofwhichweshowinFigure3.26)hasasingleaminoacidsubstitution,causingachange
in protein structure and function. Specifically, valine in the β chain substitutes the amino acid glutamic. What
is most remarkable to consider is that a hemoglobin molecule is comprised of two alpha and two beta chains
thateachconsistofabout150aminoacids.Themolecule,therefore,hasabout600aminoacids.Thestructural
differencebetweenanormalhemoglobinmoleculeandasicklecellmolecule—whichdramaticallydecreaseslife
expectancy—is a single amino acid of the 600. What is even more remarkable is that three nucleotides each
encodethose600aminoacids,andasinglebasechange(pointmutation),1in1800basescausesthemutation.
PAGE: 103
92 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure3.26Thebetachainofhemoglobinis147residuesinlength,yetasingleaminoacidsubstitutionleadstosickle
cellanemia.Innormalhemoglobin,theaminoacidatpositionsevenisglutamate.Insicklecellhemoglobin,avaline
replaces glutamate.
Because of this change of one amino acid in the chain, hemoglobin molecules form long fibers that distort the
biconcave,ordisc-shaped,redbloodcellsandcausesthemtoassumeacrescentor“sickle”shape,whichclogs
bloodvessels(Figure3.27).Thiscanleadtomyriadserioushealthproblemssuchasbreathlessness,dizziness,
headaches, and abdominal pain for those affected by this disease.
Figure3.27Inthisbloodsmear,visualizedat535xmagnificationusingbrightfieldmicroscopy,sicklecellsarecrescent
shaped, while normal cells are disc-shaped. (credit: modification of work by Ed Uthman; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
Secondary Structure
The local folding of the polypeptide in some regions gives rise to the secondary structure of the protein. The
mostcommonaretheα-helixandβ-pleatedsheetstructures(Figure3.28).Bothstructuresareheldinshape
by hydrogen bonds. The hydrogen bonds form between the oxygen atom in the carbonyl group in one amino
acid and another amino acid that is four amino acids farther along the chain.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 104
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 93
Figure 3.28 The α-helix and β-pleated sheet are secondary structures of proteins that form because of hydrogen
bondingbetweencarbonylandaminogroupsinthepeptidebackbone.Certainaminoacidshaveapropensitytoform
anα-helix, while others have a propensity to form aβ-pleated sheet.
Everyhelicalturninanalphahelixhas3.6aminoacidresidues.Thepolypeptide'sRgroups(thevariantgroups)
protrudeoutfromtheα-helixchain.Intheβ-pleatedsheet,hydrogenbondingbetweenatomsonthepolypeptide
chain's backbone form the "pleats". The R groups are attached to the carbons and extend above and below
the pleat's folds. The pleated segments align parallel or antiparallel to each other, and hydrogen bonds form
between the partially positive nitrogen atom in the amino group and the partially negative oxygen atom in the
peptidebackbone'scarbonylgroup.Theα-helixandβ-pleatedsheetstructuresareinmostglobularandfibrous
proteins and they play an important structural role.
Tertiary Structure
Thepolypeptide'suniquethree-dimensionalstructureisitstertiarystructure(Figure3.29).Thisstructureisin
part due to chemical interactions at work on the polypeptide chain. Primarily, the interactions among R groups
create the protein's complex three-dimensional tertiary structure. The nature of the R groups in the amino
acids involved can counteract forming the hydrogen bonds we described for standard secondary structures.
For example, R groups with like charges repel each other and those with unlike charges are attracted to each
other(ionicbonds).Whenproteinfoldingtakesplace,thenonpolaraminoacids'hydrophobicRgroupslieinthe
protein'sinterior;whereas,thehydrophilicRgroupslieontheoutside.Scientistsalsocalltheformerinteraction
typeshydrophobicinteractions.Interactionbetweencysteinesidechainsformsdisulfidelinkagesinthepresence
of oxygen, the only covalent bond that forms during protein folding.
PAGE: 105
94 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
Figure 3.29 A variety of chemical interactions determine the proteins' tertiary structure. These include hydrophobic
interactions, ionic bonding, hydrogen bonding, and disulfide linkages.
Alloftheseinteractions,weakandstrong,determinetheprotein'sfinalthree-dimensionalshape.Whenaprotein
loses its three-dimensional shape, it may no longer be functional.
Quaternary Structure
Innature,someproteinsformfromseveralpolypeptides,orsubunits,andtheinteractionofthesesubunitsforms
the quaternary structure. Weak interactions between the subunits help to stabilize the overall structure. For
example, insulin(aglobularprotein) hasacombination ofhydrogenanddisulfide bondsthat causeittomostly
clump into a ball shape. Insulin starts out as a single polypeptide and loses some internal sequences in the
presence of post-translational modification after forming the disulfide linkages that hold the remaining chains
together.Silk(afibrousprotein),however,hasaβ-pleatedsheetstructurethatistheresultofhydrogenbonding
between different chains.
Figure 3.30illustrates the four levels of protein structure (primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 106
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 95
Figure3.30Observethefourlevelsofproteinstructureintheseillustrations.(credit:modificationofworkbyNational
Human Genome Research Institute)
Denaturation and Protein Folding
Each protein has its own unique sequence and shape that chemical interactions hold together. If the protein is
subject to changes in temperature, pH, or exposure to chemicals, the protein structure may change, losing its
shape without losing its primary sequence in what scientists call denaturation. Denaturation is often reversible
because the polypeptide's primary structure is conserved in the process if the denaturing agent is removed,
allowing the protein to resume its function. Sometimes denaturation is irreversible, leading to loss of function.
One example of irreversible protein denaturation is frying an egg. The albumin protein in the liquid egg white
denatureswhenplacedinahotpan.Notallproteinsdenatureathightemperatures.Forinstance,bacteriathat
survive in hot springs have proteins that function at temperatures close to boiling. The stomach is also very
acidic,hasalowpH,anddenaturesproteinsaspartofthedigestionprocess;however,thestomach'sdigestive
enzymes retain their activity under these conditions.
Protein folding is critical to its function. Scientists originally thought that the proteins themselves were
responsible for the folding process. Only recently researchers discovered that often they receive assistance in
thefoldingprocessfromproteinhelpers,orchaperones(orchaperonins)thatassociatewiththetargetprotein
during the folding process. They act by preventing polypeptide aggregation that comprise the complete protein
PAGE: 107
96 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
structure, and they disassociate from the protein once the target protein is folded.
Foranadditionalperspectiveonproteins,viewthisanimation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/proteins)called
“Biomolecules: The Proteins.”
3.5 | Nucleic Acids
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe nucleic acids' structure and define the two types of nucleic acids
• Explain DNA's structure and role
• Explain RNA's structure and roles
Nucleic acids are the most important macromolecules for the continuity of life. They carry the cell's genetic
blueprint and carry instructions for its functioning.
DNA and RNA
The two main types of nucleic acids are deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonucleic acid (RNA). DNA is
thegeneticmaterialinalllivingorganisms,rangingfromsingle-celledbacteriatomulticellularmammals.Itisin
thenucleusofeukaryotesandintheorganelles,chloroplasts,andmitochondria.Inprokaryotes,theDNAisnot
enclosed in a membranous envelope.
The cell's entire genetic content is its genome, and the study of genomes is genomics. In eukaryotic cells but
not in prokaryotes, DNA forms a complex with histone proteins to form chromatin, the substance of eukaryotic
chromosomes.Achromosomemaycontaintensofthousandsofgenes.Manygenescontaintheinformationto
makeproteinproducts.OthergenescodeforRNAproducts.DNAcontrolsallofthecellularactivitiesbyturning
the genes “on” or “off.”
The other type of nucleic acid, RNA, is mostly involved in protein synthesis. The DNA molecules never leave
the nucleus but instead use an intermediary to communicate with the rest of the cell. This intermediary is the
messenger RNA (mRNA). Other types of RNA—like rRNA, tRNA, and microRNA—are involved in protein
synthesis and its regulation.
DNAandRNAarecomprisedofmonomersthatscientistscallnucleotides.Thenucleotidescombinewitheach
othertoformapolynucleotide,DNAorRNA.Threecomponentscompriseeachnucleotide:anitrogenousbase,
a pentose (five-carbon) sugar, and a phosphate group (Figure 3.31). Each nitrogenous base in a nucleotide is
attached to a sugar molecule, which is attached to one or more phosphate groups.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 108
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 97
Figure 3.31 Three components comprise a nucleotide: a nitrogenous base, a pentose sugar, and one or more
phosphategroups.Carbonresiduesinthepentosearenumbered1′through5′(theprimedistinguishestheseresidues
from those in the base, which are numbered without using a prime notation). The base is attached to the ribose's 1′
position,andthephosphateisattachedtothe5′position.Whenapolynucleotideforms,theincomingnucleotide's5′
phosphateattachestothe3′hydroxylgroupattheendofthegrowingchain.Twotypesofpentoseareinnucleotides,
deoxyribose (found in DNA) and ribose (found in RNA). Deoxyribose is similar in structure to ribose, but it has an H
insteadofanOHatthe2′position.Wecandividebasesintotwocategories:purinesandpyrimidines.Purineshavea
double ring structure, and pyrimidines have a single ring.
Thenitrogenousbases,importantcomponentsofnucleotides,areorganicmoleculesandaresonamedbecause
they contain carbon and nitrogen. They are bases because they contain an amino group that has the potential
ofbindinganextrahydrogen,andthusdecreasingthehydrogenionconcentrationinitsenvironment,makingit
morebasic.EachnucleotideinDNAcontainsoneoffourpossiblenitrogenousbases:adenine(A),guanine(G)
cytosine (C), and thymine (T).
Scientistsclassifyadenineandguanineaspurines.Thepurine'sprimarystructureistwocarbon-nitrogenrings.
Scientists classify cytosine, thymine, and uracil as pyrimidines which have a single carbon-nitrogen ring as
their primary structure (Figure 3.31). Each of these basic carbon-nitrogen rings has different functional groups
attachedtoit.Inmolecularbiologyshorthand,weknowthenitrogenousbasesbytheirsymbolsA,T,G,C,and
U. DNA contains A, T, G, and C; whereas, RNA contains A, U, G, and C.
The pentose sugar in DNA is deoxyribose, and in RNA, the sugar is ribose (Figure 3.31). The difference
between the sugars is the presence of the hydroxyl group on the ribose's second carbon and hydrogen on the
deoxyribose'ssecondcarbon.Thecarbonatomsofthesugarmoleculearenumberedas1′,2′,3′,4′,and5′(1′
is read as “one prime”). The phosphate residue attaches to the hydroxyl group of the 5′ carbon of one sugar
andthehydroxylgroupofthe3′carbonofthesugarofthenextnucleotide,whichformsa5′–3′phosphodiester
PAGE: 109
98 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
linkage.Asimpledehydrationreactionliketheotherlinkagesconnectingmonomersinmacromoleculesdoesnot
form the phosphodiester linkage. Its formation involves removing two phosphate groups. A polynucleotide may
have thousands of such phosphodiester linkages.
DNA Double-Helix Structure
DNAhasadouble-helixstructure(Figure3.32).Thesugarandphosphatelieontheoutsideofthehelix,forming
theDNA'sbackbone.Thenitrogenousbasesarestackedintheinterior,likeapairofstaircasesteps.Hydrogen
bonds bind the pairs to each other. Every base pair inthe double helix isseparated from the next base pair by
0.34 nm. The helix's two strands run in opposite directions, meaning that the 5′ carbon end of one strand will
face the 3′ carbon end of its matching strand. (Scientists call this an antiparallel orientation and is important to
DNA replication and in many nucleic acid interactions.)
Figure3.32NativeDNAisanantiparalleldoublehelix.Thephosphatebackbone(indicatedbythecurvylines)ison
theoutside,andthebasesareontheinside.Eachbasefromonestrandinteractsviahydrogenbondingwithabase
from the opposing strand. (credit: Jerome Walker/Dennis Myts)
Only certain types of base pairing are allowed. For example, a certain purine can only pair with a certain
pyrimidine. This means A can pair with T, and G can pair with C, as Figure 3.33 shows. This is the base
complementary rule. In other words, the DNA strands are complementary to each other. If the sequence of
one strand is AATTGGCC, the complementary strand would have the sequence TTAACCGG. During DNA
replication, each strand copies itself, resulting in a daughter DNA double helix containing one parental DNA
strand and a newly synthesized strand.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 110
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 99
Figure3.33InadoublestrandedDNAmolecule,thetwostrandsrunantiparalleltooneanothersothatonestrand
runs 5′ to 3′ and the other 3′ to 5′. The phosphate backbone islocated on the outside, and the bases are in the
middle. Adenine forms hydrogen bonds (or base pairs) with thymine, and guanine base pairs with cytosine.
A mutation occurs, and adenine replaces cytosine. What impact do you think this will have on the DNA
structure?
RNA
Ribonucleic acid, or RNA, is mainly involved in the process of protein synthesis under the direction of DNA.
RNAisusuallysingle-strandedandiscomprisedofribonucleotidesthatarelinkedbyphosphodiesterbonds.A
ribonucleotideintheRNAchaincontainsribose(thepentosesugar),oneofthefournitrogenousbases(A,U,G,
and C), and the phosphate group.
TherearefourmajortypesofRNA:messengerRNA(mRNA),ribosomalRNA(rRNA),transferRNA(tRNA),and
microRNA(miRNA).Thefirst,mRNA,carriesthemessagefromDNA,whichcontrolsallofthecellularactivities
inacell.Ifacellrequiressynthesizingacertainprotein,thegeneforthisproductturns“on”andthemessenger
RNAsynthesizesinthenucleus.TheRNAbasesequenceiscomplementarytotheDNA'scodingsequencefrom
which it has been copied. However, in RNA, the base T is absent and U is present instead. If the DNA strand
has a sequence AATTGCGC, the sequence of the complementary RNA is UUAACGCG. In the cytoplasm, the
mRNA interacts with ribosomes and other cellular machinery (Figure 3.34).
Figure 3.34 A ribosome has two parts: a large subunit and a small subunit. The mRNA sits in between the two
subunits. A tRNA molecule recognizes a codon on the mRNA, binds to it by complementary base pairing, and adds
the correct amino acid to the growing peptide chain.
The mRNA is read in sets of three bases known as codons. Each codon codes for a single amino acid. In this
way, the mRNA is read and the protein product is made. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is a major constituent of
PAGE: 111
100 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
ribosomesonwhichthemRNAbinds.TherRNAensurestheproperalignmentofthemRNAandtheRibosomes.
Theribosome'srRNAalsohasanenzymaticactivity(peptidyltransferase)andcatalyzespeptidebondformation
betweentwoalignedaminoacids.TransferRNA(tRNA)isoneofthesmallestofthefourtypesofRNA,usually
70–90 nucleotides long. It carries the correct amino acid to the protein synthesis site. It is the base pairing
between the tRNA and mRNA that allows for the correct amino acid to insert itself in the polypeptide chain.
MicroRNAs are the smallest RNA molecules and their role involves regulating gene expression by interfering
with the expression of certain mRNA messages.Table 3.2summarizes DNA and RNA features.
DNA and RNA Features
DNA RNA
Function Carries genetic information Involved in protein synthesis
Location Remains in the nucleus Leaves the nucleus
Structure Double helix Usually single-stranded
Sugar Deoxyribose Ribose
Pyrimidines Cytosine, thymine Cytosine, uracil
Purines Adenine, guanine Adenine, guanine
Table 3.2
EventhoughtheRNAissinglestranded,mostRNAtypesshowextensiveintramolecularbasepairingbetween
complementary sequences, creating a predictable three-dimensional structure essential for their function.
As you have learned, information flow in an organism takes place from DNA to RNA to protein. DNA dictates
the structure of mRNA in a process scientists call transcription, and RNA dictates the protein's structure in
a process scientists call translation. This is the Central Dogma of Life, which holds true for all organisms;
however, exceptions to the rule occur in connection with viral infections.
To learn more about DNA, explore the Howard Hughes Medical Institute BioInteractive animations
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/DNA)on the topic of DNA.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 112
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 101
KEY TERMS
alpha-helix structure (α-helix) type of secondary protein structure formed by folding the polypeptide into a
helix shape with hydrogen bonds stabilizing the structure
amino acid a protein's monomer; has a central carbon or alpha carbon to which an amino group, a carboxyl
group, a hydrogen, and an R group or side chain is attached; the R group is different for all 20 common
amino acids
beta-pleated sheet (β-pleated) secondary structure in proteins in which hydrogen bonding forms “pleats”
between atoms on the polypeptide chain's backbone
biological macromolecule large molecule necessary for life that is built from smaller organic molecules
carbohydrate biological macromolecule in which the ratio of carbon to hydrogen and to oxygen is 1:2:1;
carbohydrates serve as energy sources and structural support in cells and form arthropods' cellular
exoskeleton
cellulose polysaccharide that comprises the plants' cell wall; provides structural support to the cell
chaperone (also, chaperonin) protein that helps nascent protein in the folding process
chitin typeofcarbohydratethatformstheouterskeletonofallarthropodsthatincludecrustaceansandinsects;
it also forms fungi cell walls
dehydration synthesis (also, condensation) reaction that links monomer molecules, releasing a water
molecule for each bond formed
denaturation loss of shape in a protein as a result of changes in temperature, pH, or chemical exposure
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) double-helical molecule that carries the cell's hereditary information
disaccharide two sugar monomers that a glycosidic bond links
enzyme catalyst in a biochemical reaction that is usually a complex or conjugated protein
glycogen storage carbohydrate in animals
glycosidic bond bond formed by a dehydration reaction between two monosaccharides with eliminating a
water molecule
hormone chemicalsignalingmolecule,usuallyproteinorsteroid,secretedbyendocrinecellsthatacttocontrol
or regulate specific physiological processes
hydrolysis reaction that causes breakdown of larger molecules into smaller molecules by utilizing water
lipid macromolecule that is nonpolar and insoluble in water
messenger RNA (mRNA) RNA that carries information from DNA to ribosomes during protein synthesis
monomer smallest unit of larger molecules that are polymers
monosaccharide single unit or monomer of carbohydrates
nucleic acid biological macromolecule that carries the cell's genetic blueprint and carries instructions for the
cell's functioning
nucleotide monomer of nucleic acids; contains a pentose sugar, one or more phosphate groups, and a
nitrogenous base
omega fat type of polyunsaturated fat that the body requires; numbering the carbon omega starts from the
methyl end or the end that is farthest from the carboxylic end
PAGE: 113
102 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
peptide bond bond formed between two amino acids by a dehydration reaction
phosphodiester linkage covalent chemical bond that holds together the polynucleotide chains with a
phosphate group linking neighboring nucleotides' two pentose sugars
phospholipid membranes' major constituent; comprised of two fatty acids and a phosphate-containing group
attached to a glycerol backbone
polymer chain of monomer residues that covalent bonds link; polymerization is the process of polymer
formation from monomers by condensation
polynucleotide long chain of nucleotides
polypeptide long chain of amino acids that peptide bonds link
polysaccharide long chain of monosaccharides; may be branched or unbranched
primary structure linear sequence of amino acids in a protein
protein biological macromolecule comprised of one or more amino acid chains
purine type of nitrogenous base in DNA and RNA; adenine and guanine are purines
pyrimidine type of nitrogenous base in DNA and RNA; cytosine, thymine, and uracil are pyrimidines
quaternary structure association of discrete polypeptide subunits in a protein
ribonucleic acid (RNA) single-stranded, often internally base paired, molecule that is involved in protein
synthesis
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) RNAthatensurestheproperalignmentofthemRNAandtheribosomesduringprotein
synthesis and catalyzes forming the peptide linkage
saturated fatty acid long-chain hydrocarbon with single covalent bonds in the carbon chain; the number of
hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon skeleton is maximized
secondary structure regular structure that proteins form by intramolecular hydrogen bonding between the
oxygenatomofoneaminoacidresidueandthehydrogenattachedtothenitrogenatomofanotheramino
acid residue
starch storage carbohydrate in plants
steroid type of lipid comprised of four fused hydrocarbon rings forming a planar structure
tertiary structure a protein's three-dimensional conformation, including interactions between secondary
structural elements; formed from interactions between amino acid side chains
trans fat fatformedartificiallybyhydrogenatingoils,leadingtoadifferentarrangementofdoublebond(s)than
those in naturally occurring lipids
transcription process through which messenger RNA forms on a template of DNA
transfer RNA (tRNA) RNA that carries activated amino acids to the site of protein synthesis on the ribosome
translation process through which RNA directs the protein's formation
triacylglycerol (also, triglyceride) fat molecule; consists of three fatty acids linked to a glycerol molecule
unsaturated fatty acid long-chain hydrocarbon that has one or more double bonds in the hydrocarbon chain
wax lipid comprised of a long-chain fatty acid that is esterified to a long-chain alcohol; serves as a protective
coating on some feathers, aquatic mammal fur, and leaves
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 114
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 103
CHAPTER SUMMARY
3.1Synthesis of Biological Macromolecules
Proteins, carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and lipids are the four major classes of biological
macromolecules—large molecules necessary for life that are built from smaller organic molecules.
Macromolecules are comprised of single units scientists call monomers that are joined by covalent bonds to
form larger polymers. The polymer is more than the sum of its parts: it acquires new characteristics, and leads
to an osmotic pressure that is much lower than that formed by its ingredients. This is an important advantage in
maintaining cellular osmotic conditions. A monomer joins with another monomer with water molecule release,
leading to a covalent bond forming. Scientists call these dehydration or condensation reactions. When
polymers break down into smaller units (monomers), they use a water molecule for each bond broken by these
reactions. Such reactions are hydrolysis reactions. Dehydration and hydrolysis reactions are similar for all
macromolecules, but each monomer and polymer reaction is specific to its class. Dehydration reactions
typically require an investment of energy for new bond formation, while hydrolysis reactions typically release
energy by breaking bonds.
3.2Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates are a group of macromolecules that are a vital energy source for the cell and provide structural
support to plant cells, fungi, and all of the arthropods that include lobsters, crabs, shrimp, insects, and spiders.
Scientists classify carbohydrates as monosaccharides, disaccharides, and polysaccharides depending on the
number of monomers in the molecule. Monosaccharides are linked by glycosidic bonds that form as a result of
dehydration reactions, forming disaccharides and polysaccharides with eliminating a water molecule for each
bond formed. Glucose, galactose, and fructose are common monosaccharides; whereas, common
disaccharides include lactose, maltose, and sucrose. Starch and glycogen, examples of polysaccharides, are
the storage forms of glucose in plants and animals, respectively. The long polysaccharide chains may be
branched or unbranched. Cellulose is an example of an unbranched polysaccharide; whereas, amylopectin, a
constituent of starch, is a highly branched molecule. Glucose storage, in the form of polymers like starch of
glycogen, makes it slightly less accessible for metabolism; however, this prevents it from leaking out of the cell
or creating a high osmotic pressure that could cause the cell to uptake excessive water.
3.3Lipids
Lipids are a class of macromolecules that are nonpolar and hydrophobic in nature. Major types include fats and
oils, waxes, phospholipids, and steroids. Fats are a stored form of energy and are also known as
triacylglycerols or triglycerides. Fats are comprised of fatty acids and either glycerol or sphingosine. Fatty acids
may be unsaturated or saturated, depending on the presence or absence of double bonds in the hydrocarbon
chain. If only single bonds are present, they are saturated fatty acids. Unsaturated fatty acids may have one or
more double bonds in the hydrocarbon chain. Phospholipids comprise the membrane's matrix. They have a
glycerol or sphingosine backbone to which two fatty acid chains and a phosphate-containing group are
attached. Steroids are another class of lipids. Their basic structure has four fused carbon rings. Cholesterol is a
type of steroid and is an important constituent of the plasma membrane, where it helps to maintain the
membrane's fluid nature. It is also the precursor of steroid hormones such as testosterone.
3.4Proteins
Proteins are a class of macromolecules that perform a diverse range of functions for the cell. They help in
metabolism by acting as enzymes, carriers, or hormones, and provide structural support. The building blocks of
proteins (monomers) are amino acids. Each amino acid has a central carbon that bonds to an amino group, a
carboxyl group, a hydrogen atom, and an R group or side chain. There are 20 commonly occurring amino
acids, each of which differs in the R group. A peptide bond links each amino acid to its neighbors. A long amino
acid chain is a polypeptide.
Proteins are organized at four levels: primary, secondary, tertiary, and (optional) quaternary. The primary
structure is the amino acids' unique sequence. The polypeptide's local folding to form structures such as the
α-helix andβ-pleated sheet constitutes the secondary structure. The overall three-dimensional structure is the
tertiary structure. When two or more polypeptides combine to form the complete protein structure, the
configuration is the protein's quaternary structure. Protein shape and function are intricately linked. Any change
in shape caused by changes in temperature or pH may lead to protein denaturation and a loss in function.
PAGE: 115
104 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
3.5Nucleic Acids
Nucleic acids are molecules comprised of nucleotides that direct cellular activities such as cell division and
protein synthesis. Pentose sugar, a nitrogenous base, and a phosphate group comprise each nucleotide. There
are two types of nucleic acids: DNA and RNA. DNA carries the cell's genetic blueprint and passes it on from
parents to offspring (in the form of chromosomes). It has a double-helical structure with the two strands running
in opposite directions, connected by hydrogen bonds, and complementary to each other. RNA is a single-
stranded polymer composed of linked nucleotides made up of a pentose sugar (ribose), a nitrogenous base,
and a phosphate group. RNA is involved in protein synthesis and its regulation. Messenger RNA (mRNA)
copies from the DNA, exports itself from the nucleus to the cytoplasm, and contains information for constructing
proteins. Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is a part of the ribosomes at the site of protein synthesis; whereas, transfer
RNA (tRNA) carries the amino acid to the site of protein synthesis. The microRNA regulates using mRNA for
protein synthesis.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 3.5What kind of sugars are these, aldose What distribution of amino acids would you expect to
or ketose? find in a protein embedded in a lipid bilayer?
2.Figure 3.23Which categories of amino acid would 3.Figure 3.33A mutation occurs, and cytosine is
you expect to find on the surface of a soluble protein, replaced with adenine. What impact do you think this
and which would you expect to find in the interior? will have on the DNA structure?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Dehydration synthesis leads to formation of a. monosaccharides
b. disaccharides
a. monomers c. lipids
b. polymers d. polysaccharides
c. water and polymers
9.Plant cell walls contain which of the following in
d. none of the above
abundance?
5.During the breakdown of polymers, which of the a. starch
following reactions takes place? b. cellulose
a. hydrolysis c. glycogen
b. dehydration d. lactose
c. condensation
10.Lactose is a disaccharide formed by the
d. covalent bond
formation of a ________ bond between glucose and
6.The following chemical reactants produce the ester ________.
ethyl ethanoate (C4H8O2): a. glycosidic; lactose
b. glycosidic; galactose
C2H6O + CH3COOH
c. hydrogen; sucrose
What type of reaction occurs to make ethyl d. hydrogen; fructose
ethanoate?
11.Which of the following is not an extracellular
matrix role of carbohydrates?
a. condensation a. protect an insect’s internal organs from
b. hydrolysis external trauma
c. combustion b. prevent plant cells from lysing after the plant
d. acid-base reaction is watered
c. maintain the shape of a fungal spore
7.An example of a monosaccharide is ________.
d. provide energy for muscle movement
a. fructose 12.Saturated fats have all of the following
b. glucose characteristics except:
c. galactose
d. all of the above
8.Cellulose and starch are examples of:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 116
Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules 105
a. they are solid at room temperature 17.Mad cow disease is an infectious disease where
b. they have single bonds within the carbon one misfolded protein causes all other copies of the
chain protein to being misfolding. This is an example of a
c. they are usually obtained from animal disease impacting ____ structure.
sources a. primary
d. they tend to dissolve in water easily b. secondary
c. tertiary
13.Phospholipids are important components of
d. quaternary
________.
a. the plasma membrane of cells 18.A nucleotide of DNA may contain ________.
b. the ring structure of steroids
c. the waxy covering on leaves a. ribose, uracil, and a phosphate group
d. the double bond in hydrocarbon chains b. deoxyribose, uracil, and a phosphate group
c. deoxyribose, thymine, and a phosphate
14.Cholesterol is an integral part of plasma
group
membranes. Based on its structure, where is it found
d. ribose, thymine, and a phosphate group
in the membrane?
a. on the extracellular surface 19.The building blocks of nucleic acids are
b. embedded with the phospholipid heads ________.
c. within the tail bilayer a. sugars
d. attached to the intracellular surface b. nitrogenous bases
c. peptides
15.The monomers that make up proteins are called
d. nucleotides
________.
a. nucleotides 20.How does the double helix structure of DNA
b. disaccharides support its role in encoding the genome?
c. amino acids a. The sugar-phosphate backbone provides a
d. chaperones template for DNA replication.
b. tRNA pairing with the template strand
16.Theα-helix and theβ-pleated sheet are part of
creates proteins encoded by the genome.
which protein structure?
c. Complementary base pairing creates a very
a. primary
stable structure.
b. secondary
d. Complementary base pairing allows for easy
c. tertiary
editing of both strands of DNA.
d. quaternary
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
21.Why are biological macromolecules considered monosaccharide with the chemical formula C3H6O3.
organic? How is the structure of the monosaccharide changed
from one form to the other in the human body?
22.What role do electrons play in dehydration
synthesis and hydrolysis? 27.Explain at least three functions that lipids serve in
plants and/or animals.
23.Amino acids have the generic structure seen
below, where R represents different carbon-based 28.Why have trans fats been banned from some
restaurants? How are they created?
29.Why are fatty acids better than glycogen for
storing large amounts of chemical energy?
30.Part of cortisol’s role in the body involves passing
through the plasma membrane to initiate signaling
side chains. inside a cell. Describe how the structures of cortisol
and the plasma membrane allow this to occur.
Describe how the structure of amino acids allows
them to be linked into long peptide chains to form 31.Explain what happens if even one amino acid is
proteins. substituted for another in a polypeptide chain.
Provide a specific example.
24.Describe the similarities and differences between
glycogen and starch. 32.Describe the differences in the four protein
structures.
25.Why is it impossible for humans to digest food
that contains cellulose? 33.Aquaporins are proteins embedded in the plasma
membrane that allow water molecules to move
26.Draw the ketose and aldose forms of a
PAGE: 117
106 Chapter 3 | Biological Macromolecules
between the extracellular matrix and the intracellular 34.What are the structural differences between RNA
space. Based on its function and location, describe and DNA?
the key features of the protein’s shape and the
35.What are the four types of RNA and how do they
chemical characteristics of its amino acids.
function?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 118
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 107
4 | CELL STRUCTURE
Figure 4.1 (a) Nasal sinus cells (viewed with a light microscope), (b) onion cells (viewed with a light microscope),
and (c) Vibrio tasmaniensis bacterial cells (seen through a scanning electron microscope) are from very different
organisms,yetallsharecertainbasiccellstructurecharacteristics.(credita:modificationofworkbyEdUthman,MD;
credit b: modification of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit c: modification of work by Anthony D'Onofrio, William H.
Fowle, Eric J. Stewart, and Kim Lewis of the Lewis Lab at Northeastern University; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
4.1:Studying Cells
4.2:Prokaryotic Cells
4.3:Eukaryotic Cells
4.4:The Endomembrane System and Proteins
4.5:The Cytoskeleton
4.6:Connections between Cells and Cellular Activities
Introduction
Closeyoureyesandpictureabrickwall.Whatisthewall'sbasicbuildingblock?Itisasinglebrick.Likeabrick
wall, cells are the building blocks that make up your body.
Yourbodyhasmanykindsofcells,eachspecializedforaspecificpurpose.Justasweuseavarietyofmaterials
to build a home, the human body is constructed from many cell types. For example, epithelial cells protect
the body's surface and cover the organs and body cavities within. Bone cells help to support and protect the
body.Immunesystemcellsfightinvadingbacteria.Additionally,bloodandbloodcellscarrynutrientsandoxygen
throughoutthebodywhileremovingcarbondioxide.Eachofthesecelltypesplaysavitalroleduringthebody's
growth, development, and day-to-day maintenance. In spite of their enormous variety, however, cells from all
organisms—even ones as diverse as bacteria, onion, and human—share certain fundamental characteristics.
4.1 | Studying Cells
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the role of cells in organisms
• Compare and contrast light microscopy and electron microscopy
• Summarize cell theory
A cell is the smallest unit of a living thing. Whether comprised of one cell (like bacteria) or many cells (like a
human), we call it an organism. Thus, cells are the basic building blocks of all organisms.
PAGE: 119
108 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Several cells of one kind that interconnect with each other and perform a shared function form tissues. These
tissuescombinetoformanorgan(yourstomach,heart,orbrain),andseveralorganscompriseanorgansystem
(such as the digestive system, circulatory system, or nervous system). Several systems that function together
form an organism (like a human being). Here, we will examine the structure and function of cells.
There are many types of cells, which scientists group into one of two broad categories: prokaryotic and
eukaryotic. For example, we classify both animal and plant cells as eukaryotic cells; whereas, we classify
bacterial cells as prokaryotic. Before discussing the criteria for determining whether a cell is prokaryotic or
eukaryotic, we will first examine how biologists study cells.
Microscopy
Cells vary in size. With few exceptions, we cannot see individual cells with the naked eye, so scientists use
microscopes (micro- = “small”; -scope = “to look at”) to study them. A microscope is an instrument that
magnifies an object. We photograph most cells with a microscope, so we can call these images micrographs.
The optics of a microscope’s lenses change the image orientation that the user sees. A specimen that is right-
sideupandfacingrightonthemicroscopeslidewillappearupside-downandfacingleftwhenoneviewsthrough
a microscope, and vice versa. Similarly, if one moves the slide left while looking through the microscope, it will
appeartomoveright,andifonemovesitdown,itwillseemtomoveup.Thisoccursbecausemicroscopesuse
two sets of lenses to magnify the image. Because of the manner by which light travels through the lenses, this
twolenssystemproducesaninvertedimage(binocular,ordissectingmicroscopes,workinasimilarmanner,but
include an additional magnification system that makes the final image appear to be upright).
Light Microscopes
To give you a sense of cell size, a typical human red blood cell is about eight millionths of a meter or eight
micrometers(abbreviatedaseightμm)indiameter.Apinheadisabouttwothousandthsofameter(twomm)in
diameter. That means about 250 red blood cells could fit on a pinhead.
Most student microscopes are light microscopes (Figure 4.2a). Visible light passes and bends through the
lens system to enable the user to see the specimen. Light microscopes are advantageous for viewing living
organisms,butsinceindividualcellsaregenerallytransparent,theircomponentsarenotdistinguishableunless
they are colored with special stains. Staining, however, usually kills the cells.
Lightmicroscopesthatundergraduatescommonlyuseinthelaboratorymagnifyuptoapproximately400times.
Two parameters that are important in microscopy are magnification and resolving power. Magnification is the
process of enlarging an object in appearance. Resolving power is the microscope's ability to distinguish two
adjacent structures as separate: the higher the resolution, the better the image's clarity and detail. When one
usesoilimmersionlensestostudysmallobjects,magnificationusuallyincreasesto1,000times.Inordertogain
a better understanding of cellular structure and function, scientists typically use electron microscopes.
Figure 4.2 (a) Most light microscopes in a college biology lab can magnify cells up to approximately 400 times and
havearesolutionofabout200nanometers.(b)Electronmicroscopesprovideamuchhighermagnification,100,000x,
and a have a resolution of 50 picometers. (credit a: modification of work by "GcG"/Wikimedia Commons; credit b:
modification of work by Evan Bench)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 120
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 109
Electron Microscopes
In contrast to light microscopes, electron microscopes (Figure 4.2b) use a beam of electrons instead of a
beam of light. Not only does this allow for higher magnification and, thus, more detail (Figure 4.3), it also
provideshigherresolvingpower.Themethodtopreparethespecimenforviewingwithanelectronmicroscope
killsthespecimen.Electronshaveshortwavelengths(shorterthanphotons)thatmovebestinavacuum,sowe
cannot view living cells with an electron microscope.
In a scanning electron microscope, a beam of electrons moves back and forth across a cell’s surface, creating
details of cell surface characteristics. In a transmission electron microscope, the electron beam penetrates
the cell and provides details of a cell’s internal structures. As you might imagine, electron microscopes are
significantly more bulky and expensive than light microscopes.
(a) (b)
Figure 4.3 (a) These Salmonella bacteria appear as tiny purple dots when viewed with a light microscope. (b) This
scanning electron microscope micrograph shows Salmonella bacteria (in red) invading human cells (yellow). Even
thoughsubfigure(b)showsadifferentSalmonellaspecimenthansubfigure(a),youcanstillobservethecomparative
increase in magnification and detail. (credit a: modification of work by CDC/Armed Forces Institute of Pathology,
Charles N. Farmer, Rocky Mountain Laboratories; credit b: modification of work by NIAID, NIH; scale-bar data from
Matt Russell)
For another perspective on cell size, try the HowBig interactive at this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
cell_sizes).
Cell Theory
The microscopes we use today are far more complex than those that Dutch shopkeeper Antony van
Leeuwenhoek, used in the 1600s. Skilled in crafting lenses, van Leeuwenhoek observed the movements of
single-celled organisms, which he collectively termed “animalcules.”
Inthe1665publicationMicrographia,experimentalscientistRobertHookecoinedtheterm“cell”forthebox-like
structures he observed when viewing cork tissue through a lens. In the 1670s, van Leeuwenhoek discovered
bacteria and protozoa. Later advances in lenses, microscope construction, and staining techniques enabled
other scientists to see some components inside cells.
By the late 1830s, botanist Matthias Schleiden and zoologist Theodor Schwann were studying tissues and
proposed the unified cell theory, which states that one or more cells comprise all living things, the cell is the
basic unit of life, and new cells arise from existing cells. Rudolf Virchow later made important contributions to
this theory.
PAGE: 121
110 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Cytotechnologist
HaveyoueverheardofamedicaltestcalledaPapsmear(Figure4.4)?Inthistest,adoctortakesasmall
sampleofcellsfromthepatient'suterinecervixandsendsittoamedicallabwhereacytotechnologiststains
the cells and examines them for any changes that could indicate cervical cancer or a microbial infection.
Cytotechnologists(cyto-=“cell”)areprofessionalswhostudycellsviamicroscopicexaminationsandother
laboratory tests. They are trained to determine which cellular changes are within normal limits and which
are abnormal. Their focus is not limited to cervical cells. They study cellular specimens that come from all
organs. When they notice abnormalities, they consult a pathologist, a medical doctor who interprets and
diagnoses changes that disease in body tissue and fluids cause.
Cytotechnologists play a vital role in saving people’s lives. When doctors discover abnormalities early, a
patient’s treatment can begin sooner, which usually increases the chances of a successful outcome.
Figure4.4Theseuterinecervixcells,viewedthroughalightmicroscope,arefromaPapsmear.Normalcellsare
ontheleft.Thecellsontherightareinfectedwithhumanpapillomavirus(HPV).Noticethattheinfectedcellsare
larger. Also, two of these cells each have two nuclei instead of one, the normal number. (credit: modification of
work by Ed Uthman, MD; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
4.2 | Prokaryotic Cells
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Name examples of prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms
• Compare and contrast prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
• Describe the relative sizes of different cells
• Explain why cells must be small
Cellsfallintooneoftwobroadcategories:prokaryoticandeukaryotic.Weclassifyonlythepredominantlysingle-
celledorganismsBacteriaandArchaeaasprokaryotes(pro-=“before”;-kary-=“nucleus”).Animalcells,plants,
fungi, and protists are all eukaryotes (eu- = “true”).
Components of Prokaryotic Cells
All cells share four common components: 1) a plasma membrane, an outer covering that separates the cell’s
interior from its surrounding environment; 2) cytoplasm, consisting of a jelly-like cytosol within the cell in which
there are other cellular components; 3) DNA, the cell's genetic material; and 4) ribosomes, which synthesize
proteins. However, prokaryotes differ from eukaryotic cells in several ways.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 122
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 111
A prokaryote is a simple, mostly single-celled (unicellular) organism that lacks a nucleus, or any other
membrane-bound organelle. We will shortly come to see that this is significantly different in eukaryotes.
Prokaryotic DNA is in the cell's central part: thenucleoid(Figure 4.5).
Figure4.5Thisfigureshowsthegeneralizedstructureofaprokaryoticcell.AllprokaryoteshavechromosomalDNA
localizedinanucleoid,ribosomes,acellmembrane,andacellwall.Theotherstructuresshownarepresentinsome,
but not all, bacteria.
Most prokaryotes have a peptidoglycan cell wall and many have a polysaccharide capsule (Figure 4.5). The
cell wall acts as an extra layer of protection, helps the cell maintain its shape, and prevents dehydration. The
capsuleenablesthecelltoattachtosurfacesinitsenvironment.Someprokaryoteshaveflagella,pili,orfimbriae.
Flagella are used for locomotion. Pili exchange genetic material during conjugation, the process by which one
bacteriumtransfersgeneticmaterialtoanotherthroughdirectcontact.Bacteriausefimbriaetoattachtoahost
cell.
Microbiologist
The most effective action anyone can take to prevent the spread of contagious illnesses is to wash his or
her hands. Why? Because microbes (organisms so tiny that they can only be seen with microscopes) are
ubiquitous. They live on doorknobs, money, your hands, and many other surfaces. If someone sneezes
into his hand and touches a doorknob, and afterwards you touch that same doorknob, the microbes from
the sneezer’smucus are now on your hands. If you touch your hands to your mouth, nose, oreyes, those
microbes can enter your body and could make you sick.
However, not all microbes (also called microorganisms) cause disease; most are actually beneficial. You
have microbes in your gut that make vitamin K. Other microorganisms are used to ferment beer and wine.
Microbiologistsarescientistswhostudymicrobes.Microbiologistscanpursueanumberofcareers.Notonly
dotheyworkinthefoodindustry,theyarealsoemployedintheveterinaryandmedicalfields.Theycanwork
in the pharmaceutical sector, serving key roles in research and development by identifying new antibiotic
sources that can treat bacterial infections.
Environmental microbiologists may look for new ways to use specially selected or genetically engineered
microbestoremovepollutantsfromsoilorgroundwater,aswellashazardouselementsfromcontaminated
sites. We call using these microbes bioremediation technologies. Microbiologists can also work in the
bioinformatics field, providing specialized knowledge and insight for designing, developing, and specificity
of computer models of, for example, bacterial epidemics.
Cell Size
At 0.1 to 5.0 μm in diameter, prokaryotic cells are significantly smaller than eukaryotic cells, which have
diameters ranging from 10 to 100 μm (Figure 4.6). The prokaryotes' small size allows ions and organic
PAGE: 123
112 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
molecules that enter them to quickly diffuse to other parts of the cell. Similarly, any wastes produced within
a prokaryotic cell can quickly diffuse. This is not the case in eukaryotic cells, which have developed different
structural adaptations to enhance intracellular transport.
Figure 4.6 This figure shows relative sizes of microbes on a logarithmic scale (recall that each unit of increase in a
logarithmic scale represents a 10-fold increase in the quantity measured).
Small size, in general, is necessary for all cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic. Let’s examine why that is
so.First,we’llconsidertheareaandvolumeofatypicalcell.Notallcellsaresphericalinshape,butmosttend
to approximate a sphere. You may remember from your high school geometry course that the formula for the
2 3
surfaceareaofasphereis4πr ,whiletheformulaforitsvolumeis4πr /3.Thus,astheradiusofacellincreases,
its surface area increases as the square of its radius, but its volume increases as the cube of its radius (much
more rapidly). Therefore, as a cell increases in size, its surface area-to-volume ratio decreases. This same
principlewouldapplyifthecellhadacubeshape(Figure4.7).Ifthecellgrowstoolarge,theplasmamembrane
will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion required for the increased volume. In other
words, as a cell grows, it becomes less efficient. One way to become more efficient is to divide. Another way
is to develop organelles that perform specific tasks. These adaptations lead to developing more sophisticated
cells, which we call eukaryotic cells.
Figure 4.7 Notice that as a cell increases in size, its surface area-to-volume ratio decreases. When there is
insufficient surface area to support a cell’s increasing volume, a cell will either divide or die. The cell on the left
hasavolumeof1mm3andasurfaceareaof6mm2,withasurfacearea-to-volumeratioof6to1;whereas,the
cellontherighthasavolumeof8mm3andasurfaceareaof24mm2,withasurfacearea-to-volumeratioof3to
1.
Prokaryoticcellsaremuchsmallerthaneukaryoticcells.Whatadvantagesmightsmallcellsizeconferona
cell? What advantages might large cell size have?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 124
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 113
4.3 | Eukaryotic Cells
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the structure of eukaryotic cells
• Compare animal cells with plant cells
• State the role of the plasma membrane
• Summarize the functions of the major cell organelles
Have you ever heard the phrase “form follows function?” It’s a philosophy that many industries follow. In
architecture, this means that buildings should be constructed to support the activities that will be carried out
inside them. For example, a skyscraper should include several elevator banks. A hospital should have its
emergency room easily accessible.
Our natural world also utilizes the principle of form following function, especially in cell biology, and this will
become clear as we explore eukaryotic cells ( Figure 4.8). Unlike prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have: 1)
a membrane-bound nucleus; 2) numerous membrane-bound organelles such as the endoplasmic reticulum,
Golgiapparatus,chloroplasts,mitochondria,andothers;and3)several,rod-shapedchromosomes.Becausea
membranesurroundseukaryoticcell’snucleus,ithasa“truenucleus.”Theword“organelle”means“littleorgan,”
and, as we already mentioned, organelles have specialized cellular functions, just as your body's organs have
specialized functions.
At this point, it should be clear to you that eukaryotic cells have a more complex structure than prokaryotic
cells.Organellesallowdifferentfunctionstobecompartmentalizedindifferentareasofthecell.Beforeturningto
organelles, let’s first examine two important components of the cell: the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm.
PAGE: 125
114 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.8 These figures show the major organelles and other cell components of (a) a typical animal cell
and (b) a typical eukaryotic plant cell. The plant cell has a cell wall, chloroplasts, plastids, and a central
vacuole—structures not in animal cells. Most cells do not have lysosomes or centrosomes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 126
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 115
If the nucleolus were not able to carry out its function, what other cellular organelles would be affected?
The Plasma Membrane
Like prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells have a plasma membrane (Figure 4.9), a phospholipid bilayer with
embedded proteins that separates the internal contents of the cell from its surrounding environment. A
phospholipid is a lipid molecule with two fatty acid chains and a phosphate-containing group. The plasma
membranecontrolsthepassageoforganicmolecules,ions,water,andoxygenintoandoutofthecell.Wastes
(such as carbon dioxide and ammonia) also leave the cell by passing through the plasma membrane.
Figure 4.9The eukaryotic plasma membrane is a phospholipid bilayer with proteins and cholesterol embedded in it.
Theplasmamembranesofcellsthatspecializeinabsorptionfoldintofingerlikeprojectionsthatwecallmicrovilli
(singular = microvillus); (Figure 4.10). Such cells typically line the small intestine, the organ that absorbs
nutrientsfromdigestedfood.Thisisanexcellentexampleofformfollowingfunction.Peoplewithceliacdisease
have an immune response to gluten, which is a protein in wheat, barley, and rye. The immune response
damagesmicrovilli,andthus,afflictedindividualscannotabsorbnutrients.Thisleadstomalnutrition,cramping,
and diarrhea. Patients suffering from celiac disease must follow a gluten-free diet.
Figure 4.10 Microvilli, as they appear on cells lining the small intestine, increase the surface area available for
absorption.Thesemicrovilliareonlyontheareaoftheplasmamembranethatfacesthecavityfromwhichsubstances
will be absorbed. (credit "micrograph": modification of work by Louisa Howard)
The Cytoplasm
Thecytoplasmisthecell'sentireregionbetweentheplasmamembraneandthenuclearenvelope(astructure
we will discuss shortly). It is comprised of organelles suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and
various chemicals (Figure 4.8). Even though the cytoplasm consists of 70 to 80 percent water, it has a semi-
solidconsistency,whichcomesfromtheproteinswithinit.However,proteinsarenottheonlyorganicmolecules
PAGE: 127
116 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
in the cytoplasm. Glucose and other simple sugars, polysaccharides, amino acids, nucleic acids, fatty acids,
and derivatives of glycerol are also there. Ions of sodium, potassium, calcium, and many other elements also
dissolve in the cytoplasm. Many metabolic reactions, including protein synthesis, take place in the cytoplasm.
The Nucleus
Typically,thenucleusisthemostprominentorganelleinacell(Figure4.8).Thenucleus(plural=nuclei)houses
the cell’s DNA and directs the synthesis of ribosomes and proteins. Let’s look at it in more detail (Figure 4.11).
Figure 4.11 The nucleus stores chromatin (DNA plus proteins) in a gel-like substance called the nucleoplasm. The
nucleolus is a condensed chromatin region where ribosome synthesis occurs. We call the nucleus' boundary the
nuclearenvelope.Itconsistsoftwophospholipidbilayers:anouterandaninnermembrane.Thenuclearmembraneis
continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum. Nuclear pores allow substances to enter and exit the nucleus.
The Nuclear Envelope
Thenuclearenvelopeisadouble-membranestructurethatconstitutesthenucleus'outermostportion(Figure
4.11). Both the nuclear envelope's inner and outer membranes are phospholipid bilayers.
The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that control the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between
thenucleoplasmandcytoplasm.Thenucleoplasmisthesemi-solidfluidinsidethenucleus,wherewefindthe
chromatin and the nucleolus.
Chromatin and Chromosomes
Tounderstandchromatin,itishelpfultofirstexplorechromosomes,structureswithinthenucleusthataremade
up of DNA, the hereditary material. You may remember that in prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a single
circularchromosome.Ineukaryotes,chromosomesarelinearstructures.Everyeukaryoticspecieshasaspecific
number of chromosomes in the nucleus of each cell. For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46,
while in fruit flies, it is eight. Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable from one another when the
cell is getting ready to divide. When the cell is in the growth and maintenance phases of its life cycle, proteins
attach to chromosomes, and they resemble an unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. We call these unwound
protein-chromosomecomplexeschromatin(Figure4.12).Chromatindescribesthematerialthatmakesupthe
chromosomes both when condensed and decondensed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 128
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 117
(a) (b)
Figure4.12(a)Thisimageshowsvariouslevelsofchromatin'sorganization(DNAandprotein).(b)Thisimageshows
paired chromosomes. (credit b: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The Nucleolus
We already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some
chromosomes have sections of DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area within the nucleus
calledthenucleolus(plural=nucleoli)aggregatestheribosomalRNAwithassociatedproteinstoassemblethe
ribosomal subunits that are then transported out through the pores in the nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm.
Ribosomes
Ribosomesarethecellularstructuresresponsibleforproteinsynthesis.Whenweviewthemthroughanelectron
microscope, ribosomes appear either as clusters (polyribosomes) or single, tiny dots that float freely in the
cytoplasm. They may be attached to the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side or the endoplasmic reticulum's
cytoplasmic side and the nuclear envelope's outer membrane (Figure 4.8). Electron microscopy shows us
that ribosomes, which are large protein and RNA complexes, consist of two subunits, large and small (Figure
4.13). Ribosomes receive their “orders” for protein synthesis from the nucleus where the DNA transcribes
into messenger RNA (mRNA). The mRNA travels to the ribosomes, which translate the code provided by the
sequence of the nitrogenous bases in the mRNA into a specific order of amino acids in a protein. Amino acids
are the building blocks of proteins.
Figure 4.13 A large subunit (top) and a small subunit (bottom) comprise ribosomes. During protein synthesis,
ribosomes assemble amino acids into proteins.
Because protein synthesis is an essential function of all cells (including enzymes, hormones, antibodies,
PAGE: 129
118 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
pigments, structural components, and surface receptors), there are ribosomes in practically every cell.
Ribosomes are particularly abundant in cells that synthesize large amounts of protein. For example, the
pancreas is responsible for creating several digestive enzymes and the cells that produce these enzymes
contain many ribosomes. Thus, we see another example of form following function.
Mitochondria
Scientists often call mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) the cell's “powerhouses” or “energy factories”
because they are responsible for making adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the cell’s main energy-carrying
molecule. ATP represents the cell's short-term stored energy. Cellular respiration is the process of making
ATP using the chemical energy in glucose and other nutrients. In mitochondria, this process uses oxygen and
producescarbondioxideasawasteproduct.Infact,thecarbondioxidethatyouexhalewitheverybreathcomes
from the cellular reactions that produce carbon dioxide as a byproduct.
Inkeepingwithourthemeofformfollowingfunction,itisimportanttopointoutthatmusclecellshaveaveryhigh
concentrationofmitochondriathatproduceATP.Yourmusclecellsneedconsiderableenergytokeepyourbody
moving. When your cells don’t get enough oxygen, they do not make much ATP. Instead, producing lactic acid
accompanies the small amount of ATP they make in the absence of oxygen.
Mitochondria are oval-shaped, double membrane organelles (Figure 4.14) that have their own ribosomes and
DNA.Eachmembraneisaphospholipidbilayerembeddedwithproteins.Theinnerlayerhasfoldscalledcristae.
Wecalltheareasurroundedbythefoldsthemitochondrialmatrix.Thecristaeandthematrixhavedifferentroles
in cellular respiration.
Figure 4.14 This electron micrograph shows a mitochondrion through an electron microscope. This organelle has
an outer membrane and an inner membrane. The inner membrane contains folds, called cristae, which increase its
surfacearea.Wecallthespacebetweenthetwomembranestheintermembranespace,andthespaceinsidetheinner
membranethemitochondrialmatrix.ATPsynthesistakesplaceontheinnermembrane.(credit:modificationofwork
by Matthew Britton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Peroxisomes
Peroxisomes are small, round organelles enclosed by single membranes. They carry out oxidation reactions
thatbreakdownfattyacidsandaminoacids.Theyalsodetoxifymanypoisonsthatmayenterthebody.(Manyof
theseoxidationreactionsreleasehydrogenperoxide,H2O2,whichwouldbedamagingtocells;however,when
thesereactionsareconfinedtoperoxisomes,enzymessafelybreakdowntheH2O2intooxygenandwater.)For
example,peroxisomesinlivercellsdetoxifyalcohol.Glyoxysomes,whicharespecializedperoxisomesinplants,
are responsible for converting stored fats into sugars. Plant cells contain many different types of peroxisomes
that play a role in metabolism, pathogene defense, and stress response, to mention a few.
Vesicles and Vacuoles
Vesicles and vacuoles are membrane-bound sacs that function in storage and transport. Other than the fact
that vacuoles are somewhat larger than vesicles, there is a very subtle distinction between them. Vesicle
membranescanfusewitheithertheplasmamembraneorothermembranesystemswithinthecell.Additionally,
some agents such as enzymes within plant vacuoles break down macromolecules. The vacuole's membrane
does not fuse with the membranes of other cellular components.
Animal Cells versus Plant Cells
At this point, you know that each eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, a nucleus, ribosomes,
mitochondria, peroxisomes, and in some, vacuoles, but there are some striking differences between animal
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 130
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 119
and plant cells. While both animal and plant cells have microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs), animal cells
also have centrioles associated with the MTOC: a complex we call the centrosome. Animal cells each have a
centrosomeandlysosomes;whereas,mostplantcellsdonot.Plantcellshaveacellwall,chloroplastsandother
specialized plastids, and a large central vacuole; whereas, animal cells do not.
The Centrosome
The centrosome is a microtubule-organizing center found near the nuclei of animal cells. It contains a pair of
centrioles,twostructuresthatlieperpendiculartoeachother(Figure4.15).Eachcentrioleisacylinderofnine
triplets of microtubules.
Figure4.15Thecentrosomeconsistsoftwocentriolesthatlieatrightanglestoeachother.Eachcentrioleisacylinder
comprised of nine triplets of microtubules. Nontubulin proteins (indicated by the green lines) hold the microtubule
triplets together.
The centrosome (the organelle where all microtubules originate) replicates itself before a cell divides, and the
centriolesappeartohavesomeroleinpullingtheduplicatedchromosomestooppositeendsofthedividingcell.
However, the centriole's exact function in cell division isn’t clear, because cells that have had the centrosome
removed can still divide, and plant cells, which lack centrosomes, are capable of cell division.
Lysosomes
Animal cells have another set of organelles that most plant cells do not: lysosomes. The lysosomes are the
cell’s “garbage disposal.” In plant cells, the digestive processes take place in vacuoles. Enzymes within the
lysosomesaidinbreakingdownproteins,polysaccharides,lipids,nucleicacids,andevenworn-outorganelles.
TheseenzymesareactiveatamuchlowerpHthanthecytoplasm's.Therefore,thepHwithinlysosomesismore
acidicthanthecytoplasm'spH.ManyreactionsthattakeplaceinthecytoplasmcouldnotoccuratalowpH,so
again, the advantage of compartmentalizing the eukaryotic cell into organelles is apparent.
The Cell Wall
If you examine Figure 4.8, the plant cell diagram, you will see a structure external to the plasma membrane.
This is the cell wall, a rigid covering that protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives shape to the
cell. Fungal and some protistan cells also have cell walls. While the prokaryotic cell walls' chief component is
peptidoglycan,themajororganicmoleculeintheplant(andsomeprotists')cellwalliscellulose(Figure4.16),a
polysaccharidecomprisedofglucoseunits.Haveyouevernoticedthatwhenyoubiteintoarawvegetable,like
celery, it crunches? That’s because you are tearing the celery cells' rigid cell walls with your teeth.
Figure 4.16 Cellulose is a long chain of β-glucose molecules connected by a 1-4 linkage. The dashed lines at each
endofthefigureindicateaseriesofmanymoreglucoseunits.Thesizeofthepagemakesitimpossibletoportrayan
entire cellulose molecule.
PAGE: 131
120 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Chloroplasts
Like the mitochondria, chloroplasts have their own DNA and ribosomes, but chloroplasts have an entirely
different function. Chloroplasts are plant cell organelles that carry out photosynthesis. Photosynthesis is the
seriesofreactionsthatusecarbondioxide,water,andlightenergytomakeglucoseandoxygen.Thisisamajor
difference between plants and animals. Plants (autotrophs) are able to make their own food, like sugars, while
animals (heterotrophs) must ingest their food.
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts have outer and inner membranes, but within the space enclosed by a
chloroplast’s inner membrane is a set of interconnected and stacked fluid-filled membrane sacs we call
thylakoids (Figure 4.17). Each thylakoid stack is a granum (plural = grana). We call the fluid enclosed by the
inner membrane that surrounds the grana the stroma.
Figure4.17Thechloroplasthasanoutermembrane,aninnermembrane,andmembranestructures-thylakoidsthat
are stacked into grana. We call the space inside the thylakoid membranes the thylakoid space. The light harvesting
reactions take place in the thylakoid membranes, and sugar synthesis takes place in the fluid inside the inner
membrane,whichwecallthestroma.Chloroplastsalsohavetheirowngenome,whichiscontainedonasinglecircular
chromosome.
Thechloroplastscontainagreenpigment,chlorophyll,whichcapturesthelightenergythatdrivesthereactions
of photosynthesis. Like plant cells, photosynthetic protists also have chloroplasts. Some bacteria perform
photosynthesis, but their chlorophyll is not relegated to an organelle.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 132
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 121
Endosymbiosis
We have mentioned that both mitochondria and chloroplasts contain DNA and ribosomes. Have you
wondered why? Strong evidence points to endosymbiosis as the explanation.
Symbiosis is a relationship in which organisms from two separate species depend on each other for their
survival.Endosymbiosis(endo-=“within”)isamutuallybeneficialrelationshipinwhichoneorganismlives
insidetheother.Endosymbiotic relationships aboundinnature. Wehavealreadymentioned that microbes
that produce vitamin K live inside the human gut. This relationship is beneficial for us because we are
unabletosynthesizevitaminK.Itisalsobeneficialforthemicrobesbecausetheyareprotectedfromother
organismsandfromdryingout,andtheyreceiveabundantfoodfromtheenvironmentofthelargeintestine.
Scientistshavelongnoticedthatbacteria,mitochondria,andchloroplastsaresimilarinsize.Wealsoknow
thatbacteriahaveDNAandribosomes,justlikemitochondriaandchloroplasts.Scientistsbelievethathost
cells and bacteria formed an endosymbiotic relationship when the host cells ingested both aerobic and
autotrophicbacteria(cyanobacteria)butdidnotdestroythem.Throughmanymillionsofyearsofevolution,
these ingested bacteria became more specialized in their functions, with the aerobic bacteria becoming
mitochondria and the autotrophic bacteria becoming chloroplasts.
The Central Vacuole
Previously, we mentioned vacuoles as essential components of plant cells. If you look at Figure 4.8b, you will
seethatplantcellseachhavealargecentralvacuolethatoccupiesmostofthecell'sarea.Thecentralvacuole
plays a key role in regulating the cell’s concentration of water in changing environmental conditions. Have you
evernoticedthatifyouforgettowateraplantforafewdays,itwilts?That’sbecauseasthewaterconcentration
inthesoilbecomeslowerthanthewaterconcentrationintheplant,watermovesoutofthecentralvacuolesand
cytoplasm.Asthecentralvacuoleshrinks,itleavesthecellwallunsupported.Thislossofsupporttotheplant's
cell walls results in the wilted appearance.
The central vacuole also supports the cell's expansion. When the central vacuole holds more water, the cell
becomes larger without having to invest considerable energy in synthesizing new cytoplasm.
4.4 | The Endomembrane System and Proteins
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the components of the endomembrane system
• Recognize the relationship between the endomembrane system and its functions
The endomembrane system (endo = “within”) is a group of membranes and organelles (Figure 4.18) in
eukaryoticcellsthatworkstogethertomodify,package,andtransportlipidsandproteins.Itincludesthenuclear
envelope,lysosomes,andvesicles,whichwehavealreadymentioned,andtheendoplasmicreticulumandGolgi
apparatus,whichwewillcovershortly.Althoughnottechnicallywithinthecell,theplasmamembraneisincluded
intheendomembranesystembecause,asyouwillsee,itinteractswiththeotherendomembranousorganelles.
The endomembrane system does not include either mitochondria or chloroplast membranes.
PAGE: 133
122 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Figure 4.18 Membrane and secretory proteins are synthesized in the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER). The
RER also sometimes modifies proteins. In this illustration, an attachment of a (purple) carbohydrate modifies a
(green)integralmembraneproteinintheER.VesicleswiththeintegralproteinbudfromtheERandfusewiththe
Golgiapparatus'cisface.AstheproteinpassesalongtheGolgi’scisternae,theadditionofmorecarbohydrates
furthermodifiesit.Afteritssynthesisiscomplete,itexitsasanintegralmembraneproteinofthevesiclethatbuds
from the Golgi’s trans face. When the vesicle fuses with the cell membrane, the protein becomes an integral
portion of that cell membrane. (credit: modification of work by Magnus Manske)
Ifaperipheralmembraneproteinweresynthesizedinthelumen(inside)oftheER,woulditenduponthe
inside or outside of the plasma membrane?
The Endoplasmic Reticulum
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Figure 4.18) is a series of interconnected membranous sacs and tubules
that collectively modifies proteins and synthesizes lipids. However, these two functions take place in separate
areas of the ER: the rough ER and the smooth ER, respectively.
WecalltheERtubules'hollowportionthelumenorcisternalspace.TheER'smembrane,whichisaphospholipid
bilayer embedded with proteins, is continuous with the nuclear envelope.
Rough ER
Scientists have named the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) as such because the ribosomes attached to
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 134
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 123
its cytoplasmic surface give it a studded appearance when viewing it through an electron microscope (Figure
4.19).
Figure4.19Thistransmissionelectronmicrographshowstheroughendoplasmicreticulumandotherorganellesina
pancreatic cell. (credit: modification of work by Louisa Howard)
Ribosomes transfer their newly synthesized proteins into the RER's lumen where they undergo structural
modifications, such as folding or acquiring side chains. These modified proteins incorporate into cellular
membranes—the ER or the ER's or other organelles' membranes. The proteins can also secrete from the cell
(such as protein hormones, enzymes). The RER also makes phospholipids for cellular membranes.
If the phospholipids or modified proteins are not destined to stay in the RER, they will reach their destinations
via transport vesicles that bud from the RER’s membrane (Figure 4.18).
SincetheRERisengagedinmodifyingproteins(suchasenzymes,forexample)thatsecretefromthecell,you
wouldbecorrectinassumingthattheRERisabundantincellsthatsecreteproteins.Thisisthecasewithliver
cells, for example.
Smooth ER
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) is continuous with the RER but has few or no ribosomes on
its cytoplasmic surface (Figure 4.18). SER functions include synthesis of carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid
hormones; detoxification of medications and poisons; and storing calcium ions.
In muscle cells, a specialized SER, the sarcoplasmic reticulum, is responsible for storing calcium ions that are
needed to trigger the muscle cells' coordinated contractions.
You can watch an excellent animation of the endomembrane system here (http://openstax.org/l/
insane_in_the_endomembrane). At the end of the animation, there is a short self-assessment.
PAGE: 135
124 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Cardiologist
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States. This is primarily due to our sedentary
lifestyle and our high trans-fat diets.
Heart failure is just one of many disabling heart conditions. Heart failure does not mean that the heart has
stopped working. Rather, it means that the heart can’t pump with sufficient force to transport oxygenated
blood to all the vital organs. Left untreated, heart failure can lead to kidney failure and other organ failure.
Cardiac muscle tissue comprises the heart's wall. Heart failure occurs when cardiac muscle cells'
endoplasmic reticula do not function properly. As a result, an insufficient number of calcium ions are
available to trigger a sufficient contractile force.
Cardiologists (cardi- = “heart”; -ologist = “one who studies”) are doctors who specialize in treating heart
diseases,includingheartfailure.Cardiologistscandiagnoseheartfailureviaaphysicalexamination,results
from an electrocardiogram (ECG, a test that measures the heart's electrical activity), a chest X-ray to see
whether the heart is enlarged, and other tests. If the cardiologist diagnoses heart failure, he or she will
typically prescribe appropriate medications and recommend a reduced table salt intake and a supervised
exercise program.
The Golgi Apparatus
WehavealreadymentionedthatvesiclescanbudfromtheERandtransporttheircontentselsewhere,butwhere
do the vesicles go? Before reaching their final destination, the lipids or proteins within the transport vesicles
still need sorting, packaging, and tagging so that they end up in the right place. Sorting, tagging, packaging,
anddistributinglipidsandproteinstakesplaceintheGolgi apparatus (alsocalledtheGolgibody),aseriesof
flattened membranes (Figure 4.20).
Figure4.20TheGolgiapparatusinthiswhitebloodcellisvisibleasastackofsemicircular,flattenedringsinthelower
portion of the image. You can see several vesicles near the Golgi apparatus. (credit: modification of work by Louisa
Howard)
WecalltheGolgiapparatus'thecisface.Theoppositesideisthetransface.Thetransportvesiclesthatformed
fromtheERtraveltothecisface,fusewithit,andemptytheircontentsintotheGolgiapparatus'lumen.Asthe
proteinsandlipidstravelthroughtheGolgi,theyundergofurthermodificationsthatallowthemtobesorted.The
mostfrequentmodificationisaddingshortsugarmoleculechains.Thesenewlymodifiedproteinsandlipidsthen
tag with phosphate groups or other small molecules in order to travel to their proper destinations.
Finally, the modified and tagged proteins are packaged into secretory vesicles that bud from the Golgi's trans
face. While some of these vesicles deposit their contents into other cell parts where they will be used, other
secretory vesicles fuse with the plasma membrane and release their contents outside the cell.
In another example of form following function, cells that engage in a great deal of secretory activity (such as
salivary gland cells that secrete digestive enzymes or immune system cells that secrete antibodies) have an
abundance of Golgi.
In plant cells, the Golgi apparatus has the additional role of synthesizing polysaccharides, some of which are
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 136
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 125
incorporated into the cell wall and some of which other cell parts use.
Geneticist
Many diseases arise from genetic mutations that prevent synthesizing critical proteins. One such disease
isLowedisease(oroculocerebrorenalsyndrome,becauseitaffectstheeyes,brain,andkidneys).InLowe
disease, there is a deficiency in an enzyme localized to the Golgi apparatus. Children with Lowe disease
are born with cataracts, typically develop kidney disease after the first year of life, and may have impaired
mental abilities.
AmutationontheXchromosomecausesLowedisease.TheXchromosomeisoneofthetwohumansex
chromosomes, as these chromosomes determine a person's sex. Females possess two X chromosomes
while males possess one X and one Y chromosome. In females, the genes on only one of the two X
chromosomes are expressed. Females who carry the Lowe disease gene on one of their X chromosomes
arecarriersanddonotshowsymptomsofthedisease.However,malesonlyhaveoneXchromosomeand
the genes on this chromosome are always expressed. Therefore, males will always have Lowe disease if
theirXchromosomecarriestheLowediseasegene.Geneticistshaveidentifiedthemutatedgene'slocation,
as well as many other mutation locations that cause genetic diseases. Through prenatal testing, a woman
can find out if the fetus she is carrying may be afflicted with one of several genetic diseases.
Geneticists analyze prenatal genetic test results and may counsel pregnant women on available options.
They may also conduct genetic research that leads to new drugs or foods, or perform DNA analyses for
forensic investigations.
Lysosomes
In addition to their role as the digestive component and organelle-recycling facility of animal cells, lysosomes
are part of the endomembrane system. Lysosomes also use their hydrolytic enzymes to destroy pathogens
(disease-causingorganisms)thatmightenterthecell.Agoodexampleofthisoccursinmacrophages,agroup
ofwhitebloodcellswhicharepartofyourbody’simmunesystem.Inaprocessthatscientistscallphagocytosis
orendocytosis,asectionofthemacrophage'splasmamembraneinvaginates(foldsin)andengulfsapathogen.
The invaginated section, with the pathogen inside, then pinches itself off from the plasma membrane and
becomes a vesicle. The vesicle fuses with a lysosome. The lysosome’s hydrolytic enzymes then destroy the
pathogen (Figure 4.21).
PAGE: 137
126 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Figure 4.21 A macrophage has engulfed (phagocytized) a potentially pathogenic bacterium and then fuses with
lysosomeswithinthecelltodestroythepathogen.Otherorganellesarepresentinthecellbutforsimplicitywedonot
show them.
4.5 | The Cytoskeleton
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the cytoskeleton
• Compare the roles of microfilaments, intermediate filaments, and microtubules
• Compare and contrast cilia and flagella
• Summarize the differences among the components of prokaryotic cells, animal cells, and plant cells
If you were to remove all the organelles from a cell, would the plasma membrane and the cytoplasm be
the only components left? No. Within the cytoplasm, there would still be ions and organic molecules, plus
a network of protein fibers that help maintain the cell's shape, secure some organelles in specific positions,
allow cytoplasm and vesicles to move within the cell, and enable cells within multicellular organisms to move.
Collectively,scientistscallthisnetworkofproteinfibersthecytoskeleton.Therearethreetypesoffiberswithin
thecytoskeleton:microfilaments,intermediatefilaments,andmicrotubules(Figure4.22).Here,wewillexamine
each.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 138
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 127
Figure 4.22 Microfilaments thicken the cortex around the cell's inner edge. Like rubber bands, they resist tension.
Therearemicrotubulesinthecell'sinteriorwheretheymaintaintheirshapebyresistingcompressiveforces.Thereare
intermediate filaments throughout the cell that hold organelles in place.
Microfilaments
Of the three types of protein fibers in the cytoskeleton, microfilaments are the narrowest. They function in
cellular movement, have a diameter of about 7 nm, and are comprised of two globular protein intertwined
strands, which we call actin (Figure 4.23). For this reason, we also call microfilaments actin filaments.
PAGE: 139
128 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Figure 4.23Two intertwined actin strands comprise microfilaments.
ATP powers actin to assemble its filamentous form, which serves as a track for the movement of a motor
protein we call myosin. This enables actin to engage in cellular events requiring motion, such as cell division
in eukaryotic cells and cytoplasmic streaming, which is the cell cytoplasm's circular movement in plant cells.
Actinandmyosinareplentifulinmusclecells.Whenyouractinandmyosinfilamentsslidepasteachother,your
muscles contract.
Microfilaments also provide some rigidity and shape to the cell. They can depolymerize (disassemble) and
reform quickly, thus enabling a cell to change its shape and move. White blood cells (your body’s infection-
fighting cells) make good use of this ability. They can move to an infection site and phagocytize the pathogen.
To see an example of a white blood cell in action, watch a short time-lapse video of the cell capturing two
bacteria. It engulfs one and then moves on to the other. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66454/1.3/#eip-id3083425)
Intermediate Filaments
Several strands of fibrous proteins that are wound together comprise intermediate filaments (Figure 4.24).
Cytoskeleton elements get their name from the fact that their diameter, 8 to 10 nm, is between those of
microfilaments and microtubules.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 140
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 129
Figure 4.24Intermediate filaments consist of several intertwined strands of fibrous proteins.
Intermediate filaments have no role in cell movement. Their function is purely structural. They bear tension,
thusmaintainingthecell'sshape,andanchorthenucleusandotherorganellesinplace.Figure4.22showshow
intermediate filaments create a supportive scaffolding inside the cell.
The intermediate filaments are the most diverse group of cytoskeletal elements. Several fibrous protein types
areintheintermediatefilaments.Youareprobablymostfamiliarwithkeratin,thefibrousproteinthatstrengthens
your hair, nails, and the skin's epidermis.
Microtubules
Astheirnameimplies,microtubulesaresmallhollowtubes.Polymerizeddimersofα-tubulinandβ-tubulin, two
globularproteins,comprisethemicrotubule'swalls(Figure4.25).Withadiameterofabout25nm,microtubules
are cytoskeletons' widest components. They help the cell resist compression, provide a track along which
vesicles move through the cell, and pull replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. Like
microfilaments, microtubules can disassemble and reform quickly.
Figure 4.25 Microtubules are hollow. Their walls consist of 13 polymerized dimers of α-tubulin and β-tubulin (right
image). The left image shows the tube's molecular structure.
Microtubulesarealsothestructuralelementsofflagella,cilia,andcentrioles(thelatterarethecentrosome'stwo
perpendicularbodies).Inanimalcells,thecentrosomeisthemicrotubule-organizing center.Ineukaryoticcells,
flagella and cilia are quite different structurally from their counterparts in prokaryotes, as we discuss below.
Flagella and Cilia
The flagella (singular = flagellum) are long, hair-like structures that extend from the plasma membrane and
enableanentirecelltomove(forexample,sperm,Euglena,andsomeprokaryotes).Whenpresent,thecellhas
just one flagellum or a few flagella. However, when cilia (singular = cilium) are present, many of them extend
alongtheplasmamembrane'sentiresurface.Theyareshort,hair-likestructuresthatmoveentirecells(suchas
paramecia)orsubstancesalongthecell'soutersurface(forexample,theciliaofcellsliningtheFallopiantubes
thatmovetheovumtowardtheuterus,orcilialiningthecellsoftherespiratorytractthattrapparticulatematter
and move it toward your nostrils.)
Despite their differences in length and number, flagella and cilia share a common structural arrangement of
microtubulescalleda“9+2array.”Thisisanappropriatenamebecauseasingleflagellumorciliumismadeof
a ring of nine microtubule doublets, surrounding a single microtubule doublet in the center (Figure 4.26).
PAGE: 141
130 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Figure4.26Thistransmissionelectronmicrographoftwoflagellashowsthemicrotubules'9+2array:ninemicrotubule
doublets surround a single microtubule doublet. (credit: modification of work by Dartmouth Electron Microscope
Facility, Dartmouth College; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
You have now completed a broad survey of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell components. For a summary of
cellular components in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, seeTable 4.1.
Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Present
Present
Cell Present in in
Function in Plant
Component Prokaryotes? Animal
Cells?
Cells?
Separates cell from external environment;
Plasma controls passage of organic molecules, ions,
Yes Yes Yes
membrane water, oxygen, and wastes into and out of
cell
Provides turgor pressure to plant cells as
fluid inside the central vacuole; site of many
Cytoplasm Yes Yes Yes
metabolic reactions; medium in which
organelles are found
Darkened area within the nucleus where
Nucleolus No Yes Yes
ribosomal subunits are synthesized.
Cell organelle that houses DNA and directs
Nucleus No Yes Yes
synthesis of ribosomes and proteins
Ribosomes Protein synthesis Yes Yes Yes
Mitochondria ATP production/cellular respiration No Yes Yes
Oxidize and thus break down fatty acids and
Peroxisomes No Yes Yes
amino acids, and detoxify poisons
Vesicles and Storage and transport; digestive function in
No Yes Yes
vacuoles plant cells
Unspecified role in cell division in animal
Centrosome No Yes No
cells; microtubule source in animal cells
Digestion of macromolecules; recycling of
Lysosomes No Yes Some
worn-out organelles
Table 4.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 142
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 131
Components of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Present
Present
Cell Present in in
Function in Plant
Component Prokaryotes? Animal
Cells?
Cells?
Yes,
Protection, structural support, and Yes, primarily
Cell wall No primarily
maintenance of cell shape peptidoglycan
cellulose
Chloroplasts Photosynthesis No No Yes
Endoplasmic
Modifies proteins and synthesizes lipids No Yes Yes
reticulum
Modifies, sorts, tags, packages, and
Golgi apparatus No Yes Yes
distributes lipids and proteins
Maintains cell’s shape, secures organelles in
specific positions, allows cytoplasm and
Cytoskeleton Yes Yes Yes
vesicles to move within cell, and enables
unicellular organisms to move independently
No, except
for some
Flagella Cellular locomotion Some Some
plant sperm
cells
Cellular locomotion, movement of particles
Cilia along plasma membrane's extracellular Some Some No
surface, and filtration
Table 4.1
4.6 | Connections between Cells and Cellular Activities
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the extracellular matrix
• List examples of the ways that plant cells and animal cells communicate with adjacent cells
• Summarize the roles of tight junctions, desmosomes, gap junctions, and plasmodesmata
Youalreadyknowthattissueisagroupofsimilarcellsworkingtogether.Asyoumightexpect,ifcellsaretowork
together,theymustcommunicatewitheachother,justasyouneedtocommunicatewithothersifyouworkona
group project. Let’s take a look at how cells communicate with each other.
Extracellular Matrix of Animal Cells
While cells in most multicellular organisms release materials into the extracellular space, animal cells will be
discussed as an example. The primary components of these materials are proteins, and the most abundant
protein is collagen. Collagen fibers are interwoven with proteoglycans, which are carbohydrate-containing
protein molecules. Collectively, we call these materials the extracellular matrix (Figure 4.27). Not only does
the extracellular matrix hold the cells together to form a tissue, but it also allows the cells within the tissue to
communicate with each other. How can this happen?
PAGE: 143
132 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
Figure 4.27The extracellular matrix consists of a network of proteins and carbohydrates.
Cells have protein receptors on their plasma membranes' extracellular surfaces. When a molecule within the
matrix binds to the receptor, it changes the receptor's molecular structure. The receptor, in turn, changes
the microfilaments' conformation positioned just inside the plasma membrane. These conformational changes
induce chemical signals inside the cell that reach the nucleus and turn “on” or “off” the transcription of specific
DNA sections, which affects the associated protein production, thus changing the activities within the cell.
Bloodclottingprovidesanexampleoftheextracellularmatrix'sroleincellcommunication.Whenthecellslining
a blood vessel are damaged, they display a protein receptor, which we call tissue factor. When tissue factor
bindswithanotherfactorintheextracellularmatrix,itcausesplateletstoadheretothedamagedbloodvessel's
wall, stimulates the adjacent smooth muscle cells in the blood vessel to contract (thus constricting the blood
vessel), and initiates a series of steps that stimulate the platelets to produce clotting factors.
Intercellular Junctions
Cells can also communicate with each other via direct contact, or intercellular junctions. There are differences
in the ways that plant and animal and fungal cells communicate. Plasmodesmata are junctions between plant
cells; whereas, animal cell contacts include tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.
Plasmodesmata
In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another
becausethecellwallthatsurroundseachcellseparatesthem(Figure4.8).Howthen,canaplanttransferwater
and other soil nutrients from its roots, through its stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascular
tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily. There also exist structural modifications, which we call plasmodesmata
(singular = plasmodesma). Numerous channels that pass between adjacent plant cells' cell walls connect their
cytoplasm, and enable transport of materials from cell to cell, and thus throughout the plant (Figure 4.28).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 144
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 133
Figure4.28Aplasmodesmaisachannelbetweentwoadjacentplantcells'cellwalls.Plasmodesmataallowmaterials
to pass from one plant cell's cytoplasm to an adjacent cell's cytoplasm.
Tight Junctions
A tight junction is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells (Figure 4.29). Proteins (predominantly
two proteins called claudins and occludins) tightly hold the cells against each other.
Figure 4.29Tightjunctionsformwatertight connectionsbetweenadjacentanimalcells.Proteinscreatetightjunction
adherence. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking between the cells; tight junctions are typically found in
epithelial tissues that line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most of the skin. For example, the tight
junctions of the epithelial cells lining your urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into the extracellular
space.
Desmosomes
Also only in animal cells are desmosomes, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells
(Figure 4.30). Cadherins, short proteins in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filaments to create
PAGE: 145
134 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
desmosomes. The cadherins connect two adjacent cells and maintain the cells in a sheet-like formation in
organs and tissues that stretch, like the skin, heart, and muscles.
Figure4.30Adesmosomeformsaverystrongspotweldbetweencells.Linkingcadherinsandintermediatefilaments
create it. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Gap Junctions
Gapjunctionsinanimalcellsarelikeplasmodesmatainplantcellsinthattheyarechannelsbetweenadjacent
cells that allow for transporting ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to communicate (Figure
4.31). Structurally, however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 146
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 135
Figure 4.31 A gap junction is a protein-lined pore that allows water and small molecules to pass between adjacent
animal cells. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themselves in
anelongateddonut-likeconfiguration-aconnexon.Whentheconnexon'spores(“doughnutholes”)inadjacent
animal cells align, a channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac
muscle. The electrical signal for the muscle to contract passes efficiently through gap junctions, allowing the
heart muscle cells to contract in tandem.
To conduct a virtual microscopy lab and review the parts of a cell, work through the steps of this interactive
assignment (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/microscopy_lab).
PAGE: 147
136 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
KEY TERMS
cell theory see unified cell theory
cell wall rigid cell covering comprised of various molecules that protects the cell, provides structural support,
and gives shape to the cell
central vacuole largeplantcellorganellethatregulatesthecell’sstoragecompartment,holdswater,andplays
a significant role in cell growth as the site of macromolecule degradation
centrosome region in animal cells made of two centrioles that serves as an organizing center for microtubules
chlorophyll green pigment that captures the light energy that drives the light reactions of photosynthesis
chloroplast plant cell organelle that carries out photosynthesis
chromatin protein-DNA complex that serves as the chromosomes' building material
chromosome structure within the nucleus that comprises chromatin that contains DNA, the hereditary material
cilium (plural = cilia) short, hair-like structure that extends from the plasma membrane in large numbers and
functions to move an entire cell or move substances along the cell's outer surface
cytoplasm entire region between the plasma membrane and the nuclear envelope, consisting of organelles
suspended in the gel-like cytosol, the cytoskeleton, and various chemicals
cytoskeleton protein fiber network that collectively maintains the cell's shape, secures some organelles in
specificpositions,allowscytoplasmandvesiclestomovewithinthecell,andenablesunicellularorganisms
to move independently
cytosol the cytoplasm's gel-like material in which cell structures are suspended
desmosome linkages between adjacent epithelial cells that form when cadherins in the plasma membrane
attach to intermediate filaments
electron microscope an instrument that magnifies an object using an electron beam that passes and bends
through a lens system to visualize a specimen
endomembrane system groupoforganellesandmembranesineukaryoticcellsthatworktogethermodifying,
packaging, and transporting lipids and proteins
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) series of interconnected membranous structures within eukaryotic cells that
collectively modify proteins and synthesize lipids
eukaryotic cell cellthathasamembrane-boundnucleusandseveralothermembrane-boundcompartmentsor
sacs
extracellular matrix material secreted from animal or fungal cells that provides mechanical protection and
anchoring for the cells in the tissue
flagellum (plural=flagella)long,hair-likestructurethatextendsfromtheplasmamembraneandmovesthecell
gap junction channel between two adjacent animal cells that allows ions, nutrients, and low molecular weight
substances to pass between cells, enabling the cells to communicate
Golgi apparatus eukaryotic organelle comprised of a series of stacked membranes that sorts, tags, and
packages lipids and proteins for distribution
intermediate filament cytoskeletal component, comprised of several fibrous protein intertwined strands, that
bears tension, supports cell-cell junctions, and anchors cells to extracellular structures
light microscope an instrument that magnifies an object using a beam of visible light that passes and bends
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 148
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 137
through a lens system to visualize a specimen
lysosome organelleinananimalcellthatfunctionsasthecell’sdigestivecomponent;itbreaksdownproteins,
polysaccharides, lipids, nucleic acids, and even worn-out organelles
microfilament the cytoskeleton system's narrowest element; it provides rigidity and shape to the cell and
enables cellular movements
microscope an instrument that magnifies an object
microtubule the cytoskeleton system's widest element; it helps the cell resist compression, provides a track
along which vesicles move through the cell, pulls replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing
cell, and is the structural element of centrioles, flagella, and cilia
mitochondria (singular = mitochondrion) cellular organelles responsible for carrying out cellular respiration,
resulting in producing ATP, the cell’s main energy-carrying molecule
nuclear envelope double-membrane structure that constitutes the nucleus' outermost portion
nucleoid central part of a prokaryotic cell's central part where the chromosome is located
nucleolus darkly staining body within the nucleus that is responsible for assembling ribosome subunits
nucleoplasm semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus that contains the chromatin and nucleolus
nucleus cell organelle that houses the cell’s DNA and directs ribosome and protein synthesis
organelle compartment or sac within a cell
peroxisome small,roundorganellethatcontainshydrogenperoxide,oxidizesfattyacidsandaminoacids,and
detoxifies many poisons
plasma membrane phospholipid bilayer with embedded (integral) or attached (peripheral) proteins, and
separates the cell's internal content from its surrounding environment
plasmodesma (plural=plasmodesmata)channelthatpassesbetweenadjacentplantcells'cellwalls,connects
their cytoplasm, and allows transporting of materials from cell to cell
prokaryote unicellular organism that lacks a nucleus or any other membrane-bound organelle
ribosome cellular structure that carries out protein synthesis
rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) regionoftheendoplasmicreticulumthatisstuddedwithribosomesand
engages in protein modification and phospholipid synthesis
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) region of the endoplasmic reticulum that has few or no ribosomes on
its cytoplasmic surface and synthesizes carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; detoxifies certain
chemicals (like pesticides, preservatives, medications, and environmental pollutants), and stores calcium
ions
tight junction protein adherence that creates a firm seal between two adjacent animal cells
unified cell theory abiologicalconceptthatstatesthatoneormorecellscompriseallorganisms;thecellisthe
basic unit of life; and new cells arise from existing cells
vacuole membrane-bound sac, somewhat larger than a vesicle, which functions in cellular storage and
transport
vesicle small,membrane-boundsacthatfunctionsincellularstorageandtransport;itsmembraneiscapableof
fusing with the plasma membrane and the membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus
PAGE: 149
138 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
CHAPTER SUMMARY
4.1Studying Cells
A cell is the smallest unit of life. Most cells are so tiny that we cannot see them with the naked eye. Therefore,
scientists use microscopes to study cells. Electron microscopes provide higher magnification, higher resolution,
and more detail than light microscopes. The unified cell theory states that one or more cells comprise all
organisms, the cell is the basic unit of life, and new cells arise from existing cells.
4.2Prokaryotic Cells
Prokaryotes are single-celled organisms of the domains Bacteria and Archaea. All prokaryotes have plasma
membranes, cytoplasm, ribosomes, and DNA that is not membrane-bound. Most have peptidoglycan cell walls
and many have polysaccharide capsules. Prokaryotic cells range in diameter from 0.1 to 5.0 μm.
As a cell increases in size, its surface area-to-volume ratio decreases. If the cell grows too large, the plasma
membrane will not have sufficient surface area to support the rate of diffusion required for the increased
volume.
4.3Eukaryotic Cells
Like a prokaryotic cell, a eukaryotic cell has a plasma membrane, cytoplasm, and ribosomes, but a eukaryotic
cell is typically larger than a prokaryotic cell, has a true nucleus (meaning a membrane surrounds its DNA), and
has other membrane-bound organelles that allow for compartmentalizing functions. The plasma membrane is a
phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins. The nucleus’s nucleolus is the site of ribosome assembly. We
find ribosomes either in the cytoplasm or attached to the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane or
endoplasmic reticulum. They perform protein synthesis. Mitochondria participate in cellular respiration. They
are responsible for the majority of ATP produced in the cell. Peroxisomes hydrolyze fatty acids, amino acids,
and some toxins. Vesicles and vacuoles are storage and transport compartments. In plant cells, vacuoles also
help break down macromolecules.
Animal cells also have a centrosome and lysosomes. The centrosome has two bodies perpendicular to each
other, the centrioles, and has an unknown purpose in cell division. Lysosomes are the digestive organelles of
animal cells.
Plant cells and plant-like cells each have a cell wall, chloroplasts, and a central vacuole. The plant cell wall,
whose primary component is cellulose, protects the cell, provides structural support, and gives the cell shape.
Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts. The central vacuole can expand without having to produce more
cytoplasm.
4.4The Endomembrane System and Proteins
The endomembrane system includes the nuclear envelope, lysosomes, vesicles, the ER, and Golgi apparatus,
as well as the plasma membrane. These cellular components work together to modify, package, tag, and
transport proteins and lipids that form the membranes.
The RER modifies proteins and synthesizes phospholipids in cell membranes. The SER synthesizes
carbohydrates, lipids, and steroid hormones; engages in the detoxification of medications and poisons; and
stores calcium ions. Sorting, tagging, packaging, and distributing lipids and proteins take place in the Golgi
apparatus. Budding RER and Golgi membranes create lysosomes. Lysosomes digest macromolecules, recycle
worn-out organelles, and destroy pathogens.
4.5The Cytoskeleton
The cytoskeleton has three different protein element types. From narrowest to widest, they are the
microfilaments (actin filaments), intermediate filaments, and microtubules. Biologists often associate
microfilaments with myosin. They provide rigidity and shape to the cell and facilitate cellular movements.
Intermediate filaments bear tension and anchor the nucleus and other organelles in place. Microtubules help
the cell resist compression, serve as tracks for motor proteins that move vesicles through the cell, and pull
replicated chromosomes to opposite ends of a dividing cell. They are also the structural element of centrioles,
flagella, and cilia.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 150
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 139
4.6Connections between Cells and Cellular Activities
Animal cells communicate via their extracellular matrices and are connected to each other via tight junctions,
desmosomes, and gap junctions. Plant cells are connected and communicate with each other via
plasmodesmata.
When protein receptors on the plasma membrane's surface of an animal cell bind to a substance in the
extracellular matrix, a chain of reactions begins that changes activities taking place within the cell.
Plasmodesmata are channels between adjacent plant cells, while gap junctions are channels between adjacent
animal cells. However, their structures are quite different. A tight junction is a watertight seal between two
adjacent cells, while a desmosome acts like a spot weld.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 4.7Prokaryotic cells are much smaller than be affected?
eukaryotic cells. What advantages might small cell
3.Figure 4.18If a peripheral membrane protein were
size confer on a cell? What advantages might large
synthesized in the lumen (inside) of the ER, would it
cell size have?
end up on the inside or outside of the plasma
2.Figure 4.8If the nucleolus were not able to carry membrane?
out its function, what other cellular organelles would
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.When viewing a specimen through a light a. the ribosomes
microscope, scientists use ________ to distinguish b. the vesicles
the individual components of cells. c. the cytoplasm
a. a beam of electrons d. the nucleoplasm
b. radioactive isotopes
10.Peroxisomes got their name because hydrogen
c. special stains
peroxide is:
d. high temperatures
a. used in their detoxification reactions
5.The ________ is the basic unit of life. b. produced during their oxidation reactions
a. organism c. incorporated into their membranes
b. cell d. a cofactor for the organelles’ enzymes
c. tissue
11.In plant cells, the function of the lysosomes is
d. organ
carried out by __________.
6.Prokaryotes depend on ________ to obtain some a. vacuoles
materials and to get rid of wastes. b. peroxisomes
a. ribosomes c. ribosomes
b. flagella d. nuclei
c. cell division
12.Which of the following is both in eukaryotic and
d. diffusion
prokaryotic cells?
7.Bacteria that lack fimbriae are less likely to a. nucleus
________. b. mitochondrion
a. adhere to cell surfaces c. vacuole
b. swim through bodily fluids d. ribosomes
c. synthesize proteins
13.Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder that
d. retain the ability to divide
results in the destruction of neurons due to a buildup
8.Which of the following organisms is a prokaryote? of sphingolipids in the cells. Which organelle is
malfunctioning in Tay-Sachs?
a. amoeba a. lysosome
b. influenza A virus b. endoplasmic reticulum
c. charophyte algae c. peroxisome
d. E. coli d. mitochondria
9.Which of the following is surrounded by two 14.Which of the following is not a component of the
phospholipid bilayers? endomembrane system?
PAGE: 151
140 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
a. mitochondrion 19.Which of the following have the ability to
b. Golgi apparatus disassemble and reform quickly?
c. endoplasmic reticulum a. microfilaments and intermediate filaments
d. lysosome b. microfilaments and microtubules
c. intermediate filaments and microtubules
15.The process by which a cell engulfs a foreign
d. only intermediate filaments
particle is known as:
a. endosymbiosis 20.Which of the following do not play a role in
b. phagocytosis intracellular movement?
c. hydrolysis a. microfilaments and intermediate filaments
d. membrane synthesis b. microfilaments and microtubules
c. intermediate filaments and microtubules
16.Which of the following is most likely to have the
d. only intermediate filaments
greatest concentration of smooth endoplasmic
reticulum? 21.In humans, _____ are used to move a cell within
a. a cell that secretes enzymes its environment while _____ are used to move the
b. a cell that destroys pathogens environment relative to the cell.
c. a cell that makes steroid hormones a. cilia, pseudopodia
d. a cell that engages in photosynthesis b. flagella; cilia
c. microtubules; flagella
17.Which of the following sequences correctly lists in
d. microfilaments; microtubules
order the steps involved in the incorporation of a
proteinaceous molecule within a cell? 22.Which of the following are only in plant cells?
a. protein synthesis of the protein on the
ribosome; modification in the Golgi a. gap junctions
apparatus; packaging in the endoplasmic b. desmosomes
reticulum; tagging in the vesicle c. plasmodesmata
b. synthesis of the protein on the lysosome; d. tight junctions
tagging in the Golgi; packaging in the
23.The key components of desmosomes are
vesicle; distribution in the endoplasmic
cadherins and __________.
reticulum
a. actin
c. synthesis of the protein on the ribosome;
b. microfilaments
modification in the endoplasmic reticulum;
c. intermediate filaments
tagging in the Golgi; distribution via the
d. microtubules
vesicle
d. synthesis of the protein on the lysosome; 24.Diseased animal cells may produce molecules
packaging in the vesicle; distribution via the that activate death cascades to kill the cells in a
Golgi; tagging in the endoplasmic reticulum controlled manner. Why would neighboring healthy
cells also die?
18.Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a
a. The death molecule is passed through
growing class of rare diseases. Which organelle
desmosomes.
would be most commonly involved in the glycoprotein
b. The death molecule is passed through
disorder portion of the group?
plasmodesmata.
a. RER
c. The death molecule disrupts the
b. ribosomes
extracellular matrix.
c. endosomes
d. The death molecule passes through gap
d. Golgi apparatus
junctions.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
25.In your everyday life, you have probably noticed 27.In what situation(s) would a transmission electron
that certain instruments are ideal for certain microscope be ideal, and why?
situations. For example, you would use a spoon
28.What are the advantages and disadvantages of
rather than a fork to eat soup because a spoon is
each of these types of microscopes?
shaped for scooping, while soup would slip between
the tines of a fork. The use of ideal instruments also 29.Explain how the formation of an adult human
applies in science. In what situation(s) would the use follows the cell theory.
of a light microscope be ideal, and why? 30.Antibiotics are medicines that are used to fight
26.In what situation(s) would the use of a scanning bacterial infections. These medicines kill prokaryotic
electron microscope be ideal, and why? cells without harming human cells. What part or parts
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 152
Chapter 4 | Cell Structure 141
of the bacterial cell do you think antibiotics target? 37.What are the similarities and differences between
Why? the structures of centrioles and flagella?
31.Explain why not all microbes are harmful. 38.How do cilia and flagella differ?
32.You already know that ribosomes are abundant in 39.Describe how microfilaments and microtubules
red blood cells. In what other cells of the body would are involved in the phagocytosis and destruction of a
you find them in great abundance? Why? pathogen by a macrophage.
33.What are the structural and functional similarities 40.Compare and contrast the boundaries that plant,
and differences between mitochondria and animal, and bacteria cells use to separate
chloroplasts? themselves from their surrounding environment.
34.Why are plasma membranes arranged as a 41.How does the structure of a plasmodesma differ
bilayer rather than a monolayer? from that of a gap junction?
35.In the context of cell biology, what do we mean by 42.Explain how the extracellular matrix functions.
form follows function? What are at least two
43.PathogenicE. colihave recently been shown to
examples of this concept?
degrade tight junction proteins during infection. How
36.In your opinion, is the nuclear membrane part of would this provide an advantage to the bacteria?
the endomembrane system? Why or why not?
Defend your answer.
PAGE: 153
142 Chapter 4 | Cell Structure
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 154
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 143
5 | STRUCTURE AND
FUNCTION OF PLASMA
MEMBRANES
Figure 5.1 Despite its seeming hustle and bustle, Grand Central Station functions with a high level of organization:
Peopleandobjectsmovefromonelocationtoanother,theycrossorarecontainedwithincertainboundaries,andthey
provideaconstantflowaspartoflargeractivity.Analogously,aplasmamembrane’sfunctionsinvolvemovementwithin
the cell and across boundaries' activities. (credit: modification of work by Randy Le’Moine)
Chapter Outline
5.1:Components and Structure
5.2:Passive Transport
5.3:Active Transport
5.4:Bulk Transport
Introduction
The plasma membrane, the cell membrane, has many functions, but the most basic one is to define the cell's
borders and keep the cell functional. The plasma membrane is selectively permeable. This means that the
membraneallowssomematerialstofreelyenterorleavethecell,whileothermaterialscannotmovefreely,but
require a specialized structure, and occasionally, even energy investment for crossing.
PAGE: 155
144 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
5.1 | Components and Structure
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand the cell membrane fluid mosaic model
• Describe phospholipid, protein, and carbohydrate functions in membranes
• Discuss membrane fluidity
Acell’splasmamembranedefinesthecell,outlinesitsborders,anddeterminesthenatureofitsinteractionwith
itsenvironment(seeTable5.1forasummary).Cellsexcludesomesubstances,takeinothers,andexcretestill
others, all in controlled quantities. The plasma membrane must be very flexible to allow certain cells, such as
redandwhitebloodcells,tochangeshapeastheypassthroughnarrowcapillaries.Thesearethemoreobvious
plasma membrane functions. In addition, the plasma membrane's surface carries markers that allow cells to
recognize one another, which is vital for tissue and organ formation during early development, and which later
plays a role in the immune response's “self” versus “non-self” distinction.
Amongthemostsophisticatedplasmamembranefunctionsistheabilityforcomplex,integralproteins,receptors
to transmit signals. These proteins act both as extracellular input receivers and as intracellular processing
activators. These membrane receptors provide extracellular attachment sites for effectors like hormones and
growthfactors,andtheyactivateintracellularresponsecascadeswhentheireffectorsarebound.Occasionally,
viruses hijack receptors (HIV, human immunodeficiency virus, is one example) that use them to gain entry into
cells, and at times, the genes encoding receptors become mutated, causing the signal transduction process to
malfunction with disastrous consequences.
Fluid Mosaic Model
Scientists identified the plasma membrane in the 1890s, and its chemical components in 1915. The principal
components they identified were lipids and proteins. In 1935, Hugh Davson and James Danielli proposed the
plasmamembrane'sstructure.Thiswasthefirstmodelthatothersinthescientificcommunitywidelyaccepted.
It was based on the plasma membrane's “railroad track” appearance in early electron micrographs. Davson
andDaniellitheorizedthattheplasmamembrane'sstructureresemblesasandwich.Theymadetheanalogyof
proteins to bread, and lipids to the filling. In the 1950s, advances in microscopy, notably transmission electron
microscopy (TEM), allowed researchers to see that the plasma membrane's core consisted of a double, rather
thanasingle,layer.In1972,S.J.SingerandGarthL.Nicolsonproposedanewmodelthatprovidesmicroscopic
observations and better explains plasma membrane function.
The explanation, the fluid mosaic model, has evolved somewhat over time, but it still best accounts for
plasma membrane structure and function as we now understand them. The fluid mosaic model describes the
plasma membrane structure as a mosaic of components—including phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, and
carbohydrates—that gives the membrane a fluid character. Plasma membranes range from 5 to 10 nm in
thickness. For comparison, human red blood cells, visible via light microscopy, are approximately 8 µm wide,
or approximately 1,000 times wider than a plasma membrane. The membrane does look a bit like a sandwich
(Figure 5.2).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 156
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 145
Figure 5.2 The plasma membrane fluid mosaic model describes the plasma membrane as a fluid combination of
phospholipids,cholesterol,andproteins.Carbohydratesattachedtolipids(glycolipids)andtoproteins(glycoproteins)
extend from the membrane's outward-facing surface.
A plasma membrane's principal components are lipids (phospholipids and cholesterol), proteins, and
carbohydrates attached to some of the lipids and proteins. A phospholipid is a molecule consisting of glycerol,
two fatty acids, and a phosphate-linked head group. Cholesterol, another lipid comprised of four fused carbon
rings, is situated alongside the phospholipids in the membrane's core. The protein, lipid, and carbohydrate
proportionsintheplasmamembranevarywithcelltype,butforatypicalhumancell,proteinaccountsforabout
50 percent of the composition by mass, lipids (of all types) account for about 40 percent, and carbohydrates
comprise the remaining 10 percent. However, protein and lipid concentration varies with different cell
membranes. For example, myelin, an outgrowth of specialized cells' membrane that insulates the peripheral
nerves'axons,containsonly18percentproteinand76percentlipid.Themitochondrialinnermembranecontains
76 percent protein and only 24 percent lipid. The plasma membrane of human red blood cells is 30 percent
lipid.Carbohydratesarepresentonlyontheplasmamembrane'sexteriorsurfaceandareattachedtoproteins,
formingglycoproteins, or attached to lipids, formingglycolipids.
Phospholipids
Themembrane'smainfabriccomprisesamphiphilic,phospholipidmolecules.Thehydrophilicor“water-loving”
areas of these molecules (which look like a collection of balls in an artist’s rendition of the model) (Figure 5.2)
areincontactwiththeaqueousfluidbothinsideandoutsidethecell.Hydrophobic,orwater-hatingmolecules,
tend to be non-polar. They interact with other non-polar molecules in chemical reactions, but generally do not
interact with polar molecules. When placed in water, hydrophobic molecules tend to form a ball or cluster. The
phospholipids'hydrophilicregionsformhydrogenbondswithwaterandotherpolarmoleculesonboththecell's
exterior and interior. Thus, the membrane surfaces that face the cell's interior and exterior are hydrophilic. In
contrast, the cell membrane's interior is hydrophobic and will not interact with water. Therefore, phospholipids
form an excellent two-layer cell membrane that separates fluid within the cell from the fluid outside the cell.
Aphospholipidmolecule(Figure5.3)consistsofathree-carbonglycerolbackbonewithtwofattyacidmolecules
attachedtocarbons1and2,andaphosphate-containinggroupattachedtothethirdcarbon.Thisarrangement
gives the overall molecule a head area (the phosphate-containing group), which has a polar character or
negative charge, and a tail area (the fatty acids), which has no charge. The head can form hydrogen bonds,
butthetailcannot.Scientistscallamoleculewithapositivelyornegativelychargedareaandanuncharged,or
non-polar, areaamphiphilicor “dual-loving.”
PAGE: 157
146 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
Figure 5.3 A hydrophilic head and two hydrophobic tails comprise this phospholipid molecule. The hydrophilic
head group consists of a phosphate-containing group attached to a glycerol molecule. The hydrophobic tails, each
containing either a saturated or an unsaturated fatty acid, are long hydrocarbon chains.
This characteristic is vital to the plasma membrane's structure because, in water, phospholipids arrange
themselveswiththeirhydrophobictailsfacingeachotherandtheirhydrophilicheadsfacingout.Inthisway,they
formalipidbilayer—adoublelayeredphospholipidbarrierthatseparatesthewaterandothermaterialsonone
sidefromthewaterandothermaterialsontheotherside.Phosopholipidsheatedinanaqueoussolutionusually
spontaneously form small spheres or droplets (micelles or liposomes), with their hydrophilic heads forming the
exterior and their hydrophobic tails on the inside (Figure 5.4).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 158
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 147
Figure 5.4 In an aqueous solution, phospholipids usually arrange themselves with their polar heads facing outward
and their hydrophobic tails facing inward. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Proteins
Proteins comprise the plasma membranes' second major component. Integral proteins, or integrins, as their
name suggests, integrate completely into the membrane structure, and their hydrophobic membrane-spanning
regionsinteractwiththephospholipidbilayer'shydrophobicregion(Figure5.2).Single-passintegralmembrane
proteins usually have a hydrophobic transmembrane segment that consists of 20–25 amino acids. Some span
only part of the membrane—associating with a single layer—while others stretch from one side to the other,
andareexposedoneither side. Upto12singleprotein segments comprisesomecomplexproteins, whichare
extensively folded and embedded in the membrane (Figure 5.5). This protein type has a hydrophilic region
or regions, and one or several mildly hydrophobic regions. This arrangement of protein regions orients the
protein alongside the phospholipids, with the protein's hydrophobic region adjacent to the phosopholipids' tails
andtheprotein'shydrophilicregionorregionsprotrudingfromthemembraneandincontactwiththecytosolor
extracellular fluid.
Figure5.5Integralmembraneproteinsmayhaveoneormorealpha-helicesthatspanthemembrane(examples1and
2), or they may have beta-sheets that span the membrane (example 3). (credit: “Foobar”/Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 159
148 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
Peripheral proteins are on the membranes' exterior and interior surfaces, attached either to integral proteins
or to phospholipids. Peripheral proteins, along with integral proteins, may serve as enzymes, as structural
attachmentsforthecytoskeleton'sfibers,oraspartofthecell’srecognitionsites.Scientistssometimesreferto
these as “cell-specific” proteins. The body recognizes its own proteins and attacks foreign proteins associated
with invasive pathogens.
Carbohydrates
Carbohydratesarethethirdmajorplasmamembranecomponent.Theyarealwaysonthecells'exteriorsurface
and are bound either to proteins (forming glycoproteins) or to lipids (forming glycolipids) (Figure 5.2). These
carbohydrate chains may consist of 2–60 monosaccharide units and can be either straight or branched. Along
with peripheral proteins, carbohydrates form specialized sites on the cell surface that allow cells to recognize
eachother.Thesesiteshaveuniquepatternsthatallowforcellrecognition,muchthewaythatthefacialfeatures
unique to each person allow individuals to recognize him or her. This recognition function is very important to
cells, as it allows the immune system to differentiate between body cells (“self”) and foreign cells or tissues
(“non-self”).Similarglycoproteinandglycolipidtypesareonthesurfacesofvirusesandmaychangefrequently,
preventing immune cells from recognizing and attacking them.
Wecollectivelyrefertothesecarbohydratesonthecell'sexteriorsurface—thecarbohydratecomponentsofboth
glycoproteinsandglycolipids—astheglycocalyx(meaning“sugarcoating”).Theglycocalyxishighlyhydrophilic
and attracts large amounts of water to the cell's surface. This aids in the cell's interaction with its watery
environment and in the cell’s ability to obtain substances dissolved in the water. As we discussed above, the
glycocalyxisalsoimportantforcellidentification, self/non-selfdetermination,andembryonicdevelopment,and
is used in cell to cell attachments to form tissues.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 160
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 149
How Viruses Infect Specific Organs
Glycoprotein and glycolipid patterns on the cells' surfaces give many viruses an opportunity for infection.
HIV and hepatitis viruses infect only specific organs or cells in the human body. HIV is able to penetrate
theplasmamembranesofasubtypeoflymphocytescalledT-helpercells,aswellassomemonocytesand
central nervous system cells. The hepatitis virus attacks liver cells.
Thesevirusesareabletoinvadethesecells,becausethecellshavebindingsitesontheirsurfacesthatare
specific to and compatible with certain viruses (Figure 5.6). Other recognition sites on the virus’s surface
interact with the human immune system, prompting the body to produce antibodies. Antibodies are made
inresponsetotheantigensorproteinsassociatedwithinvasivepathogens,orinresponsetoforeigncells,
such as might occur with an organ transplant. These same sites serve as places for antibodies to attach
and either destroy or inhibit the virus' activity. Unfortunately, these recognition sites on HIV change at a
rapid rate because of mutations, making an effective vaccine against the virus very difficult, as the virus
evolvesandadapts.ApersoninfectedwithHIVwillquicklydevelopdifferentpopulations,orvariants,ofthe
virusthatdifferencesintheserecognitionsitesdistinguish.Thisrapidchangeofsurfacemarkersdecreases
the effectiveness of the person’s immune system in attacking the virus, because the antibodies will not
recognizethesurfacepatterns'newvariations.InthecaseofHIV,theproblemiscompoundedbecausethe
virusspecificallyinfectsanddestroyscellsinvolvedintheimmuneresponse,furtherincapacitatingthehost.
Figure5.6HIVbindstotheCD4receptor,aglycoproteinonTcellsurfaces.(credit:modificationofworkbyNIH,
NIAID)
Membrane Fluidity
The membrane's mosaic characteristic helps to illustrate its nature. The integral proteins and lipids exist in the
membrane as separate but loosely attached molecules. These resemble the separate, multicolored tiles of a
mosaic picture, and they float, moving somewhat with respect to one another. The membrane is not like a
balloon,however,thatcanexpandandcontract;rather,itisfairlyrigidandcanburstifpenetratedorifacelltakes
in too much water. However, because of its mosaic nature, a very fine needle can easily penetrate a plasma
PAGE: 161
150 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
membrane without causing it to burst, and the membrane will flow and self-seal when one extracts the needle.
The membrane's mosaic characteristics explain some but not all of its fluidity. There are two other factors that
helpmaintainthisfluidcharacteristic.Onefactoristhenatureofthephospholipidsthemselves.Intheirsaturated
form,thefattyacidsinphospholipidtailsaresaturatedwithboundhydrogenatoms.Therearenodoublebonds
between adjacent carbon atoms. This results in tails that are relatively straight. In contrast, unsaturated fatty
acids do not contain a maximal number of hydrogen atoms, but they do contain some double bonds between
adjacentcarbonatoms.Adoublebondresultsinabendinthecarbonstringofapproximately30degrees(Figure
5.3).
Thus, if decreasing temperatures compress saturated fatty acids with their straight tails, they press in on each
other, making a dense and fairly rigid membrane. If unsaturated fatty acids are compressed, the “kinks” in
their tails elbow adjacent phospholipid molecules away, maintaining some space between the phospholipid
molecules. This “elbow room” helps to maintain fluidity in the membrane at temperatures at which membranes
with saturated fatty acid tails in their phospholipids would “freeze” or solidify. The membrane's relative fluidity
is particularly important in a cold environment. A cold environment usually compresses membranes comprised
largelyofsaturatedfattyacids,makingthemlessfluidandmoresusceptibletorupturing.Manyorganisms(fish
areoneexample)arecapableofadaptingtocoldenvironmentsbychangingtheproportionofunsaturatedfatty
acids in their membranes in response to lower temperature.
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/biological_memb) to see animations of the membranes' fluidity
and mosaic quality.
Animals have an additional membrane constituent that assists in maintaining fluidity. Cholesterol, which lies
alongside the phospholipids in the membrane, tends to dampen temperature effects on the membrane. Thus,
this lipid functions as a buffer, preventing lower temperatures from inhibiting fluidity and preventing increased
temperatures from increasing fluidity too much. Thus, cholesterol extends, in both directions, the temperature
range in which the membrane is appropriately fluid and consequently functional. Cholesterol also serves other
functions, such as organizing clusters of transmembrane proteins into lipid rafts.
Plasma Membrane Components and Functions
Component Location
Phospholipid Main membrane fabric
Attached between phospholipids and between the two
Cholesterol
phospholipid layers
Embedded within the phospholipid layer(s); may or may not
Integral proteins (for example, integrins)
penetrate through both layers
On the phospholipid bilayer's inner or outer surface; not
Peripheral proteins
embedded within the phospholipids
Carbohydrates (components of
Generally attached to proteins on the outside membrane layer
glycoproteins and glycolipids)
Table 5.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 162
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 151
Immunologist
The variations in peripheral proteins and carbohydrates that affect a cell’s recognition sites are of prime
interest in immunology. In developing vaccines, researchers have been able to conquer many infectious
diseases, such as smallpox, polio, diphtheria, and tetanus.
Immunologists are the physicians and scientists who research and develop vaccines, as well as treat and
study allergies or other immune problems. Some immunologists study and treat autoimmune problems
(diseases in which a person’s immune system attacks his or her own cells or tissues, such as lupus)
and immunodeficiencies, whether acquired (such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, or AIDS) or
hereditary (such as severe combined immunodeficiency, or SCID). Immunologists also help treat organ
transplantation patients, who must have their immune systems suppressed so that their bodies will not
rejectatransplantedorgan.Someimmunologistsworktounderstandnaturalimmunityandtheeffectsofa
person’senvironmentonit.Othersworkonquestionsabouthowtheimmunesystemaffectsdiseasessuch
ascancer.Inthepast,researchersdidnotunderstandtheimportanceofhavingahealthyimmunesystem
in preventing cancer.
To work as an immunologist, one must have a PhD or MD. In addition, immunologists undertake at least
two to three years of training in an accredited program and must pass the American Board of Allergy
and Immunology exam. Immunologists must possess knowledge of the human body's function as they
relate to issues beyond immunization, and knowledge of pharmacology and medical technology, such as
medications, therapies, test materials, and surgical procedures.
5.2 | Passive Transport
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain why and how passive transport occurs
• Understand the osmosis and diffusion processes
• Define tonicity and its relevance to passive transport
Plasmamembranesmustallowcertainsubstancestoenterandleaveacell,andpreventsomeharmfulmaterials
from entering and some essential materials from leaving. In other words, plasma membranes are selectively
permeable—they allow some substances to pass through, but not others. If they were to lose this selectivity,
thecellwouldnolongerbeabletosustainitself,anditwouldbedestroyed.Somecellsrequirelargeramounts
of specific substances. They must have a way of obtaining these materials from extracellular fluids. This may
happen passively, as certain materials move back and forth, or the cell may have special mechanisms that
facilitate transport. Some materials are so important to a cell that it spends some of its energy, hydrolyzing
adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to obtain these materials. Red blood cells use some of their energy doing just
that. Most cells spend the majority of their energy to maintain an imbalance of sodium and potassium ions
between the cell's interior and exterior, as well as on protein synthesis.
The most direct forms of membrane transport are passive. Passive transport is a naturally occurring
phenomenon and does not require the cell to exert any of its energy to accomplish the movement. In passive
transport, substances move from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration. A physical
space in which there is a single substance concentration range has aconcentration gradient.
Selective Permeability
Plasma membranes are asymmetric: the membrane's interior is not identical to its exterior. There is a
considerable difference between the array of phospholipids and proteins between the two leaflets that form a
membrane. On the membrane's interior, someproteins serveto anchor the membrane to cytoskeleton's fibers.
Thereareperipheralproteinsonthemembrane'sexteriorthatbindextracellularmatrixelements.Carbohydrates,
PAGE: 163
152 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
attached to lipids or proteins, are also on the plasma membrane's exterior surface. These carbohydrate
complexes help the cell bind required substances in the extracellular fluid. This adds considerably to plasma
membrane's selective nature (Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.7The plasma membrane's exterior surface is not identical to its interior surface.
Recall that plasma membranes are amphiphilic: They have hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. This
characteristic helps move some materials through the membrane and hinders the movement of others. Non-
polarandlipid-solublematerialwithalowmolecularweightcaneasilyslipthroughthemembrane'shydrophobic
lipid core. Substances such as the fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K readily pass through the plasma
membranes in the digestive tract and other tissues. Fat-soluble drugs and hormones also gain easy entry into
cellsandreadilytransportthemselvesintothebody’stissuesandorgans.Oxygenandcarbondioxidemolecules
have no charge and pass through membranes by simple diffusion.
Polar substances present problems for the membrane. While some polar molecules connect easily with the
cell'soutside,theycannotreadilypassthroughtheplasmamembrane'slipidcore.Additionally,whilesmallions
couldeasilyslipthroughthespacesinthemembrane'smosaic,theirchargepreventsthemfromdoingso.Ions
suchassodium,potassium,calcium,andchloridemusthavespecialmeansofpenetratingplasmamembranes.
Simple sugars and amino acids also need the help of various transmembrane proteins (channels) to transport
themselves across plasma membranes.
Diffusion
Diffusion is a passive process of transport. A single substance moves from a high concentration to a low
concentrationareauntiltheconcentrationisequalacrossaspace.Youarefamiliarwithdiffusionofsubstances
through the air. For example, think about someone opening a bottle of ammonia in a room filled with people.
The ammonia gas is at its highest concentration in the bottle. Its lowest concentration is at the room's edges.
The ammonia vapor will diffuse, or spread away, from the bottle, and gradually, increasingly more people will
smell the ammonia as it spreads. Materials move within the cell’s cytosol by diffusion, and certain materials
move through the plasma membrane by diffusion (Figure 5.8). Diffusion expends no energy. On the contrary,
concentration gradients are a form of potential energy, which dissipates as the gradient is eliminated.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 164
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 153
Figure5.8Diffusionthroughapermeablemembranemovesasubstancefromahighconcentrationarea(extracellular
fluid, inthiscase)downitsconcentration gradient (into thecytoplasm). (credit: modification ofworkbyMarianaRuiz
Villareal)
Each separate substance in a medium, such as the extracellular fluid, has its own concentration gradient,
independentofothermaterials'concentrationgradients.Inaddition,eachsubstancewilldiffuseaccordingtothat
gradient. Within a system, there will be different diffusion rates of various substances in the medium.
Factors That Affect Diffusion
Molecules move constantly in a random manner, at a rate that depends on their mass, their environment, and
theamountofthermalenergytheypossess,whichinturnisafunctionoftemperature.Thismovementaccounts
formoleculediffusionthroughwhatevermediuminwhichtheyarelocalized.Asubstancemovesintoanyspace
available to it until it evenly distributes itself throughout. After a substance has diffused completely through a
space,removingitsconcentrationgradient,moleculeswillstillmovearoundinthespace,buttherewillbenonet
movementofthenumberofmoleculesfromoneareatoanother.Wecallthislackofaconcentrationgradientin
whichthesubstancehasnonetmovementdynamicequilibrium.Whilediffusionwillgoforwardinthepresence
of a substance's concentration gradient, several factors affect the diffusion rate.
• Extent of the concentration gradient: The greater the difference in concentration, the more rapid the
diffusion. The closer the distribution of the material gets to equilibrium, the slower the diffusion rate.
• Massofthemoleculesdiffusing:Heaviermoleculesmovemoreslowly;therefore,theydiffusemoreslowly.
The reverse is true for lighter molecules.
• Temperature:Highertemperaturesincreasetheenergyandthereforethemolecules'movement,increasing
the diffusion rate. Lower temperatures decrease the molecules' energy, thus decreasing the diffusion rate.
• Solvent density: As the density of a solvent increases, the diffusion rate decreases. The molecules slow
down because they have a more difficult time passing through the denser medium. If the medium is less
dense, diffusion increases. Because cells primarily use diffusion to move materials within the cytoplasm,
any increase in the cytoplasm’s density will inhibit the movement of the materials. An example of this
is a person experiencing dehydration. As the body’s cells lose water, the diffusion rate decreases in the
cytoplasm,andthecells’functionsdeteriorate.Neuronstendtobeverysensitivetothiseffect.Dehydration
frequentlyleadstounconsciousnessandpossiblycomabecauseofthedecreaseindiffusionratewithinthe
cells.
• Solubility: As we discussed earlier, nonpolar or lipid-soluble materials pass through plasma membranes
more easily than polar materials, allowing a faster diffusion rate.
• Surface area and plasma membrane thickness: Increased surface area increases the diffusion rate;
whereas, a thicker membrane reduces it.
• Distancetravelled:Thegreaterthedistancethatasubstancemusttravel,theslowerthediffusionrate.This
places an upper limitation on cell size. A large, spherical cell will die because nutrients or waste cannot
reachorleavethecell'scenter,respectively.Therefore,cellsmusteitherbesmallinsize,asinthecaseof
many prokaryotes, or be flattened, as with many single-celled eukaryotes.
A variation of diffusion is the process of filtration. In filtration, material moves according to its concentration
PAGE: 165
154 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
gradientthroughamembrane.Sometimespressureenhancesthediffusionrate,causingthesubstancestofilter
morerapidly.Thisoccursinthekidney,wherebloodpressureforceslargeamountsofwaterandaccompanying
dissolvedsubstances,orsolutes,outofthebloodandintotherenaltubules.Thediffusionrateinthisinstance
isalmosttotallydependentonpressure.Oneoftheeffectsofhighbloodpressureistheappearanceofprotein
in the urine, which abnormally high pressure "squeezes through".
Facilitated transport
In facilitated transport, or facilitated diffusion, materials diffuse across the plasma membrane with the help
of membrane proteins. A concentration gradient exists that would allow these materials to diffuse into the cell
without expending cellular energy. However, these materials are polar molecule ions that the cell membrane's
hydrophobic parts repel. Facilitated transport proteins shield these materials from the membrane's repulsive
force, allowing them to diffuse into the cell.
The transported material first attaches to protein or glycoprotein receptors on the plasma membrane's exterior
surface. This allows removal of material from the extracellular fluid that the cell needs. The substances then
pass to specific integral proteins that facilitate their passage. Some of these integral proteins are collections of
beta-pleated sheets that form a pore or channel through the phospholipid bilayer. Others are carrier proteins
which bind with the substance and aid its diffusion through the membrane.
Channels
The integral proteins involved in facilitated transport are transport proteins, and they function as either
channels for the material or carriers. In both cases, they are transmembrane proteins. Channels are specific
for the transported substance. Channel proteins have hydrophilic domains exposed to the intracellular and
extracellular fluids. In addition, they have a hydrophilic channel through their core that provides a hydrated
opening through the membrane layers (Figure 5.9). Passage through the channel allows polar compounds to
avoid the plasma membrane's nonpolar central layer that would otherwise slow or prevent their entry into the
cell.Aquaporinsare channel proteins that allow water to pass through the membrane at a very high rate.
Figure 5.9 Facilitated transport moves substances down their concentration gradients. They may cross the plasma
membrane with the aid of channel proteins. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Channel proteins are either open at all times or they are “gated,” which controls the channel's opening. When
aparticular ionattaches tothechannelprotein itmaycontrol theopening, orother mechanismsorsubstances
may be involved. In some tissues, sodium and chloride ions pass freely through open channels; whereas, in
othertissuesagatemustopentoallowpassage.Anexampleofthisoccursinthekidney,wherethereareboth
channel forms in different parts of the renal tubules. Cells involved in transmitting electrical impulses, such as
nerveandmusclecells,havegatedchannelsforsodium,potassium,andcalciumintheirmembranes.Opening
and closing these channels changes the relative concentrations on opposing sides of the membrane of these
ions, resulting in facilitating electrical transmission along membranes (in the case of nerve cells) or in muscle
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 166
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 155
contraction (in the case of muscle cells).
Carrier Proteins
Another type of protein embedded in the plasma membrane is a carrier protein. This aptly named protein
binds a substance and, thus triggers a change of its own shape, moving the bound molecule from the cell's
outsidetoitsinterior(Figure5.10).Dependingonthegradient,thematerialmaymoveintheoppositedirection.
Carrier proteins are typically specific for a single substance. This selectivity adds to the plasma membrane's
overall selectivity. Scientists poorly understand the exact mechanism for the change of shape. Proteins can
change shape when their hydrogen bonds are affected, but this may not fully explain this mechanism. Each
carrier protein is specific to one substance, and there are a finite number of these proteins in any membrane.
This can cause problems in transporting enough material for the cell to function properly. When all of the
proteinsareboundtotheirligands,theyaresaturatedandtherateoftransportisatitsmaximum.Increasingthe
concentration gradient at this point will not result in an increased transport rate.
Figure5.10Somesubstancesareabletomovedowntheirconcentrationgradientacrosstheplasmamembranewith
the aid of carrier proteins. Carrier proteins change shape as they move molecules across the membrane. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
An example of this process occurs in the kidney. In one part, the kidney filters glucose, water, salts, ions, and
amino acids that the body requires. This filtrate, which includes glucose, then reabsorbs in another part of the
kidney. Because there are only a finite number of carrier proteins for glucose, if more glucose is present than
the proteins can handle, the excess is not transported and the body excretes this through urine. In a diabetic
individual, the term is “spilling glucose into the urine.” A different group of carrier proteins, glucose transport
proteins, or GLUTs, are involved in transporting glucose and other hexose sugars through plasma membranes
within the body.
Channelandcarrierproteinstransportmaterialatdifferentrates.Channelproteinstransportmuchmorequickly
than carrier proteins. Channel proteins facilitate diffusion at a rate of tens of millions of molecules per second;
whereas, carrier proteins work at a rate of a thousand to a million molecules per second.
Osmosis
Osmosisisthemovementofwaterthroughasemipermeablemembraneaccordingtothewater'sconcentration
gradient across the membrane, which is inversely proportional to the solutes' concentration. While diffusion
transportsmaterialacrossmembranesandwithincells,osmosistransportsonlywateracrossamembraneand
the membrane limits the solutes' diffusion in the water. Not surprisingly, the aquaporins that facilitate water
movement play a large role in osmosis, most prominently in red blood cells and the membranes of kidney
tubules.
Mechanism
Osmosisisaspecialcaseofdiffusion.Water,likeothersubstances,movesfromanareaofhighconcentration
to one of low concentration. An obvious question is what makes water move at all? Imagine a beaker with a
semipermeable membrane separating the two sides or halves (Figure 5.11). On both sides of the membrane
the water level is the same, but there are different dissolved substance concentrations, or solute, that cannot
PAGE: 167
156 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
crossthemembrane(otherwisethesolutecrossingthemembranewouldbalanceconcentrationsoneachside).
Ifthesolution'svolumeonbothsidesofthemembraneisthesame,butthesolute'sconcentrationsaredifferent,
then there are different amounts of water, the solvent, on either side of the membrane.
Figure5.11Inosmosis,wateralwaysmovesfromanareaofhigherwaterconcentrationtooneoflowerconcentration.
In the diagram, the solute cannot pass through the selectively permeable membrane, but the water can.
Toillustratethis,imaginetwofullwaterglasses.Onehasasingleteaspoonofsugarinit;whereas,thesecond
one contains one-quarter cup of sugar. If the total volume of the solutions in both cups is the same, which cup
contains more water? Because the large sugar amount in the second cup takes up much more space than the
teaspoon of sugar in the first cup, the first cup has more water in it.
Returningtothebeakerexample,recallthatithasasolutemixtureoneithersideofthemembrane.Aprinciple
of diffusion is that the molecules move around and will spread evenly throughout the medium if they can.
However, only the material capable of getting through the membrane will diffuse through it. In this example,
the solute cannot diffuse through the membrane, but the water can. Water has a concentration gradient in this
system. Thus, water will diffuse down its concentration gradient, crossing the membrane to the side where it
is less concentrated. This diffusion of water through the membrane—osmosis—will continue until the water's
concentration gradient goes to zero or until the water's hydrostatic pressure balances the osmotic pressure.
Osmosis proceeds constantly in living systems.
Tonicity
Tonicity describes how an extracellular solution can change a cell's volume by affecting osmosis. A solution's
tonicity often directly correlates with the solution's osmolarity. Osmolarity describes the solution's total solute
concentration.Asolutionwithlowosmolarityhasagreaternumberofwatermoleculesrelativetothenumberof
soluteparticles.Asolutionwithhighosmolarityhasfewerwatermoleculeswithrespecttosoluteparticles.Ina
situationinwhichamembranepermeabletowater,thoughnottothesoluteseparatestwodifferentosmolarities,
water will move from the membrane's side with lower osmolarity (and more water) to the side with higher
osmolarity (and less water). This effect makes sense if you remember that the solute cannot move across
the membrane, and thus the only component in the system that can move—the water—moves along its own
concentration gradient. An important distinction that concerns living systems is that osmolarity measures the
number of particles (which may be molecules) in a solution. Therefore, a solution that is cloudy with cells may
have a lower osmolarity than a solution that is clear, if the second solution contains more dissolved molecules
than there are cells.
Hypotonic Solutions
Scientists use three terms—hypotonic, isotonic, and hypertonic—to relate the cell's osmolarity to the
extracellular fluid's osmolarity that contains the cells. In a hypotonic situation, the extracellular fluid has lower
osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell, and water enters the cell. (In living systems, the point of reference is
always the cytoplasm, so the prefix hypo- means that the extracellular fluid has a lower solute concentration,
or a lower osmolarity, than the cell cytoplasm.) It also means that the extracellular fluid has a higher water
concentrationinthesolutionthandoesthecell.Inthissituation,waterwillfollowitsconcentrationgradientand
enter the cell.
Hypertonic Solutions
As for a hypertonic solution, the prefix hyper- refers to the extracellular fluid having a higher osmolarity than
thecell’scytoplasm;therefore,thefluidcontainslesswaterthanthecelldoes.Becausethecellhasarelatively
higher water concentration, water will leave the cell.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 168
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 157
Isotonic Solutions
Inanisotonicsolution,theextracellularfluidhasthesameosmolarityasthecell.Ifthecell'sosmolaritymatches
thatoftheextracellularfluid,therewillbenonetmovementofwaterintooroutofthecell,althoughwaterwillstill
moveinandout.Bloodcellsandplantcellsinhypertonic,isotonic,andhypotonicsolutionstakeoncharacteristic
appearances (Figure 5.12).
Figure 5.12 Osmotic pressure changes red blood cells' shape in hypertonic, isotonic, and hypotonic solutions.
(credit: Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
A doctor injects a patient with what the doctor thinks is an isotonic saline solution. The patient dies, and
an autopsy reveals that many red blood cells have been destroyed. Do you think the solution the doctor
injected was really isotonic?
For a video illustrating the diffusion process in solutions, visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
dispersion).
Tonicity in Living Systems
In a hypotonic environment, water enters a cell, and the cell swells. In an isotonic condition, the relative solute
andsolventconcentrationsareequalonbothmembranesides.Thereisnonetwatermovement;therefore,there
isnochangeinthecell'ssize.Inahypertonicsolution,waterleavesacellandthecellshrinks.Ifeitherthehypo-
or hyper- condition goes to excess, the cell’s functions become compromised, and the cell may be destroyed.
A red blood cell will burst, or lyse, when it swells beyond the plasma membrane’s capability to expand.
Remember, the membrane resembles a mosaic, with discrete spaces between the molecules comprising it. If
the cell swells, and the spaces between the lipids and proteins become too large, the cell will break apart.
In contrast, when excessive water amounts leave a red blood cell, the cell shrinks, or crenates. This has the
effectofconcentratingthesolutesleftinthecell,makingthecytosoldenserandinterferingwithdiffusionwithin
the cell. The cell’s ability to function will be compromised and may also result in the cell's death.
Various living things have ways of controlling the effects of osmosis—a mechanism we call osmoregulation.
Some organisms, such as plants, fungi, bacteria, and some protists, have cell walls that surround the plasma
membrane and prevent cell lysis in a hypotonic solution. The plasma membrane can only expand to the
PAGE: 169
158 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
cell wall's limit, so the cell will not lyse. The cytoplasm in plants is always slightly hypertonic to the cellular
environment,andwaterwillalwaysenteracellifwaterisavailable.Thiswaterinflowproducesturgorpressure,
which stiffens the plant's cell walls (Figure 5.13). In nonwoody plants, turgor pressure supports the plant.
Conversly,ifyoudonotwatertheplant,theextracellularfluidwillbecomehypertonic,causingwatertoleavethe
cell.Inthiscondition, thecelldoesnotshrinkbecausethecellwallisnotflexible. However,thecellmembrane
detaches from the wall and constricts the cytoplasm. We call this plasmolysis. Plants lose turgor pressure in
this condition and wilt (Figure 5.14).
Figure 5.13 The turgor pressure within a plant cell depends on the solution's tonicity in which it is bathed. (credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Figure 5.14 Without adequate water, the plant on the left has lost turgor pressure, visible in its wilting. Watering the
plant (right) will restore the turgor pressure. (credit: Victor M. Vicente Selvas)
Tonicityisaconcernforalllivingthings.Forexample,parameciaandamoebas,whichareprotiststhatlackcell
walls, havecontractile vacuoles. This vesiclecollects excesswater from the cellandpumpsit out, keepingthe
cell from lysing as it takes on water from its environment (Figure 5.15).
Figure 5.15 A paramecium’s contractile vacuole, here visualized using bright field light microscopy at 480x
magnification, continuously pumps water out of the organism’s body to keep it from bursting in a hypotonic medium.
(credit: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Many marine invertebrates have internal salt levels matched to their environments, making them isotonic with
the water in which they live. Fish, however, must spend approximately five percent of their metabolic energy
maintaining osmotic homeostasis. Freshwater fish live in an environment that is hypotonic to their cells. These
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 170
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 159
fishactivelytakeinsaltthroughtheirgillsandexcretedilutedurinetoridthemselvesofexcesswater.Saltwater
fishliveinthereverseenvironment,whichishypertonictotheircells,andtheysecretesaltthroughtheirgillsand
excrete highly concentrated urine.
In vertebrates, the kidneys regulate the water amount in the body. Osmoreceptors are specialized cells in the
brain that monitor solute concentration in the blood. If the solute levels increase beyond a certain range, a
hormone releases that slows water loss through the kidney and dilutes the blood to safer levels. Animals also
havehighalbuminconcentrations,whichtheliverproduces,intheirblood.Thisproteinistoolargetopasseasily
through plasma membranes and is a major factor in controlling the osmotic pressures applied to tissues.
5.3 | Active Transport
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand how electrochemical gradients affect ions
• Distinguish between primary active transport and secondary active transport
Activetransportmechanismsrequirethecell’senergy,usuallyintheformofadenosinetriphosphate(ATP).If
asubstancemustmoveintothecellagainstitsconcentrationgradient—thatis,ifthesubstance'sconcentration
insidethecellisgreaterthanitsconcentrationintheextracellularfluid(andviceversa)—thecellmustuseenergy
to move the substance. Some active transport mechanisms move small-molecular weight materials, such as
ions, through the membrane. Other mechanisms transport much larger molecules.
Electrochemical Gradient
Wehavediscussedsimpleconcentrationgradients—asubstance'sdifferentialconcentrationsacrossaspaceor
amembrane—but inlivingsystems, gradients aremorecomplex. Because ionsmoveinto andout ofcellsand
becausecellscontainproteinsthatdonotmoveacrossthemembraneandaremostlynegativelycharged,there
isalsoanelectricalgradient,adifferenceofcharge,acrosstheplasmamembrane.Theinterioroflivingcellsis
electrically negative with respect to the extracellular fluid in which they are bathed, and at the same time, cells
+ +
have higher concentrations of potassium (K ) and lower concentrations of sodium (Na ) than the extracellular
+
fluid.Thusinalivingcell,theconcentrationgradientofNa tendstodriveitintothecell,anditselectricalgradient
(apositiveion)alsodrivesitinwardtothenegativelychargedinterior.However,thesituationismorecomplexfor
+
otherelementssuchaspotassium.TheelectricalgradientofK ,apositiveion,alsodrivesitintothecell,butthe
+ +
concentrationgradientofK drivesK outofthecell(Figure5.16).Wecallthecombinedconcentrationgradient
and electrical charge that affects an ion itselectrochemical gradient.
PAGE: 171
160 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
Figure 5.16 Electrochemical gradients arise from the combined effects of concentration gradients and electrical
gradients. Structures labeled A represent proteins. (credit: “Synaptitude”/Wikimedia Commons)
Injectingapotassiumsolutionintoaperson’sbloodislethal.Thisishowcapitalpunishmentandeuthanasia
subjects die. Why do you think a potassium solution injection is lethal?
Moving Against a Gradient
To move substances against a concentration or electrochemical gradient, the cell must use energy. This
energy comes from ATP generated through the cell’s metabolism. Active transport mechanisms, or pumps,
work against electrochemical gradients. Small substances constantly pass through plasma membranes. Active
transport maintains concentrations of ions and other substances that living cells require in the face of these
passivemovements.Acellmayspendmuchofitsmetabolicenergysupplymaintainingtheseprocesses.(Ared
bloodcellusesmostofitsmetabolicenergytomaintaintheimbalancebetweenexteriorandinteriorsodiumand
potassiumlevelsthatthecellrequires.)Becauseactivetransportmechanismsdependonacell’smetabolismfor
energy, they are sensitive to many metabolic poisons that interfere with the ATP supply.
Two mechanisms exist for transporting small-molecular weight material and small molecules. Primary active
transport moves ions across a membrane and creates a difference in charge across that membrane, which
is directly dependent on ATP. Secondary active transport does not directly require ATP: instead, it is the
movement of material due to the electrochemical gradient established by primary active transport.
Carrier Proteins for Active Transport
An important membrane adaption for active transport is the presence of specific carrier proteins or pumps
to facilitate movement: there are three protein types or transporters (Figure 5.17). A uniporter carries one
specific ion or molecule. A symporter carries two different ions or molecules, both in the same direction. An
antiporter also carries two different ions or molecules, but in different directions. All of these transporters can
also transport small, uncharged organic molecules like glucose. These three types of carrier proteins are also
infacilitateddiffusion,buttheydonotrequireATPtoworkinthatprocess.Someexamplesofpumpsforactive
+ + + +
transport are Na -K ATPase, which carries sodium and potassium ions, and H -K ATPase, which carries
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 172
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 161
2+
hydrogenandpotassiumions.Bothoftheseareantiportercarrierproteins.TwoothercarrierproteinsareCa
+
ATPase and H ATPase, which carry only calcium and only hydrogen ions, respectively. Both are pumps.
Figure 5.17 A uniporter carries one molecule orion. A symporter carries two different molecules orions, both in the
samedirection.Anantiporteralsocarriestwodifferentmoleculesorions,butindifferentdirections.(credit:modification
of work by “Lupask”/Wikimedia Commons)
Primary Active Transport
Theprimaryactivetransportthatfunctionswiththeactivetransportofsodiumandpotassiumallowssecondary
active transport to occur. The second transport method is still active because it depends on using energy as
does primary transport (Figure 5.18).
Figure 5.18 Primary active transport moves ions across a membrane, creating an electrochemical gradient
(electrogenic transport). (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
+ +
One of the most important pumps in animal cells is the sodium-potassium pump (Na -K ATPase), which
+ +
maintainstheelectrochemicalgradient(andthecorrectconcentrationsofNa andK )inlivingcells.Thesodium-
+ + +
potassiumpumpmovesK intothecellwhilemovingNa outatthesametime,ataratioofthreeNa forevery
+ + +
twoK ionsmovedin.TheNa -K ATPaseexistsintwoforms,dependingonitsorientationtothecell'sinterior
or exterior and its affinity for either sodium or potassium ions. The process consists of the following six steps.
1. With the enzyme oriented towards the cell's interior, the carrier has a high affinity for sodium ions. Three
ions bind to the protein.
2. The protein carrier hydrolyzes ATP and a low-energy phosphate group attaches to it.
3. As a result, the carrier changes shape and reorients itself towards the membrane's exterior. The protein’s
affinity for sodium decreases and the three sodium ions leave the carrier.
4. Theshapechangeincreasesthecarrier’saffinityforpotassiumions,andtwosuchionsattachtotheprotein.
Subsequently, the low-energy phosphate group detaches from the carrier.
5. With the phosphate group removed and potassium ions attached, the carrier protein repositions itself
towards the cell's interior.
6. Thecarrierprotein,initsnewconfiguration,hasadecreasedaffinityforpotassium,andthetwoionsmoves
PAGE: 173
162 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
into the cytoplasm. The protein now has a higher affinity for sodium ions, and the process starts again.
Several things have happened as a result of this process. At this point, there are more sodium ions outside
the cell than inside and more potassium ions inside than out. For every three sodium ions that move out, two
potassium ions move in. This results in the interior being slightly more negative relative to the exterior. This
difference in charge is important in creating the conditions necessary for the secondary process. The sodium-
potassium pump is, therefore, an electrogenic pump (a pump that creates a charge imbalance), creating an
electrical imbalance across the membrane and contributing to the membrane potential.
Watch this video (https://openstax.org/l/Na_K_ATPase) to see an active transport simulation in a sodium-
potassium ATPase.
Secondary Active Transport (Co-transport)
Secondary active transport brings sodium ions, and possibly other compounds, into the cell. As sodium ion
concentrations build outside of the plasma membrane because of the primary active transport process, this
creates an electrochemical gradient. If a channel protein exists and is open, the sodium ions will pull through
themembrane.Thismovementtransportsothersubstancesthatcanattachthemselvestothetransportprotein
through the membrane (Figure 5.19). Many amino acids, as well as glucose, enter a cell this way. This
secondaryprocessalsostoreshigh-energyhydrogenionsinthemitochondriaofplantandanimalcellsinorder
toproduceATP.Thepotentialenergythataccumulatesinthestoredhydrogenionstranslatesintokineticenergy
as the ions surge through the channel protein ATP synthase, and that energy then converts ADP into ATP.
Figure 5.19 An electrochemical gradient, which primary active transport creates, can move other substances
againsttheirconcentrationgradients,aprocessscientistscallco-transportorsecondaryactivetransport.(credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
If the pH outside the cell decreases, would you expect the amount of amino acids transported into the cell
to increase or decrease?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 174
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 163
5.4 | Bulk Transport
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe endocytosis, including phagocytosis, pinocytosis, and receptor-mediated endocytosis
• Understand the process of exocytosis
In addition to moving small ions and molecules through the membrane, cells also need to remove and take in
larger molecules and particles (see Table 5.2 for examples). Some cells are even capable of engulfing entire
unicellularmicroorganisms.Youmighthavecorrectlyhypothesizedthatwhenacelluptakesandreleaseslarge
particles, it requires energy. A large particle, however, cannot pass through the membrane, even with energy
that the cell supplies.
Endocytosis
Endocytosis is a type of active transport that moves particles, such as large molecules, parts of cells, and
even whole cells, into a cell. There are different endocytosis variations, but all share a common characteristic:
the cell's plasma membrane invaginates, forming a pocket around the target particle. The pocket pinches
off, resulting in the particle containing itself in a newly created intracellular vesicle formed from the plasma
membrane.
Phagocytosis
Phagocytosis (the condition of “cell eating”) is the process by which a cell takes in large particles, such as
other cells or relatively large particles. For example, when microorganisms invade the human body, a type of
white blood cell, a neutrophil, will remove the invaders through this process, surrounding and engulfing the
microorganism, which the neutrophil then destroys (Figure 5.20).
Figure5.20Inphagocytosis,thecellmembranesurroundstheparticleandengulfsit.(credit:modificationofworkby
Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Inpreparationforphagocytosis,aportionoftheplasmamembrane'sinward-facingsurfacebecomescoatedwith
the protein clathrin, which stabilizes this membrane's section. The membrane's coated portion then extends
fromthecell'sbodyandsurroundstheparticle,eventuallyenclosingit.Oncethevesiclecontainingtheparticle
PAGE: 175
164 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
isenclosedwithinthecell,theclathrindisengagesfromthemembraneandthevesiclemergeswithalysosome
for breaking down the material in the newly formed compartment (endosome). When accessible nutrients from
the vesicular contents' degradation have been extracted, the newly formed endosome merges with the plasma
membraneandreleasesitscontentsintotheextracellularfluid.Theendosomalmembraneagainbecomespart
of the plasma membrane.
Pinocytosis
A variation of endocytosis is pinocytosis. This literally means “cell drinking”. Discovered by Warren Lewis in
1929,thisAmericanembryologistandcellbiologistdescribedaprocesswherebyheassumedthatthecellwas
purposefullytakinginextracellularfluid.Inreality,thisisaprocessthattakesinmolecules,includingwater,which
thecellneedsfromtheextracellularfluid.Pinocytosisresultsinamuchsmallervesiclethandoesphagocytosis,
and the vesicle does not need to merge with a lysosome (Figure 5.21).
Figure5.21Inpinocytosis,thecellmembraneinvaginates,surroundsasmallvolumeoffluid,andpinchesoff.(credit:
modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
A variation of pinocytosis is potocytosis. This process uses a coating protein, caveolin, on the plasma
membrane's cytoplasmic side, which performs a similar function to clathrin. The cavities in the plasma
membranethatformthevacuoleshavemembranereceptorsandlipidraftsinadditiontocaveolin.Thevacuoles
orvesiclesformedincaveolae(singularcaveola)aresmallerthanthoseinpinocytosis.Potocytosisbringssmall
moleculesintothecellandtransportsthemthroughthecellfortheirreleaseontheotherside,aprocesswecall
transcytosis.
Receptor-mediated Endocytosis
A targeted variation of endocytosis employs receptor proteins in the plasma membrane that have a specific
binding affinity for certain substances (Figure 5.22).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 176
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 165
Figure5.22Inreceptor-mediatedendocytosis,thecell'suptakeofsubstancestargetsasingletypeofsubstancethat
binds to the receptor on the cell membrane's external surface. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
In receptor-mediated endocytosis, as in phagocytosis, clathrin attaches to the plasma membrane's
cytoplasmic side. If a compound's uptake is dependent on receptor-mediated endocytosis and the process is
ineffective, the material will not be removed from the tissue fluids or blood. Instead, it will stay in those fluids
andincreaseinconcentration.Thefailureofreceptor-mediatedendocytosiscausessomehumandiseases.For
example,receptormediatedendocytosisremoveslowdensitylipoproteinorLDL(or"bad"cholesterol)fromthe
blood. In the human genetic disease familial hypercholesterolemia, the LDL receptors are defective or missing
entirely. People with this condition have life-threatening levels of cholesterol in their blood, because their cells
cannot clear LDL particles.
Although receptor-mediated endocytosis is designed to bring specific substances that are normally in the
extracellular fluid into the cell, other substances may gain entry into the cell at the same site. Flu viruses,
diphtheria,andcholeratoxinallhavesitesthatcross-reactwithnormalreceptor-bindingsitesandgainentryinto
cells.
See receptor-mediated endocytosis in action, and click on different parts (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
endocytosis)for a focused animation.
PAGE: 177
166 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
Exocytosis
The reverse process of moving material into a cell is the process of exocytosis. Exocytosis is the opposite of
the processes we discussed above in that its purpose is to expel material from the cell into the extracellular
fluid. Waste material is enveloped in a membrane and fuses with the plasma membrane's interior. This fusion
opensthemembranousenvelopeonthecell'sexterior,andthewastematerialexpelsintotheextracellularspace
(Figure 5.23). Other examples of cells releasing molecules via exocytosis include extracellular matrix protein
secretion and neurotransmitter secretion into the synaptic cleft by synaptic vesicles.
Figure5.23Inexocytosis,vesiclescontainingsubstancesfusewiththeplasmamembrane.Thecontentsthenrelease
to the cell's exterior. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Methods of Transport, Energy Requirements, and Types of Transported Material
Active/
Transport Method Material Transported
Passive
Diffusion Passive Small-molecular weight material
Osmosis Passive Water
Facilitated transport/diffusion Passive Sodium, potassium, calcium, glucose
Primary active transport Active Sodium, potassium, calcium
Secondary active transport Active Amino acids, lactose
Large macromolecules, whole cells, or cellular
Phagocytosis Active
structures
Pinocytosis and potocytosis Active Small molecules (liquids/water)
Table 5.2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 178
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 167
Methods of Transport, Energy Requirements, and Types of Transported Material
Active/
Transport Method Material Transported
Passive
Receptor-mediated
Active Large quantities of macromolecules
endocytosis
Table 5.2
PAGE: 179
168 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
KEY TERMS
active transport method of transporting material that requires energy
amphiphilic molecule possessing a polar or charged area and a nonpolar or uncharged area capable of
interacting with both hydrophilic and hydrophobic environments
antiporter transporter that carries two ions or small molecules in different directions
aquaporin channel protein that allows water through the membrane at a very high rate
carrier protein membrane protein that moves a substance across the plasma membrane by changing its own
shape
caveolin protein that coats the plasma membrane's cytoplasmic side and participates in the liquid uptake
process by potocytosis
channel protein membraneproteinthatallowsasubstancetopassthroughitshollowcoreacrosstheplasma
membrane
clathrin protein that coats the plasma membrane's inward-facing surface and assists in forming specialized
structures, like coated pits, for phagocytosis
concentration gradient area of high concentration adjacent to an area of low concentration
diffusion passive transport process of low-molecular weight material according to its concentration gradient
electrochemical gradient a combined electrical and chemical force that produces a gradient
electrogenic pump pump that creates a charge imbalance
endocytosis type of active transport that moves substances, including fluids and particles, into a cell
exocytosis process of passing bulk material out of a cell
facilitated transport process by which material moves down a concentration gradient (from high to low
concentration) using integral membrane proteins
fluid mosaic model describes the plasma membrane's structure as a mosaic of components including
phospholipids, cholesterol, proteins, glycoproteins, and glycolipids (sugar chains attached to proteins or
lipids, respectively), resulting in a fluid character (fluidity)
glycolipid combination of carbohydrates and lipids
glycoprotein combination of carbohydrates and proteins
hydrophilic molecule with the ability to bond with water; “water-loving”
hydrophobic molecule that does not have the ability to bond with water; “water-hating”
hypertonic situationinwhichextracellularfluidhasahigherosmolaritythanthefluidinsidethecell,resultingin
water moving out of the cell
hypotonic situation in which extracellular fluid has a lower osmolarity than the fluid inside the cell, resulting in
water moving into the cell
integral protein protein integrated into the membrane structure that interacts extensively with the membrane
lipids' hydrocarbon chains and often spans the membrane
isotonic situationinwhichtheextracellularfluidhasthesameosmolarityasthefluidinsidethecell,resultingin
no net water movement into or out of the cell
osmolarity total amount of substances dissolved in a specific amount of solution
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 180
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 169
osmosis transport of water through a semipermeable membrane according to the water's concentration
gradient across the membrane that results from the presence of solute that cannot pass through the
membrane
passive transport method of transporting material through a membrane that does not require energy
peripheral protein protein at the plasma membrane's surface either on its exterior or interior side
pinocytosis a variation of endocytosis that imports macromolecules that the cell needs from the extracellular
fluid
plasmolysis detaching the cell membrane from the cell wall and constricting the cell membrane when a plant
cell is in a hypertonic solution
potocytosis variationofpinocytosisthatusesadifferentcoatingprotein(caveolin)ontheplasmamembrane's
cytoplasmic side
primary active transport active transport that moves ions or small molecules across a membrane and may
create a difference in charge across that membrane
pump active transport mechanism that works against electrochemical gradients
receptor-mediated endocytosis variation of endocytosis that involves using specific binding proteins in the
plasmamembraneforspecificmoleculesorparticles,andclathrin-coatedpitsthatbecomeclathrin-coated
vesicles
secondary active transport movement of material that results from primary active transport to the
electrochemical gradient
selectively permeable membrane characteristic that allows some substances through
solute substance dissolved in a liquid to form a solution
symporter transporter that carries two different ions or small molecules, both in the same direction
tonicity amount of solute in a solution
transport protein membrane protein that facilitates a substance's passage across a membrane by binding it
transporter specific carrier proteins or pumps that facilitate movement
uniporter transporter that carries one specific ion or molecule
CHAPTER SUMMARY
5.1Components and Structure
Modern scientists refer to the plasma membrane as the fluid mosaic model. A phospholipid bilayer comprises
the plasma membrane, with hydrophobic, fatty acid tails in contact with each other. The membrane's landscape
is studded with proteins, some which span the membrane. Some of these proteins serve to transport materials
into or out of the cell. Carbohydrates are attached to some of the proteins and lipids on the membrane's
outward-facing surface, forming complexes that function to identify the cell to other cells. The membrane's fluid
nature is due to temperature, fatty acid tail configuration (some kinked by double bonds), cholesterol presence
embedded in the membrane, and the mosaic nature of the proteins and protein-carbohydrate combinations,
which are not firmly fixed in place. Plasma membranes enclose and define the cells' borders. Not static, they
are dynamic and constantly in flux.
5.2Passive Transport
The passive transport forms, diffusion and osmosis, move materials of small molecular weight across
membranes. Substances diffuse from high to lower concentration areas, and this process continues until the
substance evenly distributes itself in a system. In solutions containing more than one substance, each molecule
PAGE: 181
170 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
type diffuses according to its own concentration gradient, independent of other substances diffusing. Many
factors can affect the diffusion rate, such as concentration gradient, diffusing, particle sizes, and the system's
temperature.
In living systems, the plasma membrane mediates substances diffusing in and out of cells. Some materials
diffuse readily through the membrane, but others are hindered and only can pass through due to specialized
proteins such as channels and transporters. The chemistry of living things occurs in aqueous solutions, and
balancing the concentrations of those solutions is an ongoing problem. In living systems, diffusing some
substances would be slow or difficult without membrane proteins that facilitate transport.
5.3Active Transport
The combined gradient that affects an ion includes its concentration gradient and its electrical gradient. A
positive ion, for example, might diffuse into a new area, down its concentration gradient, but if it is diffusing into
an area of net positive charge, its electrical gradient hampers its diffusion. When dealing with ions in aqueous
solutions, one must consider electrochemical and concentration gradient combinations, rather than just the
concentration gradient alone. Living cells need certain substances that exist inside the cell in concentrations
greater than they exist in the extracellular space. Moving substances up their electrochemical gradients
requires energy from the cell. Active transport uses energy stored in ATP to fuel this transport. Active transport
of small molecular-sized materials uses integral proteins in the cell membrane to move the materials. These
proteins are analogous to pumps. Some pumps, which carry out primary active transport, couple directly with
ATP to drive their action. In co-transport (or secondary active transport), energy from primary transport can
move another substance into the cell and up its concentration gradient.
5.4Bulk Transport
Active transport methods require directly using ATP to fuel the transport. In a process scientists call
phagocytosis, other cells can engulf large particles, such as macromolecules, cell parts, or whole cells. In
phagocytosis, a portion of the membrane invaginates and flows around the particle, eventually pinching off and
leaving the particle entirely enclosed by a plasma membrane's envelope. The cell breaks down vesicle
contents, with the particles either used as food or dispatched. Pinocytosis is a similar process on a smaller
scale. The plasma membrane invaginates and pinches off, producing a small envelope of fluid from outside the
cell. Pinocytosis imports substances that the cell needs from the extracellular fluid. The cell expels waste in a
similar but reverse manner. It pushes a membranous vacuole to the plasma membrane, allowing the vacuole to
fuse with the membrane and incorporate itself into the membrane structure, releasing its contents to the
exterior.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 5.12A doctor injects a patient with what person’s blood is lethal. Capital punishment and
the doctor thinks is an isotonic saline solution. The euthanasia utilize this method in their subjects. Why
patient dies, and an autopsy reveals that many red do you think a potassium solution injection is lethal?
blood cells have been destroyed. Do you think the
3.Figure 5.19If the pH outside the cell decreases,
solution the doctor injected was really isotonic?
would you expect the amount of amino acids
2.Figure 5.16Injecting a potassium solution into a transported into the cell to increase or decrease?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which plasma membrane component can be a. its head
either found on its surface or embedded in the b. cholesterol
membrane structure? c. a saturated fatty acid tail
a. protein d. double bonds in the fatty acid tail
b. cholesterol
6.What is the primary function of carbohydrates
c. carbohydrate
attached to the exterior of cell membranes?
d. phospholipid
a. identification of the cell
5.Which characteristic of a phospholipid contributes b. flexibility of the membrane
to the fluidity of the membrane? c. strengthening the membrane
d. channels through membrane
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 182
Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes 171
7.A scientist compares the plasma membrane interior of the cell negatively charged?
composition of an animal from the Mediterranean a. by expelling anions
coast with one from the Mojave Desert. Which b. by pulling in anions
hypothesis is most likely to be correct? c. by expelling more cations than are taken in
a. The cells from the Mediterranean coast d. by taking in and expelling an equal number
animal will have more fluid plasma of cations
membranes.
14.What is the combination of an electrical gradient
b. The cells from the Mojave Desert animal will
and a concentration gradient called?
have a higher cholesterol concentration in
a. potential gradient
the plasma membranes.
b. electrical potential
c. The cells’ plasma membranes will be
c. concentration potential
indistinguishable.
d. electrochemical gradient
d. The cells from the Mediterranean coast
animal will have a higher glycoprotein 15.What happens to the membrane of a vesicle after
content, while the cells from the Mojave exocytosis?
Desert animal will have a higher lipoprotein a. It leaves the cell.
content. b. It is disassembled by the cell.
c. It fuses with and becomes part of the
8.Water moves via osmosis _________.
plasma membrane.
a. throughout the cytoplasm
d. It is used again in another exocytosis event.
b. from an area with a high concentration of
other solutes to a lower one 16.Which transport mechanism can bring whole cells
c. from an area with a high concentration of into a cell?
water to one of lower concentration a. pinocytosis
d. from an area with a low concentration of b. phagocytosis
water to higher concentration c. facilitated transport
d. primary active transport
9.The principal force driving movement in diffusion is
the __________. 17.In what important way does receptor-mediated
a. temperature endocytosis differ from phagocytosis?
b. particle size a. It transports only small amounts of fluid.
c. concentration gradient b. It does not involve the pinching off of
d. membrane surface area membrane.
c. It brings in only a specifically targeted
10.What problem is faced by organisms that live in
substance.
fresh water?
d. It brings substances into the cell, while
a. Their bodies tend to take in too much water.
phagocytosis removes substances.
b. They have no way of controlling their
tonicity. 18.Many viruses enter host cells through receptor-
c. Only salt water poses problems for animals mediated endocytosis. What is an advantage of this
that live in it. entry strategy?
d. Their bodies tend to lose too much water to a. The virus directly enters the cytoplasm of
their environment. the cell.
b. The virus is protected from recognition by
11.In which situation would passive transportnot
white blood cells.
use a transport protein for entry into a cell?
c. The virus only enters its target host cell
a. water flowing into a hypertonic environment
type.
b. glucose being absorbed from the blood
d. The virus can directly inject its genome into
c. an ion flowing into a nerve cell to create an
the cell’s nucleus.
electrical potential
d. oxygen moving into a cell after oxygen 19.Which of the following organelles relies on
deprivation exocytosis to complete its function?
a. Golgi apparatus
12.Active transport must function continuously
b. vacuole
because __________.
c. mitochondria
a. plasma membranes wear out
d. endoplasmic reticulum
b. not all membranes are amphiphilic
c. facilitated transport opposes active transport 20.Imagine a cell can perform exocytosis, but only
d. diffusion is constantly moving solutes in minimal endocytosis. What would happen to the cell?
opposite directions
13.How does the sodium-potassium pump make the
PAGE: 183
172 Chapter 5 | Structure and Function of Plasma Membranes
a. The cell would secrete all its intracellular
proteins.
b. The plasma membrane would increase in
size over time.
c. The cell would stop expressing integral
receptor proteins in its plasma membrane.
d. The cell would lyse.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
21.Why is it advantageous for the cell membrane to If the cell’s aquaporins are still active, what will
be fluid in nature? happen to the cell? Be sure to describe the tonicity
and osmolarity of the cell.
22.Why do phospholipids tend to spontaneously
orient themselves into something resembling a 29.Where does the cell get energy for active
membrane? transport processes?
23.How can a cell use an extracellular peripheral 30.How does the sodium-potassium pump contribute
protein as the receptor to transmit a signal into the to the net negative charge of the interior of the cell?
cell?
31.Glucose from digested food enters intestinal
24.Discuss why the following affect the rate of epithelial cells by active transport. Why would
diffusion: molecular size, temperature, solution intestinal cells use active transport when most body
density, and the distance that must be traveled. cells use facilitated diffusion?
25.Why does water move through a membrane? 32.The sodium/calcium exchanger (NCX) transports
sodium into and calcium out of cardiac muscle cells.
26.Both of the regular intravenous solutions
Describe why this transporter is classified as
administered in medicine, normal saline and lactated
secondary active transport.
Ringer’s solution, are isotonic. Why is this important?
33.Why is it important that there are different types
27.Describe two ways that decreasing temperature
of proteins in plasma membranes for the transport of
would affect the rate of diffusion of molecules across
materials into and out of a cell?
a cell’s plasma membrane.
34.Why do ions have a difficult time getting through
28.A cell develops a mutation in its potassium
plasma membranes despite their small size?
channels that prevents the ions from leaving the cell.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 184
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 173
6 | METABOLISM
Figure6.1Ahummingbirdneedsenergytomaintainprolongedperiodsofflight.Thebirdobtainsitsenergyfromtaking
infoodandtransformingthenutrientsintoenergythroughaseriesofbiochemicalreactions.Theflightmusclesinbirds
are extremely efficient in energy production. (credit: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
Chapter Outline
6.1:Energy and Metabolism
6.2:Potential, Kinetic, Free, and Activation Energy
6.3:The Laws of Thermodynamics
6.4:ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate
6.5:Enzymes
Introduction
Virtuallyeverytaskperformedbylivingorganismsrequiresenergy.Organismsrequireenergytoperformheavy
labor and exercise, but humans also use considerable energy while thinking, and even during sleep. Every
organism'slivingcellsconstantlyuseenergy.Organismsimportnutrientsandothermolecules.Theymetabolize
(breakdown)andpossiblysynthesizeintonewmolecules.Ifnecessary,moleculesmodify,movearoundthecell
andmaydistributethemselvestotheentireorganism.Forexample,thelargeproteinsthatmakeupmusclesare
actively built from smaller molecules. Complex carbohydrates break down into simple sugars that the cell uses
for energy. Just as energy is required to both build and demolish a building, energy is required to synthesize
andbreakdownmolecules.Additionally,signalingmoleculessuchashormonesandneurotransmitterstransport
betweencells.Cellsingestandbreakdownbacteriaandviruses.Cellsmustalsoexportwasteandtoxinstostay
healthy,andmanycellsmustswimormovesurroundingmaterialsviathebeatingmotionofcellularappendages
like cilia and flagella.
The cellular processes that we listed above require a steady supply of energy. From where, and in what form,
does this energy come? How do living cells obtain energy, and how do they use it? This chapter will discuss
differentformsofenergyandthephysicallawsthatgovernenergytransfer.Thischapterwillalsodescribehow
cells use energy and replenish it, and how chemical reactions in the cell perform with great efficiency.
PAGE: 185
174 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
6.1 | Energy and Metabolism
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain metabolic pathways and describe the two major types
• Discuss how chemical reactions play a role in energy transfer
Scientistsusethetermbioenergeticstodiscusstheconceptofenergyflow(Figure6.2)throughlivingsystems,
such as cells. Cellular processes such as building and breaking down complex molecules occur through
stepwisechemicalreactions.Someofthesechemicalreactionsarespontaneousandreleaseenergy;whereas,
others require energy to proceed. Just as living things must continually consume food to replenish what they
have used, cells must continually produce more energy to replenish that which the many energy-requiring
chemical reactions that constantly take place use. All of the chemical reactions that transpire inside cells,
including those that use and release energy, are the cell’smetabolism.
Figure 6.2 Most life forms on earth obtain their energy from the sun. Plants use photosynthesis to capture sunlight,
and herbivores eat those plants to obtain energy. Carnivores eat the herbivores, and decomposers digest plant and
animal matter.
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Sugar (chemical reactions) metabolism (a simple carbohydrate) is a classic example of the many cellular
processesthatuseandproduceenergy.Livingthingsconsumesugarasamajorenergysource,becausesugar
moleculeshaveconsiderableenergystoredwithintheirbonds.Thefollowingequationdescribesthebreakdown
of glucose, a simple sugar:
C H O +6O →6CO +6H O+energy
6 12 6 2 2 2
Consumed carbohydrates have their origins in photosynthesizing organisms like plants (Figure 6.3). During
photosynthesis,plantsusetheenergyofsunlighttoconvertcarbondioxidegas(CO2)intosugarmolecules,like
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 186
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 175
glucose(C6H12O6).Becausethisprocessinvolvessynthesizingalarger,energy-storingmolecule,itrequiresan
energyinputtoproceed.Thefollowingequation(noticethatitisthereverseofthepreviousequation)describes
the synthesis of glucose:
6CO +6H O+energy→C H O +6O
2 2 6 12 6 2
During photosynthesis chemical reactions, energy is in the form of a very high-energy molecule scientists call
ATP,oradenosinetriphosphate.Thisistheprimaryenergycurrencyofallcells.Justasthedollaristhecurrency
we use to buy goods, cells use ATP molecules as energy currency to perform immediate work. The sugar
(glucose)isstoredasstarchorglycogen.Energy-storingpolymerslikethesebreakdownintoglucosetosupply
ATP molecules.
Solar energy is required to synthesize a glucose molecule during the photosynthesis reactions. In
photosynthesis,lightenergyfromthesuninitiallytransformsintochemicalenergythattemporallystoresitselfin
the energy carrier molecules ATP and NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). Photosynthesis
laterusesthestoredenergyinATPandNADPHtobuildoneglucosemoleculefromsixmoleculesofCO2.This
processisanalogoustoeatingbreakfastinthemorningtoacquireenergyforyourbodythatyoucanuselaterin
theday.Underidealconditions,energyfrom18moleculesofATPisrequiredtosynthesizeoneglucosemolecule
duringphotosynthesisreactions.Glucosemoleculescanalsocombinewithandconvertintoothersugartypes.
Whenanorganismconsumessugars,glucosemoleculeseventuallymaketheirwayintoeachorganism'sliving
cell.Insidethecell,eachsugarmoleculebreaksdownthroughacomplexseriesofchemicalreactions.Thegoal
ofthesereactionsistoharvesttheenergystoredinsidethesugarmolecules.Theharvestedenergymakeshigh-
energyATPmolecules,whichperformwork,poweringmanychemicalreactionsinthecell.Theamountofenergy
neededtomakeoneglucosemoleculefromsixcarbondioxidemoleculesis18ATPmoleculesand12NADPH
molecules (each one of which is energetically equivalent to three ATP molecules), or a total of 54 molecule
equivalentsrequiredforsynthesizingoneglucosemolecule.Thisprocessisafundamentalandefficientwayfor
cells to generate the molecular energy that they require.
Figure6.3Plants,likethisoaktreeandacorn,useenergyfromsunlighttomakesugarandotherorganicmolecules.
Both plants and animals (like this squirrel) use cellular respiration to derive energy from the organic molecules that
plantsoriginallyproduced.(credit“acorn”:modificationofworkbyNoelReynolds;credit“squirrel”:modificationofwork
by Dawn Huczek)
Metabolic Pathways
The processes of making and breaking down sugar molecules illustrate two types of metabolic pathways.
A metabolic pathway is a series of interconnected biochemical reactions that convert a substrate molecule
or molecules, step-by-step, through a series of metabolic intermediates, eventually yielding a final product
or products. In the case of sugar metabolism, the first metabolic pathway synthesized sugar from smaller
molecules, and the other pathway broke sugar down into smaller molecules. Scientists call these two opposite
processes—the first requiring energy and the second producing energy—anabolic (building) and catabolic
(breaking down) pathways, respectively. Consequently, building (anabolism) and degradation (catabolism)
comprise metabolism.
PAGE: 187
176 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
Figure6.4Thistreeshowstheevolutionofthevariousbranchesoflife.Theverticaldimensionistime.Earlylife
forms, in blue, used anaerobic metabolism to obtain energy from their surroundings.
Evolution of Metabolic Pathways
Thereismoretothecomplexityofmetabolismthanunderstandingthemetabolicpathwaysalone.Metabolic
complexity varies from organism to organism. Photosynthesis is the primary pathway in which
photosynthetic organisms like plants (planktonic algae perform the majority of global synthesis) harvest
the sun’s energy and convert it into carbohydrates. The by-product of photosynthesis is oxygen, which
some cells require to carry out cellular respiration. During cellular respiration, oxygen aids in the catabolic
breakdown of carbon compounds, like carbohydrates. Among the products are CO2 and ATP. In addition,
some eukaryotes perform catabolic processes without oxygen (fermentation); that is, they perform or use
anaerobic metabolism.
Organismsprobablyevolvedanaerobicmetabolismtosurvive(livingorganismscameintoexistenceabout
3.8 billion years ago, when the atmosphere lacked oxygen). Despite the differences between organisms
and the complexity of metabolism, researchers have found that all branches of life share some of the
samemetabolicpathways,suggestingthatallorganismsevolvedfromthesameancientcommonancestor
(Figure 6.4). Evidence indicates that over time, the pathways diverged, adding specialized enzymes to
alloworganismstobetteradapttotheirenvironment,thusincreasingtheirchancetosurvive.However,the
underlying principle remains that all organisms must harvest energy from their environment and convert it
to ATP to carry out cellular functions.
Anabolic and Catabolic Pathways
Anabolicpathwaysrequireaninputofenergytosynthesizecomplexmoleculesfromsimplerones.Synthesizing
sugarfromCO2isoneexample.Otherexamplesaresynthesizinglargeproteinsfromaminoacidbuildingblocks,
and synthesizing new DNA strands from nucleic acid building blocks. These biosynthetic processes are critical
tothecell'slife,takeplaceconstantly,anddemandenergythatATPandotherhigh-energymoleculeslikeNADH
(nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) and NADPH provide (Figure 6.5).
ATPisanimportantmoleculeforcellstohaveinsufficientsupplyatalltimes.Thebreakdownofsugarsillustrates
howasingleglucosemoleculecanstoreenoughenergytomakeagreatdealofATP,36to38molecules.Thisis
acatabolicpathway.Catabolicpathwaysinvolvedegrading(orbreakingdown)complexmoleculesintosimpler
ones. Molecular energy stored in complex molecule bonds release in catabolic pathways and harvest in such
a way that it can produce ATP. Other energy-storing molecules, such as fats, also break down through similar
catabolic reactions to release energy and make ATP (Figure 6.5).
It is important to know that metabolic pathway chemical reactions do not take place spontaneously. A protein
called an enzyme facilitates or catalyzes each reaction step. Enzymes are important for catalyzing all types of
biological reactions—those that require energy as well as those that release energy.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 188
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 177
Figure 6.5 Anabolic pathways are those that require energy to synthesize larger molecules. Catabolic pathways are
those that generate energy by breaking down larger molecules. Both types of pathways are required for maintaining
the cell’s energy balance.
6.2 | Potential, Kinetic, Free, and Activation Energy
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define “energy”
• Explain the difference between kinetic and potential energy
• Discuss the concepts of free energy and activation energy
• Describe endergonic and exergonic reactions
We define energy as the ability to do work. As you’ve learned, energy exists in different forms. For example,
electricalenergy,lightenergy,andheatenergyarealldifferentenergytypes.Whiletheseareallfamiliarenergy
typesthatonecanseeorfeel,thereisanotherenergytypethatismuchlesstangible.Scientistsassociatethis
energy with something as simple as an object above the ground. In order to appreciate the way energy flows
intoandoutofbiologicalsystems,itisimportanttounderstandmoreaboutthedifferentenergytypesthatexist
in the physical world.
Energy Types
When an object is in motion, there is energy. For example, an airplane in flight produces considerable energy.
Thisisbecausemovingobjectsarecapableofenactingachange,ordoingwork.Thinkofawreckingball.Even
aslow-movingwreckingballcandoconsiderabledamagetootherobjects.However,awreckingballthatisnot
in motion is incapable of performing work. Energy with objects in motion is kinetic energy. A speeding bullet,
awalkingperson,rapidmoleculemovementintheair(whichproducesheat),andelectromagneticradiationlike
light all have kinetic energy.
What if we lift that same motionless wrecking ball two stories above a car with a crane? If the suspended
wrecking ball is unmoving, can we associate energy with it? The answer is yes. The suspended wrecking ball
has associated energy that is fundamentally different from the kinetic energy of objects in motion. This energy
formresultsfromthepotentialforthewreckingballtodowork.Ifwereleasetheballitwoulddowork.Because
this energy type refers to the potential to do work, we call it potential energy. Objects transfer their energy
between kinetic and potential in the following way: As the wrecking ball hangs motionless, it has 0 kinetic and
100percentpotentialenergy.Onceitreleases,itskineticenergybeginstoincreasebecauseitbuildsspeeddue
togravity.Simultaneously,asitnearstheground,itlosespotentialenergy.Somewheremid-fallithas50percent
kineticand50percentpotentialenergy.Justbeforeithitstheground,theballhasnearlylostitspotentialenergy
andhasnear-maximalkineticenergy.Otherexamplesofpotentialenergyincludewater'senergyheldbehinda
dam (Figure 6.6), or a person about to skydive from an airplane.
PAGE: 189
178 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
Figure6.6Waterbehindadamhaspotentialenergy.Movingwater,suchasinawaterfallorarapidlyflowingriver,has
kinetic energy. (credit “dam”: modification of work by "Pascal"/Flickr; credit “waterfall”: modification of work by Frank
Gualtieri)
Weassociatepotentialenergyonlywiththematter'slocation(suchasachildsittingonatreebranch),butalso
with the matter's structure. A spring on the ground has potential energy if it is compressed; so does a tautly
pulledrubberband.Theveryexistenceoflivingcellsreliesheavilyonstructuralpotentialenergy.Onachemical
level,thebondsthatholdthemolecules'atomstogetherhavepotentialenergy.Rememberthatanaboliccellular
pathways require energy to synthesize complex molecules from simpler ones, and catabolic pathways release
energy when complex molecules break down. That certain chemical bonds' breakdown can release energy
impliesthatthosebondshavepotentialenergy.Infact,thereispotentialenergystoredwithinthebondsofallthe
food molecules we eat, which we eventually harness for use. This is because these bonds can release energy
whenbroken.Scientistscallthepotentialenergytypethatexistswithinchemicalbondsthatreleaseswhenthose
bondsbreakchemicalenergy(Figure6.7).Chemicalenergyisresponsibleforprovidinglivingcellswithenergy
from food. Breaking the molecular bonds within fuel molecules brings about the energy's release.
Figure6.7Themoleculesingasolinecontainchemicalenergywithinthechemicalbonds.Thisenergytransformsinto
kinetic energy that allows a car to race on a racetrack. (credit “car”: modification of work by Russell Trow)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 190
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 179
Visitthissite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/simple_pendulum)andselect“Asimplependulum”onthemenu
(under “Harmonic Motion”) to see the shifting kinetic (K) and potential energy (U) of a pendulum in motion.
Free Energy
After learning that chemical reactions release energy when energy-storing bonds break, an important next
question is how do we quantify and express the chemical reactions with the associated energy? How can we
comparetheenergythatreleasesfromonereactiontothatofanotherreaction?Weuseameasurementoffree
energytoquantitatetheseenergytransfers.ScientistscallthisfreeenergyGibbsfreeenergy(abbreviatedwith
theletterG)afterJosiahWillardGibbs,thescientistwhodevelopedthemeasurement.Recallthataccordingto
the second law of thermodynamics, all energy transfers involve losing some energy in an unusable form such
asheat,resultinginentropy.Gibbsfreeenergyspecificallyreferstotheenergythattakesplacewithachemical
reaction that is available after we account for entropy. In other words, Gibbs free energy is usable energy, or
energy that is available to do work.
Every chemical reaction involves a change in free energy, called delta G (∆G). We can calculate the change
in free energy for any system that undergoes such a change, such as a chemical reaction. To calculate ∆G,
subtracttheamountofenergylosttoentropy(denotedas∆S)fromthesystem'stotalenergychange.Scientists
callthis total energychangeinthe systementhalpy andwedenote itas∆H. The formula forcalculating ∆G is
as follows, where the symbol T refers to absolute temperature in Kelvin (degrees Celsius + 273):
ΔG= ΔH−TΔS
Weexpressachemicalreaction'sstandardfreeenergychangeasanamountofenergypermoleofthereaction
product(eitherinkilojoulesorkilocalories,kJ/molorkcal/mol;1kJ=0.239kcal)understandardpH,temperature,
and pressure conditions. We generally calculate standard pH, temperature, and pressure conditions at pH 7.0
inbiologicalsystems,25degreesCelsius,and100kilopascals(1atmpressure),respectively.Notethatcellular
conditionsvaryconsiderablyfromthesestandardconditions,andsostandardcalculated∆Gvaluesforbiological
reactions will be different inside the cell.
Endergonic Reactions and Exergonic Reactions
If energy releases during a chemical reaction, then the resulting value from the above equation will be a
negative number. In other words, reactions that release energy have a ∆G < 0. A negative ∆G also means
that the reaction's products have less free energy than the reactants, because they gave off some free energy
during the reaction. Scientists call reactions that have a negative ∆G and consequently release free energy
exergonicreactions.Think:exergonicmeansenergyisexitingthesystem.Wealsorefertothesereactionsas
spontaneous reactions, because they can occur without adding energy into the system. Understanding which
chemical reactions are spontaneous and release free energy is extremely useful for biologists, because these
reactionscanbeharnessedtoperformworkinsidethecell.Wemustdrawanimportantdistinctionbetweenthe
term spontaneous and the idea of a chemical reaction that occurs immediately. Contrary to the everyday use
oftheterm,aspontaneousreactionisnotonethatsuddenlyorquicklyoccurs.Rustingironisanexampleofa
spontaneous reaction that occurs slowly, little by little, over time.
Ifachemicalreactionrequiresanenergyinputratherthanreleasingenergy,thenthe∆Gforthatreactionwillbe
apositivevalue.Inthiscase,theproductshavemorefreeenergythanthereactants.Thus,wecanthinkofthe
reactions'productsasenergy-storingmolecules.Wecallthesechemicalreactionsendergonic reactions,and
they are non-spontaneous. An endergonic reaction will not take place on its own without adding free energy.
Let’srevisittheexampleofthesynthesisandbreakdownofthefoodmolecule,glucose.Rememberthatbuilding
complexmolecules,suchassugars,fromsimpleronesisananabolicprocessandrequiresenergy.Therefore,
the chemical reactions involved in anabolic processes are endergonic reactions. Alternatively the catabolic
processofbreakingsugardownintosimplermoleculesreleasesenergyinaseriesofexergonicreactions.Like
therustexampleabove,thesugarbreakdowninvolvesspontaneousreactions,butthesereactionsdonotoccur
instantaneously.Figure6.8showssomeotherexamplesofendergonicandexergonicreactions.Latersections
PAGE: 191
180 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
will provide more information about what else is required to make even spontaneous reactions happen more
efficiently.
Figure6.8Thisfigureshowssomeexamplesofendergonicprocesses(onesthatrequireenergy)andexergonic
processes (ones that release energy). These include (a) a compost pile decomposing, (b) a chick developing
fromafertilizedegg,(c)sandartdestruction,and(d)aballrollingdownahill.(credita:modificationofworkby
NatalieMaynor;creditb:modificationofworkbyUSDA;creditc:modificationofworkby“Athlex”/Flickr;creditd:
modification of work by Harry Malsch)
Look at each of the processes, and decide if it is endergonic or exergonic. In each case, does enthalpy
increase or decrease, and does entropy increase or decrease?
Animportantconceptinstudyingmetabolismandenergyisthatofchemicalequilibrium.Mostchemicalreactions
arereversible.Theycanproceedinbothdirections,releasingenergyintotheirenvironmentinonedirection,and
absorbingitfromtheenvironmentintheotherdirection(Figure6.9).Thesameistrueforthechemicalreactions
involved in cell metabolism, such as the breaking down and building up of proteins into and from individual
amino acids, respectively. Reactants within a closed system will undergo chemical reactions in both directions
until they reach a state of equilibrium, which is one of the lowest possible free energy and a state of maximal
entropy. To push the reactants and products away from a state of equilibrium requires energy. Either reactants
or products must be added, removed, or changed. If a cell were a closed system, its chemical reactions would
reachequilibrium,anditwoulddiebecausetherewouldbeinsufficientfreeenergylefttoperformthenecessary
work to maintain life. In a living cell, chemical reactions are constantly moving towards equilibrium, but never
reachit.Thisisbecausealivingcellisanopensystem.Materialspassinandout,thecellrecyclestheproducts
of certain chemical reactions into other reactions, and there is never chemical equilibrium. In this way, living
organismsareinaconstantenergy-requiring,uphillbattleagainstequilibriumandentropy.Thisconstantenergy
supply ultimately comes from sunlight, which produces nutrients in the photosynthesis process.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 192
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 181
Figure 6.9 Exergonic and endergonic reactions result in changes in Gibbs free energy. Exergonic reactions release
energy. Endergonic reactions require energy to proceed.
Activation Energy
Thereisanotherimportantconceptthatwemustconsiderregardingendergonicandexergonicreactions.Even
exergonicreactionsrequireasmallamountofenergyinputbeforetheycanproceedwiththeirenergy-releasing
steps.Thesereactionshaveanetreleaseofenergy,butstillrequiresomeinitialenergy.Scientistscallthissmall
amount of energy input necessary for all chemical reactions to occur the activation energy (or free energy of
activation) abbreviated as EA(Figure 6.10).
Why would an energy-releasing, negative ∆G reaction actually require some energy to proceed? The reason
lies in the steps that take place during a chemical reaction. During chemical reactions, certain chemical bonds
breakandnewonesform.Forexample,whenaglucosemoleculebreaksdown,bondsbetweenthemolecule's
carbonatomsbreak.Sincetheseareenergy-storingbonds,theyreleaseenergywhenbroken.However,toget
them into a state that allows the bonds to break, the molecule must be somewhat contorted. A small energy
input is required to achieve this contorted state. This contorted state is the transition state, and it is a high-
energy, unstable state. For this reason, reactant molecules do not last long in their transition state, but very
quickly proceed to the chemical reaction's next steps. Free energy diagrams illustrate the energy profiles for a
givenreaction.Whetherthereactionisexergonicorendergonicdetermineswhethertheproductsinthediagram
willexistatalowerorhigherenergystatethanboththereactantsandtheproducts.However,regardlessofthis
measure, the transition state of the reaction exists at a higher energy state than the reactants, and thus, EA is
always positive.
Watch an animation of the move from free energy to transition state at this (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
energy_reaction)site.
Fromwheredoestheactivationenergythatchemicalreactantsrequirecome?Theactivationenergy'srequired
source to push reactions forward is typically heat energy from the surroundings. Heat energy (the total bond
energy of reactants or products in a chemical reaction) speeds up the molecule's motion, increasing the
frequencyandforcewithwhichtheycollide.Italsomovesatomsandbondswithinthemoleculeslightly,helping
them reach their transition state. For this reason, heating a system will cause chemical reactants within that
systemtoreactmorefrequently.Increasingthepressureonasystemhasthesameeffect.Oncereactantshave
absorbed enough heat energy from their surroundings to reach the transition state, the reaction will proceed.
The activation energy of a particular reaction determines the rate at which it will proceed. The higher the
activation energy, the slower the chemical reaction. The example of iron rusting illustrates an inherently slow
reaction. This reaction occurs slowly over time because of its high EA. Additionally, burning many fuels, which
is strongly exergonic, will take place at a negligible rate unless sufficient heat from a spark overcomes their
activationenergy.However,oncetheybegintoburn,thechemicalreactionsreleaseenoughheattocontinuethe
PAGE: 193
182 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
burningprocess,supplyingtheactivationenergyforsurroundingfuelmolecules.Likethesereactionsoutsideof
cells,theactivationenergyformostcellularreactionsistoohighforheatenergytoovercomeatefficientrates.In
otherwords,inorderforimportantcellularreactionstooccuratappreciablerates(numberofreactionsperunit
time),theiractivationenergiesmustbelowered(Figure6.10).Scientistrefertothisascatalysis.Thisisavery
good thing as far as living cells are concerned. Important macromolecules, such as proteins, DNA, and RNA,
store considerable energy, and their breakdown is exergonic. If cellular temperatures alone provided enough
heatenergyfortheseexergonicreactionstoovercometheiractivationbarriers,thecell'sessentialcomponents
would disintegrate.
Figure 6.10 Activation energy is the energy required for a reaction to proceed, and it is lower if the reaction is
catalyzed. This diagram's horizontal axis describes the sequence of events in time.
Ifnoactivationenergywererequiredtobreakdownsucrose(tablesugar),wouldyoubeabletostoreitina
sugar bowl?
6.3 | The Laws of Thermodynamics
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the concept of entropy
• Explain the first and second laws of thermodynamics
Thermodynamicsreferstothestudyofenergyandenergytransferinvolvingphysicalmatter.Thematterandits
environment relevant to a particular case of energy transfer are classified as a system, and everything outside
thatsystemisthesurroundings.Forinstance,whenheatingapotofwateronthestove,thesystemincludesthe
stove,thepot,andthewater.Energytransferswithinthesystem(betweenthestove,pot,andwater).Thereare
twotypesofsystems:openandclosed.Anopensystemisoneinwhichenergycantransferbetweenthesystem
anditssurroundings.Thestovetopsystemisopenbecauseitcanloseheatintotheair.Aclosedsystemisone
that cannot transfer energy to its surroundings.
Biological organisms are open systems. Energy exchanges between them and their surroundings, as they
consumeenergy-storingmoleculesandreleaseenergytotheenvironmentbydoingwork.Likeallthingsinthe
physical world, energy is subject to the laws of physics. The laws of thermodynamics govern the transfer of
energy in and among all systems in the universe.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 194
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 183
The First Law of Thermodynamics
The first law of thermodynamics deals with the total amount of energy in the universe. It states that this
total amount of energy is constant. In other words, there has always been, and always will be, exactly the
same amount of energy in the universe. Energy exists in many different forms. According to the first law of
thermodynamics, energy may transfer from place to place or transform into different forms, but it cannot be
createdordestroyed.Thetransfersandtransformationsofenergytakeplacearoundusallthetime.Lightbulbs
transform electrical energy into light energy. Gas stoves transform chemical energy from natural gas into heat
energy. Plants perform one of the most biologically useful energy transformations on earth: that of converting
sunlightenergyintothechemicalenergystoredwithinorganicmolecules(Figure6.2).Figure6.11examplesof
energy transformations.
Thechallengeforalllivingorganismsistoobtainenergyfromtheirsurroundingsinformsthattheycantransfer
ortransformintousableenergytodowork.Livingcellshaveevolvedtomeetthischallengeverywell.Chemical
energystoredwithinorganicmoleculessuchassugarsandfatstransformsthroughaseriesofcellularchemical
reactionsintoenergywithinATPmolecules.EnergyinATPmoleculesiseasilyaccessibletodowork.Examples
of the types of work that cells need to do include building complex molecules, transporting materials, powering
the beating motion of cilia or flagella, contracting muscle fibers to create movement, and reproduction.
Figure6.11Herearetwoexamplesofenergytransferringfromonesystemtoanotherandtransformedfromoneform
toanother.Humanscanconvertthechemicalenergyinfood,likethisicecreamcone,intokineticenergy(theenergy
ofmovementtorideabicycle).Plantscanconvertelectromagneticradiation(lightenergy)fromthesunintochemical
energy. (credit “ice cream”: modification of work by D. Sharon Pruitt; credit “kids on bikes”: modification of work by
Michelle Riggen-Ransom; credit “leaf”: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Alivingcell’sprimarytasksofobtaining,transforming,andusingenergytodoworkmayseemsimple.However,
the second law of thermodynamics explains why these tasks are harder than they appear. None of the energy
transfers that we have discussed, along with all energy transfers and transformations in the universe, is
completelyefficient.Ineveryenergytransfer,someamountofenergyislostinaformthatisunusable.Inmost
cases,thisformisheatenergy.Thermodynamically,scientistsdefineheatenergyasenergythattransfersfrom
onesystemtoanotherthatisnotdoingwork.Forexample,whenanairplanefliesthroughtheair,itlosessomeof
itsenergyasheatenergyduetofrictionwiththesurroundingair.Thisfrictionactuallyheatstheairbytemporarily
increasingairmoleculespeed.Likewise,someenergyislostasheatenergyduringcellularmetabolicreactions.
Thisisgoodforwarm-bloodedcreatureslikeus,becauseheatenergyhelpstomaintainourbodytemperature.
Strictly speaking, no energy transfer is completely efficient, because some energy is lost in an unusable form.
Animportantconceptinphysicalsystemsisthatoforderanddisorder(orrandomness).Themoreenergythata
systemlosestoitssurroundings,thelessorderedandmorerandomthesystem.Scientistsrefertothemeasure
of randomness or disorder within a system as entropy. High entropy means high disorder and low energy
(Figure 6.12). To better understand entropy, think of a student’s bedroom. If no energy or work were put into
it,theroomwouldquicklybecomemessy.Itwouldexistinaverydisorderedstate,oneofhighentropy.Energy
mustbeputintothesystem,intheformofthestudentdoingworkandputtingeverythingaway,inordertobring
theroombacktoastateofcleanlinessandorder.Thisstateisoneoflowentropy.Similarly,acarorhousemust
beconstantlymaintainedwithworkinordertokeepitinanorderedstate.Leftalone,ahouse'sorcar'sentropy
gradually increases through rust and degradation. Molecules and chemical reactions have varying amounts of
entropy as well. For example, as chemical reactions reach a state of equilibrium, entropy increases, and as
molecules at a high concentration in one place diffuse and spread out, entropy also increases.
PAGE: 195
184 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
Transfer of Energy and the Resulting Entropy
Set up a simple experiment to understand how energy transfers and how a change in entropy results.
1. Take a block of ice. This is water in solid form, so it has a high structural order. This means that the
moleculescannotmoveverymuchandareinafixedposition.Theice'stemperatureis0°C.Asaresult,
the system's entropy is low.
2. Allowtheicetomeltatroomtemperature.Whatisthestateofmoleculesintheliquidwaternow?How
did the energy transfer take place? Is the system's entropy higher or lower? Why?
3. Heat the water to its boiling point. What happens to the system's entropy when the water is heated?
Think of all physical systems of in this way: Living things are highly ordered, requiring constant energy input to
maintainthemselvesinastateoflowentropy.Aslivingsystemstakeinenergy-storingmoleculesandtransform
themthroughchemicalreactions,theylosesomeamountofusableenergyintheprocess,becausenoreaction
is completely efficient. They also produce waste and by-products that are not useful energy sources. This
process increases the entropy of the system’s surroundings. Since all energy transfers result in losing some
usableenergy,thesecondlawofthermodynamicsstatesthateveryenergytransferortransformationincreases
the universe's entropy. Even though living things are highly ordered and maintain a state of low entropy, the
universe's entropy in total is constantly increasing due to losing usable energy with each energy transfer that
occurs. Essentially, living things are in a continuous uphill battle against this constant increase in universal
entropy.
Figure6.12Entropyisameasureofrandomnessordisorderinasystem.Gaseshavehigherentropythanliquids,and
liquids have higher entropy than solids.
6.4 | ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain ATP's role as the cellular energy currency
• Describe how energy releases through ATP hydrolysis
Even exergonic, energy-releasing reactions require a small amount of activation energy in order to proceed.
However, consider endergonic reactions, which require much more energy input, because their products have
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 196
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 185
morefreeenergythantheirreactants.Withinthecell,fromwheredoesenergytopowersuchreactionscome?
The answer lies with an energy-supplying molecule scientists call adenosine triphosphate, or ATP. This is a
small,relativelysimplemolecule(Figure6.13),butwithinsomeofitsbonds,itcontainsthepotentialforaquick
burst of energy that can be harnessed to perform cellular work. Think of this molecule as the cells' primary
energy currency in much the same way that money is the currency that people exchange for things they need.
ATP powers the majority of energy-requiring cellular reactions.
Figure 6.13 ATP is the cell's primary energy currency. It has an adenosine backbone with three phosphate groups
attached.
As its name suggests, adenosine triphosphate is comprised of adenosine bound to three phosphate groups
(Figure 6.13). Adenosine is a nucleoside consisting of the nitrogenous base adenine and a five-carbon sugar,
ribose. The three phosphate groups, in order of closest to furthest from the ribose sugar, are alpha, beta, and
gamma. Together, these chemical groups constitute an energy powerhouse. However, not all bonds within this
molecule exist in a particularly high-energy state. Both bonds that link the phosphates are equally high-energy
bonds ( phosphoanhydride bonds) that, when broken, release sufficient energy to power a variety of cellular
reactions and processes. These high-energy bonds are the bonds between the second and third (or beta and
gamma)phosphategroupsandbetweenthefirstandsecondphosphategroups.Thesebondsare“high-energy”
because the products of such bond breaking—adenosine diphosphate (ADP) and one inorganic phosphate
group (Pi)—have considerably lower free energy than the reactants: ATP and a water molecule. Because this
reactiontakesplaceusingawatermolecule,itisahydrolysisreaction.Inotherwords,ATPhydrolyzesintoADP
in the following reaction:
ATP+H O→ADP+P +free energy
2 i
Likemostchemicalreactions,ATPtoADPhydrolysisisreversible.ThereversereactionregeneratesATPfrom
ADP + Pi. Cells rely on ATP regeneration just as people rely on regenerating spent money through some sort
of income. Since ATP hydrolysis releases energy, ATP regeneration must require an input of free energy. This
equation expresses ATP formation:
ADP+P +free energy→ATP+H O
i 2
TwoprominentquestionsremainwithregardtousingATPasanenergysource.Exactlyhowmuchfreeenergy
releases with ATP hydrolysis, and how does that free energy do cellular work? The calculated ∆G for the
hydrolysisofoneATPmoleintoADPandPiis−7.3kcal/mole(−30.5kJ/mol).Sincethiscalculationistrueunder
standard conditions, one would expect a different value exists under cellular conditions. In fact, the ∆G for one
ATP mole's hydrolysis in a living cell is almost double the value at standard conditions: –14 kcal/mol (−57 kJ/
mol).
ATP is a highly unstable molecule. Unless quickly used to perform work, ATP spontaneously dissociates into
ADP + Pi, and the free energy released during this process is lost as heat. The second question we posed
abovediscusseshowATPhydrolysisenergyreleaseperformsworkinsidethecell.Thisdependsonastrategy
scientists call energy coupling. Cells couple the ATP hydrolysis' exergonic reaction allowing them to proceed.
One example of energy coupling using ATP involves a transmembrane ion pump that is extremely important
+ +
for cellular function. This sodium-potassium pump (Na /K pump) drives sodium out of the cell and potassium
into the cell (Figure 6.14). A large percentage of a cell’s ATP powers this pump, because cellular processes
bring considerable sodium into the cell and potassium out of it. The pump works constantly to stabilize cellular
concentrations of sodium and potassium. In order for the pump to turn one cycle (exporting three Na+ ions
PAGE: 197
186 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
+
and importing two K ions), one ATP molecule must hydrolyze. When ATP hydrolyzes, its gamma phosphate
does not simply float away, but it actually transfers onto the pump protein. Scientists call this process of a
phosphategroupbindingtoamoleculephosphorylation.AswithmostATPhydrolysiscases,aphosphatefrom
+ +
ATPtransfersontoanothermolecule.Inaphosphorylatedstate,theNa /K pumphasmorefreeenergyandis
+
triggeredtoundergoaconformationalchange.ThischangeallowsittoreleaseNa tothecell'soutside.Itthen
+
bindsextracellularK ,which,throughanotherconformationalchange,causesthephosphatetodetachfromthe
+
pump. This phosphate release triggers the K to release to the cell's inside. Essentially, the energy released
+ +
from the ATP hydrolysis couples with the energy required to power the pump and transport Na and K ions.
ATP performs cellular work using this basic form of energy coupling through phosphorylation.
Figure6.14Thesodium-potassiumpumpisanexampleofenergycoupling.Theenergyderivedfromexergonic
ATP hydrolysis pumps sodium and potassium ions across the cell membrane.
One ATP molecule's hydrolysis releases 7.3 kcal/mol of energy (∆G = −7.3 kcal/mol of energy). If it takes
+
2.1 kcal/mol of energy to move one Na across the membrane (∆G = +2.1 kcal/mol of energy), how many
sodium ions could one ATP molecule's hydrolysis move?
Often during cellular metabolic reactions, such as nutrient synthesis and breakdown, certain molecules must
alter slightly in their conformation to become substrates for the next step in the reaction series. One example
isduringtheveryfirststepsofcellularrespiration,whenasugarglucosemoleculebreaksdownintheprocess
of glycolysis. In the first step, ATP is required to phosphorylze glucose, creating a high-energy but unstable
intermediate. This phosphorylation reaction powers a conformational change that allows the phosphorylated
glucose molecule to convert to the phosphorylated sugar fructose. Fructose is a necessary intermediate for
glycolysis to move forward. Here, ATP hydrolysis' exergonic reaction couples with the endergonic reaction of
converting glucose into a phosphorylated intermediate in the pathway. Once again, the energy released by
breaking a phosphate bond within ATP was used for phosphorylyzing another molecule, creating an unstable
intermediate and powering an important conformational change.
SeeaninteractiveanimationoftheATP-producingglycolysisprocessatthissite(http://openstaxcollege.org/
l/glycolysis_stgs).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 198
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 187
6.5 | Enzymes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the role of enzymes in metabolic pathways
• Explain how enzymes function as molecular catalysts
• Discuss enzyme regulation by various factors
A substance that helps a chemical reaction to occur is a catalyst, and the special molecules that catalyze
biochemical reactions are enzymes. Almost all enzymes are proteins, comprised of amino acid chains, and
they perform the critical task of lowering the activation energies of chemical reactions inside the cell. Enzymes
do this by binding to the reactant molecules, and holding them in such a way as to make the chemical bond-
breakingandbond-formingprocessestakeplacemorereadily.Itisimportanttorememberthatenzymesdonot
changethereaction's∆G.Inotherwords,theydonotchangewhetherareactionisexergonic(spontaneous)or
endergonic. This is because they do not change the reactants' or products' free energy. They only reduce the
activation energy required to reach the transition state (Figure 6.15).
Figure 6.15Enzymes lower the reaction's activation energy but do not change the reaction's free energy.
Enzyme Active Site and Substrate Specificity
The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are the enzyme’s substrates. There may be one or more
substrates,dependingontheparticularchemicalreaction.Insomereactions,asingle-reactantsubstratebreaks
down into multiple products. In others, two substrates may come together to create one larger molecule. Two
reactants might also enter a reaction, both become modified, and leave the reaction as two products. The
location within the enzyme where the substrate binds is the enzyme’s active site. This is where the “action”
happens. Since enzymes are proteins, there is a unique combination of amino acid residues (also side chains,
orRgroups)withintheactivesite.Differentpropertiescharacterizeeachresidue.Thesecanbelargeorsmall,
weakly acidic or basic, hydrophilic or hydrophobic, positively or negatively charged, or neutral. The unique
combination of amino acid residues, their positions, sequences, structures, and properties, creates a very
specific chemical environment within the active site. This specific environment is suited to bind, albeit briefly,
to a specific chemical substrate (or substrates). Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and
its substrates (which adapts to find the best fit between the transition state and the active site), enzymes are
knownfortheirspecificity.The“bestfit”resultsfromtheshapeandtheaminoacidfunctionalgroup’sattractionto
thesubstrate.Thereisaspecificallymatchedenzymeforeachsubstrateand,thus,foreachchemicalreaction;
however, there is flexibility as well.
Thefactthatactivesitesaresoperfectlysuitedtoprovidespecificenvironmentalconditionsalsomeansthatthey
are subject to local enviromental influences. It is true that increasing the environmental temperature generally
increases reaction rates, enzyme-catalyzed or otherwise. However, increasing or decreasing the temperature
PAGE: 199
188 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bonds within the active site in such a way that they are less
wellsuitedtobindsubstrates.Hightemperatureswilleventuallycauseenzymes,likeotherbiologicalmolecules,
to denature, a process that changes the substance's natural properties. Likewise, the local environment's pH
can also affect enzyme function. Active site amino acid residues have their own acidic or basic properties that
are optimal for catalysis. These residues are sensitive to changes in pH that can impair the way substrate
molecules bind. Enzymes are suited to function best within a certain pH range, and, as with temperature,
extreme environmental pH values (acidic or basic) can cause enzymes to denature.
Induced Fit and Enzyme Function
Formanyyears,scientiststhoughtthatenzyme-substratebindingtookplaceinasimple“lock-and-key”fashion.
This model asserted that the enzyme and substrate fit together perfectly in one instantaneous step. However,
current research supports a more refined view scientists call induced fit (Figure 6.16). This model expands
upon the lock-and-key model by describing a more dynamic interaction between enzyme and substrate. As
the enzyme and substrate come together, their interaction causes a mild shift in the enzyme’s structure that
confirms an ideal binding arrangement between the enzyme and the substrate's transition state. This ideal
binding maximizes the enzyme’s ability to catalyze its reaction.
View an induced fit animation atthis website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/hexokinase).
Whenanenzymebindsitssubstrate,itformsanenzyme-substratecomplex.Thiscomplexlowersthereaction's
activationenergyandpromotesitsrapidprogressioninoneofmanyways.Onabasiclevel,enzymespromote
chemical reactions that involve more than one substrate by bringing the substrates together in an optimal
orientation. The appropriate region (atoms and bonds) of one molecule is juxtaposed to the other molecule's
appropriate region with which it must react. Another way in which enzymes promote substrate reaction is by
creating an optimal environment within the active site for the reaction to occur. Certain chemical reactions
might proceed best in a slightly acidic or non-polar environment. The chemical properties that emerge from
the particular arrangement of amino acid residues within an active site create the perfect environment for an
enzyme’s specific substrates to react.
You have learned that the activation energy required for many reactions includes the energy involved in
manipulating or slightly contorting chemical bonds so that they can easily break and allow others to reform.
Enzymatic action can aid this process. The enzyme-substrate complex can lower the activation energy by
contortingsubstratemoleculesinsuchawayastofacilitatebond-breaking,helpingtoreachthetransitionstate.
Finally,enzymescanalsoloweractivationenergiesbytakingpartinthechemicalreactionitself.Theaminoacid
residuescanprovidecertainionsorchemicalgroupsthatactuallyformcovalentbondswithsubstratemolecules
as a necessary step of the reaction process. In these cases, it is important to remember that the enzyme will
always return to its original state at the reaction's completion. One of enzymes' hallmark properties isthat they
remainultimatelyunchangedbythereactionstheycatalyze.Afteranenzymecatalyzesareaction,itreleasesits
product(s).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 200
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 189
Figure6.16Accordingtotheinduced-fitmodel,bothenzymeandsubstrateundergodynamicconformationalchanges
upon binding. The enzyme contorts the substrate into its transition state, thereby increasing the reaction's rate.
Metabolism Control Through Enzyme Regulation
It would seem ideal to have a scenario in which all the encoded enzymes in an organism’s genome existed in
abundant supply and functioned optimally under all cellular conditions, in all cells, at all times. In reality, this is
farfromthecase.Avarietyofmechanismsensurethatthisdoesnothappen.Cellularneedsandconditionsvary
fromcelltocell,andchangewithinindividualcellsovertime.Therequiredenzymesandenergeticdemandsof
stomachcellsaredifferentfromthoseoffatstoragecells,skincells,bloodcells,andnervecells.Furthermore,a
digestivecellworksmuchhardertoprocessandbreakdownnutrientsduringthetimethatcloselyfollowsameal
comparedwithmanyhoursafterameal.Asthesecellulardemandsandconditionsvary,sodotheamountsand
functionality of different enzymes.
Sincetheratesofbiochemicalreactionsarecontrolledbyactivationenergy,andenzymesloweranddetermine
activation energies for chemical reactions, the relative amounts and functioning of the variety of enzymes
within a cell ultimately determine which reactions will proceed and at which rates. This determination is tightly
controlled.Incertaincellularenvironments,environmentalfactorslikepHandtemperaturepartlycontrolenzyme
activity. There are other mechanisms through which cells control enzyme activity and determine the rates at
which various biochemical reactions will occur.
Molecular Regulation of Enzymes
Enzymes can be regulated in ways that either promote or reduce their activity. There are many different kinds
ofmoleculesthatinhibitorpromoteenzymefunction,andvariousmechanismsexistfordoingso.Forexample,
in some cases of enzyme inhibition, an inhibitor molecule is similar enough to a substrate that it can bind to
theactivesiteandsimplyblockthesubstratefrombinding.Whenthishappens,theenzymeisinhibitedthrough
competitive inhibition, because an inhibitor molecule competes with the substrate for active site binding
(Figure6.17).Alternatively,innoncompetitiveinhibition,aninhibitormoleculebindstotheenzymeinalocation
otherthananallostericsite,abindingsiteawayfromtheactivesite,andstillmanagestoblocksubstratebinding
to the active site.
PAGE: 201
190 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
Figure6.17Competitiveandnoncompetitiveinhibitionaffectthereaction'sratedifferently.Competitiveinhibitorsaffect
the initial rate but do not affect the maximal rate; whereas, noncompetitive inhibitors affect the maximal rate.
Some inhibitor molecules bind to enzymes in a location where their binding induces a conformational change
that reduces the enzyme's affinity for its substrate. This type of inhibition is an allosteric inhibition (Figure
6.18). More than one polypeptide comprise most allosterically regulated enzymes, meaning that they have
more than one protein subunit. When an allosteric inhibitor binds to an enzyme, all active sites on the protein
subunits change slightly such that they bind their substrates with less efficiency. There are allosteric activators
as well as inhibitors. Allosteric activators bind to locations on an enzyme away from the active site, inducing a
conformational change that increases the affinity of the enzyme’s active site(s) for its substrate(s).
Figure6.18Allostericinhibitorsmodifytheenzyme'sactivesitesothatsubstratebindingisreducedorprevented.In
contrast, allosteric activators modify the enzyme's active site so that the affinity for the substrate increases.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 202
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 191
Figure 6.19Have you ever wondered how pharmaceutical drugs are developed? (credit: Deborah Austin)
Drug Discovery by Looking for Inhibitors of Key Enzymes in
Specific Pathways
Enzymesarekeycomponentsofmetabolicpathways.Understandinghowenzymesworkandhowtheycan
beregulatedisakeyprinciplebehinddevelopingmanypharmaceuticaldrugs(Figure6.19)onthemarket
today. Biologists working in this field collaborate with other scientists, usually chemists, to design drugs.
Considerstatinsforexample—whichisaclassofdrugsthatreducescholesterollevels.Thesecompounds
are essentially inhibitors of the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. HMG-CoA reductase is the enzyme that
synthesizescholesterolfromlipidsinthebody.Byinhibitingthisenzyme,thedrugreducescholesterollevels
synthesizedinthebody.Similarly,acetaminophen,popularlymarketedunderthebrandnameTylenol,isan
inhibitoroftheenzymecyclooxygenase.Whileitiseffectiveinprovidingrelieffromfeverandinflammation
(pain), scientists still do not completely understand its mechanism of action.
How are drugs developed? One of the first challenges in drug development is identifying the specific
molecule that the drug is intended to target. In the case of statins, HMG-CoA reductase is the drug target.
Researchers identify targets through painstaking research in the laboratory. Identifying the target alone
is not sufficient. Scientists also need to know how the target acts inside the cell and which reactions go
awry in the case of disease. Once researchers identify the target and the pathway, then the actual drug
design process begins. During this stage, chemists and biologists work together to design and synthesize
moleculesthatcaneitherblockoractivateaparticularreaction.However,thisisonlythebeginning:bothif
andwhenadrugprototypeissuccessfulinperformingitsfunction,thenitmustundergomanytestsfromin
vitroexperiments to clinical trials before it can obtain FDA approval to be on the market.
Manyenzymesdon’tworkoptimally,orevenatall,unlessboundtootherspecificnon-proteinhelpermolecules,
eithertemporarilythroughionicorhydrogenbondsorpermanentlythroughstrongercovalentbonds.Twotypes
ofhelpermoleculesarecofactorsandcoenzymes.Bindingtothesemoleculespromotesoptimalconformation
and function for their respective enzymes. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron (Fe++) and magnesium
(Mg++). One example of an enzyme that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is the enzyme that builds DNA
molecules, DNA polymerase, which requires a bound zinc ion (Zn++) to function. Coenzymes are organic
helper molecules, with a basic atomic structure comprised of carbon and hydrogen, which are required for
enzymeaction.Themostcommonsourcesofcoenzymesaredietaryvitamins(Figure6.20).Somevitaminsare
precursorstocoenzymesandothersactdirectlyascoenzymes.VitaminCisacoenzymeformultipleenzymes
that take part in building the important connective tissue component, collagen. An important step in breaking
down glucose to yield energy is catalysis by a multi-enzyme complex scientists call pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Pyruvatedehydrogenaseisacomplexofseveralenzymesthatactuallyrequiresonecofactor(amagnesiumion)
andfivedifferentorganiccoenzymestocatalyzeitsspecificchemicalreaction.Therefore,enzymefunctionis,in
part,regulatedbyanabundanceofvariouscofactorsandcoenzymes,whichthedietsofmostorganismssupply.
PAGE: 203
192 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
Figure6.20Vitaminsareimportantcoenzymesorprecursorsofcoenzymes,andarerequiredforenzymestofunction
properly. Multivitamin capsules usually contain mixtures of all the vitamins at different percentages.
Enzyme Compartmentalization
In eukaryotic cells, molecules such as enzymes are usually compartmentalized into different organelles. This
allowsforyetanotherlevelofregulationofenzymeactivity.Enzymesrequiredonlyforcertaincellularprocesses
are sometimes housed separately along with their substrates, allowing for more efficient chemical reactions.
Examplesofthissortofenzymeregulationbasedonlocationandproximityincludetheenzymesinvolvedinthe
latterstagesofcellularrespiration,whichtakeplaceexclusivelyinthemitochondria,andtheenzymesinvolved
in digesting cellular debris and foreign materials, located within lysosomes.
Feedback Inhibition in Metabolic Pathways
Molecules can regulate enzyme function in many ways. However, a major question remains: What are these
moleculesandfromwheredotheycome?Somearecofactorsandcoenzymes,ions,andorganicmolecules,as
youhavelearned.Whatothermoleculesinthecellprovideenzymaticregulation,suchasallostericmodulation,
andcompetitiveandnoncompetitiveinhibition?Theansweristhatawidevarietyofmoleculescanperformthese
roles. Some include pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical drugs, toxins, and poisons from the environment.
Perhaps the most relevant sources of enzyme regulatory molecules, with respect to cellular metabolism, are
cellular metabolic reaction products themselves. In a most efficient and elegant way, cells have evolved to use
their own reactions' products for feedback inhibition of enzyme activity. Feedback inhibition involves using a
reaction product to regulate its own further production (Figure 6.21). The cell responds to the abundance of
specificproductsbyslowingdownproductionduringanabolicorcatabolicreactions.Suchreactionproductsmay
inhibit the enzymes that catalyzed their production through the mechanisms that we described above.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 204
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 193
Figure6.21Metabolicpathwaysareaseriesofreactionsthatmultipleenzymescatalyze.Feedbackinhibition,where
the pathway's end product inhibits an upstream step, is an important regulatory mechanism in cells.
Producing both amino acids and nucleotides is controlled through feedback inhibition. Additionally, ATP is an
allostericregulatorofsomeoftheenzymesinvolvedinsugar'scatabolicbreakdown,theprocessthatproduces
ATP. In this way, when ATP is abundant, the cell can prevent its further production. Remember that ATP is an
unstablemoleculethatcanspontaneouslydissociateintoADP.IftoomuchATPwerepresentinacell,muchof
itwouldgotowaste.Alternatively,ADPservesasapositiveallostericregulator(anallostericactivator)forsome
of the same enzymes that ATP inhibits. Thus, when relative ATP levels are high compared to ATP, the cell is
triggered to produce more ATP through sugar catabolism.
PAGE: 205
194 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
KEY TERMS
activation energy energy necessary for reactions to occur
active site enzyme's specific region to which the substrate binds
allosteric inhibition inhibition by a binding event at a site different from the active site, which induces a
conformational change and reduces the enzyme's affinity for its substrate
anabolic (also,anabolism)pathwaysthatrequireanenergyinputtosynthesizecomplexmoleculesfromsimpler
ones
ATP adenosine triphosphate, the cell’s energy currency
bioenergetics study of energy flowing through living systems
catabolic (also, catabolism) pathways in which complex molecules break down into simpler ones
chemical energy potential energy in chemical bonds that releases when those bonds are broken
coenzyme smallorganicmolecule,suchasavitaminoritsderivative,whichisrequiredtoenhanceanenzyme's
activity
cofactor inorganic ion, such as iron and magnesium ions, required for optimal enzyme activity regulation
competitive inhibition typeofinhibitioninwhichtheinhibitorcompeteswiththesubstratemoleculebybinding
to the enzyme's active site
denature process that changes a subtance's natural properties
endergonic describes chemical reactions that require energy input
enthalpy a system's total energy
entropy (S) measure of randomness or disorder within a system
exergonic describes chemical reactions that release free energy
feedback inhibition aproduct'seffectofareactionsequencetodecreaseitsfurtherproductionbyinhibitingthe
first enzyme's activity in the pathway that produces it
free energy Gibbs free energy is the usable energy, or energy that is available to do work
heat energy transferred from one system to another that is not work (energy of the molecules' motion or
particles)
heat energy total bond energy of reactants or products in a chemical reaction
induced fit dynamicfitbetweentheenzymeanditssubstrate,inwhichbothcomponentsmodifytheirstructures
to allow for ideal binding
kinetic energy energy type that takes place with objects or particles in motion
metabolism all the chemical reactions that take place inside cells, including anabolism and catabolism
phosphoanhydride bond bond that connects phosphates in an ATP molecule
potential energy energy type that has the potential to do work; stored energy
substrate molecule on which the enzyme acts
thermodynamics study of energy and energy transfer involving physical matter
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 206
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 195
transition state high-energy, unstable state (an intermediate form between the substrate and the product)
occurring during a chemical reaction
CHAPTER SUMMARY
6.1Energy and Metabolism
Cells perform the functions of life through various chemical reactions. A cell’s metabolism refers to the chemical
reactions that take place within it. There are metabolic reactions that involve breaking down complex chemicals
into simpler ones, such as breaking down large macromolecules. Scientists refer to this process as catabolism,
and we associate such reactions an energy release. On the other end of the spectrum, anabolism refers to
metabolic processes that build complex molecules out of simpler ones, such as macromolecule synthesis.
Anabolic processes require energy. Glucose synthesis and glucose breakdown are examples of anabolic and
catabolic pathways, respectively.
6.2Potential, Kinetic, Free, and Activation Energy
Energy comes in many different forms. Objects in motion do physical work, and kinetic energy is the energy of
objects in motion. Objects that are not in motion may have the potential to do work, and thus, have potential
energy. Molecules also have potential energy because breaking molecular bonds has the potential to release
energy. Living cells depend on harvesting potential energy from molecular bonds to perform work. Free energy
is a measure of energy that is available to do work. A system's free energy changes during energy transfers
such as chemical reactions, and scientists refer to this change as ∆G.
A reaction's ∆G can be negative or positive, meaning that the reaction releases energy or consumes energy,
respectively. A reaction with a negative ∆G that gives off energy is an exergonic reaction. One with a positive
∆G that requires energy input is an endergonic reaction. Exergonic reactions are spontaneous because their
products have less energy than their reactants. Endergonic reactions' products have a higher energy state than
the reactants, and so these are nonspontaneous reactions. However, all reactions (including spontaneous -∆G
reactions) require an initial energy input in order to reach the transition state, at which they will proceed. This
initial input of energy is the activation energy.
6.3The Laws of Thermodynamics
In studying energy, scientists use the term “system” to refer to the matter and its environment involved in
energy transfers. Everything outside of the system is the surroundings. Single cells are biological systems. We
can think of systems as having a certain amount of order. It takes energy to make a system more ordered. The
more ordered a system, the lower its entropy. Entropy is a measure of a system's disorder. As a system
becomes more disordered, the lower its energy and the higher its entropy.
The laws of thermodynamics are a series of laws that describe the properties and processes of energy transfer.
The first law states that the total amount of energy in the universe is constant. This means that energy cannot
be created or destroyed, only transferred or transformed. The second law of thermodynamics states that every
energy transfer involves some loss of energy in an unusable form, such as heat energy, resulting in a more
disordered system. In other words, no energy transfer is completely efficient, and all transfers trend toward
disorder.
6.4ATP: Adenosine Triphosphate
ATP is the primary energy-supplying molecule for living cells. ATP is comprised of a nucleotide, a five-carbon
sugar, and three phosphate groups. The bonds that connect the phosphates (phosphoanhydride bonds) have
high-energy content. The energy released from ATP hydrolysis into ADP + Piperforms cellular work. Cells use
ATP to perform work by coupling ATP hydrolysis' exergonic reaction with endergonic reactions. ATP donates its
phosphate group to another molecule via phosphorylation. The phosphorylated molecule is at a higher-energy
state and is less stable than its unphosphorylated form, and this added energy from phosphate allows the
molecule to undergo its endergonic reaction.
6.5Enzymes
Enzymes are chemical catalysts that accelerate chemical reactions at physiological temperatures by lowering
their activation energy. Enzymes are usually proteins consisting of one or more polypeptide chains. Enzymes
PAGE: 207
196 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
have an active site that provides a unique chemical environment, comprised of certain amino acid R groups
(residues). This unique environment is perfectly suited to convert particular chemical reactants for that enzyme,
scientists call substrates, into unstable intermediates that they call transition states. Enzymes and substrates
bind with an induced fit, which means that enzymes undergo slight conformational adjustments upon substrate
contact, leading to full, optimal binding. Enzymes bind to substrates and catalyze reactions in four different
ways: bringing substrates together in an optimal orientation, compromising the bond structures of substrates so
that bonds can break down more easily, providing optimal environmental conditions for a reaction to occur, or
participating directly in their chemical reaction by forming transient covalent bonds with the substrates.
Enzyme action must be regulated so that in a given cell at a given time, the desired reactions catalyze and the
undesired reactions are not. Enzymes are regulated by cellular conditions, such as temperature and pH. They
are also regulated through their location within a cell, sometimes compartmentalized so that they can only
catalyze reactions under certain circumstances. Enzyme inhibition and activation via other molecules are other
important ways that enzymes are regulated. Inhibitors can act competitively, noncompetitively, or allosterically.
Noncompetitive inhibitors are usually allosteric. Activators can also enhance enzyme function allosterically. The
most common method by which cells regulate the enzymes in metabolic pathways is through feedback
inhibition. During feedback inhibition, metabolic pathway products serve as inhibitors (usually allosteric) of one
or more of the enzymes (usually the first committed enzyme of the pathway) involved in the pathway that
produces them.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 6.8Look at each of the processes shown, 3.Figure 6.14The hydrolysis of one ATP molecule
and decide if it is endergonic or exergonic. In each releases 7.3 kcal/mol of energy (∆G = −7.3 kcal/mol
case, does enthalpy increase or decrease, and does of energy). If it takes 2.1 kcal/mol of energy to move
entropy increase or decrease? one Na + across the membrane (∆G = +2.1 kcal/mol
2.Figure 6.10If no activation energy were required of energy), how many sodium ions could be moved
to break down sucrose (table sugar), would you be by the hydrolysis of one ATP molecule?
able to store it in a sugar bowl?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Energy is stored long-term in the bonds of _____ a. i. potential and kinetic, ii. potential and
and used short-term to perform work from a(n) _____ kinetic, iii. kinetic
molecule. b. i. potential, ii. potential and kinetic, iii.
a. ATP : glucose potential and kinetic
b. an anabolic molecule : catabolic molecule c. i. potential, ii. kinetic, iii. potential and kinetic
c. glucose : ATP d. i. potential and kinetic, ii. kinetic iii. kinetic
d. a catabolic molecule : anabolic molecule
7.Which of the following comparisons or contrasts
5.DNA replication involves unwinding two strands of between endergonic and exergonic reactions is
parent DNA, copying each strand to synthesize false?
complementary strands, and releasing the parent and a. Endergonic reactions have a positive ∆G
daughter DNA. Which of the following accurately and exergonic reactions have a negative
describes this process? ∆G.
a. This is an anabolic process. b. Endergonic reactions consume energy and
b. This is a catabolic process. exergonic reactions release energy.
c. This is both anabolic and catabolic. c. Both endergonic and exergonic reactions
d. This is a metabolic process but is neither require a small amount of energy to
anabolic nor catabolic. overcome an activation barrier.
d. Endergonic reactions take place slowly and
6.Consider a pendulum swinging. Which type(s) of
exergonic reactions take place quickly.
energy is/are associated with the pendulum in the
following instances: i. the moment at which it 8.Which of the following is the best way to judge the
completes one cycle, just before it begins to fall back relative activation energies between two given
towards the other end, ii. the moment that it is in the chemical reactions?
middle between the two ends, and iii. just before it
reaches the end of one cycle (just before instant i.).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 208
Chapter 6 | Metabolism 197
a. Compare the ∆G values between the two a. sucrose
reactions. b. ATP
b. Compare their reaction rates. c. glucose
c. Compare their ideal environmental d. ADP
conditions.
13.Which of the following is not true about enzymes:
d. Compare the spontaneity between the two
reactions.
a. They increase ∆G of reactions.
9.Which of the following is not an example of an b. They are usually made of amino acids.
energy transformation? c. They lower the activation energy of
a. turning on a light switch chemical reactions.
b. solar panels at work d. Each one is specific to the particular
c. formation of static electricity substrate(s) to which it binds.
d. none of the above
14.An allosteric inhibitor does which of the following?
10.In each of the three systems, determine the state
of entropy (low or high) when comparing the first and a. Binds to an enzyme away from the active
second: i. the instant that a perfume bottle is sprayed site and changes the conformation of the
compared with 30 seconds later, ii. an old 1950s car active site, increasing its affinity for
compared with a brand new car, and iii. a living cell substrate binding.
compared with a dead cell. b. Binds to the active site and blocks it from
a. i. low, ii. high, iii. low binding substrate.
b. i. low, ii. high, iii. high c. Binds to an enzyme away from the active
c. i. high, ii. low, iii. high site and changes the conformation of the
d. i. high, ii. low, iii. low active site, decreasing its affinity for the
substrate.
11.The energy released by the hydrolysis of ATP
d. Binds directly to the active site and mimics
is____
the substrate.
a. primarily stored between the alpha and beta
phosphates 15.Which of the following analogies best describes
b. equal to −57 kcal/mol the induced-fit model of enzyme-substrate binding?
c. harnessed as heat energy by the cell to
perform work a. a hug between two people
d. providing energy to coupled reactions b. a key fitting into a lock
c. a square peg fitting through the square hole
12.Which of the following molecules is likely to have
and a round peg fitting through the round
the most potential energy?
hole of a children’s toy
d. the fitting together of two jigsaw puzzle
pieces
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Does physical exercise involve anabolic and/or shook the ground and demolished the ant farm. In
catabolic processes? Give evidence for your answer. which of these two scenarios, before or after the
earthquake, was the ant farm system in a state of
17.Name two different cellular functions that require
higher or lower entropy?
energy that parallel human energy-requiring
functions. 21.Energy transfers take place constantly in
everyday activities. Think of two scenarios: cooking
18.Explain in your own words the difference between
on a stove and driving. Explain how the second law
a spontaneous reaction and one that occurs
of thermodynamics applies to these two scenarios.
instantaneously, and what causes this difference.
19.Describe the position of the transition state on a
22.Do you think that the EAfor ATP hydrolysis is
relatively low or high? Explain your reasoning.
vertical energy scale, from low to high, relative to the
position of the reactants and products, for both 23.With regard to enzymes, why are vitamins
endergonic and exergonic reactions. necessary for good health? Give examples.
20.Imagine an elaborate ant farm with tunnels and 24.Explain in your own words how enzyme feedback
passageways through the sand where ants live in a inhibition benefits a cell.
large community. Now imagine that an earthquake
PAGE: 209
198 Chapter 6 | Metabolism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 210
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 199
7 | CELLULAR
RESPIRATION
Figure 7.1 This geothermal energy plant transforms thermal energy from deep in the ground into electrical energy,
which can be easily used. (credit: modification of work by the U.S. Department of Defense)
Chapter Outline
7.1:Energy in Living Systems
7.2:Glycolysis
7.3:Oxidation of Pyruvate and the Citric Acid Cycle
7.4:Oxidative Phosphorylation
7.5:Metabolism without Oxygen
7.6:Connections of Carbohydrate, Protein, and Lipid Metabolic Pathways
7.7:Regulation of Cellular Respiration
Introduction
TheelectricalenergyplantinFigure7.1convertsenergyfromoneformtoanotherformthatcanbemoreeasily
used.Thistypeofgeneratingplantstartswithundergroundthermalenergy(heat)andtransformsitintoelectrical
energy that will be transported to homes and factories. Like a generating plant, plants and animals also must
take in energy from the environment and convert it into a form that their cells can use. Mass and its stored
energy enter an organism’s body in one form and are converted into another form that can fuel the organism’s
lifefunctions.Intheprocessofphotosynthesis,plantsandotherphotosyntheticproducerstakeinenergyinthe
form of light (solar energy) and convert it into chemical energy in the form of glucose, which stores this energy
initschemicalbonds.Then,aseriesofmetabolicpathways,collectivelycalledcellularrespiration,extractsthe
energy from the bonds in glucose and converts it into a form that all living things can use.
PAGE: 211
200 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
7.1 | Energy in Living Systems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the importance of electrons in the transfer of energy in living systems
• Explain how ATP is used by cells as an energy source
Energy production within a cell involves many coordinated chemical pathways. Most of these pathways are
combinations of oxidation and reduction reactions, which occur at the same time. An oxidation reaction strips
an electron from an atom in a compound, and the addition of this electron to another compound is a reduction
reaction. Because oxidation and reduction usually occur together, these pairs of reactions are called oxidation
reduction reactions, orredox reactions.
Electrons and Energy
Theremovalofanelectronfromamolecule(oxidizingit),resultsinadecreaseinpotentialenergyintheoxidized
compound. The electron (sometimes as part of a hydrogen atom) does not remain unbonded, however, in the
cytoplasmofacell.Rather,theelectronisshiftedtoasecondcompound,reducingthesecondcompound.The
shiftofanelectronfromonecompoundtoanotherremovessomepotentialenergyfromthefirstcompound(the
oxidizedcompound)andincreasesthepotentialenergyofthesecondcompound(thereducedcompound).The
transfer of electrons between molecules is important because most of the energy stored in atoms and used
to fuel cell functions is in the form of high-energy electrons. The transfer of energy in the form of high-energy
electronsallowsthecelltotransferanduseenergyinanincrementalfashion—insmallpackagesratherthanin
asingle,destructiveburst.Thischapterfocusesontheextractionofenergyfromfood;youwillseethatasyou
track the path of the transfers, you are tracking the path of electrons moving through metabolic pathways.
Electron Carriers
In living systems, a small class of compounds functions as electron shuttles: they bind and carry high-energy
electrons between compounds in biochemical pathways. The principal electron carriers we will consider are
derived from the B vitamin group and are derivatives of nucleotides. These compounds can be easily reduced
(that is, they accept electrons) or oxidized (they lose electrons). Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
+
(Figure7.2)isderivedfromvitaminB3,niacin.NAD istheoxidizedformofthemolecule;NADHisthereduced
form of the molecule after it has accepted two electrons and a proton (which together are the equivalent of a
hydrogen atom with an extra electron). Note that if a compound has an “H” on it, it is generally reduced (e.g.,
NADH is the reduced form of NAD).
+
NAD can accept electrons from an organic molecule according to the general equation:
RH NAD +
NADH R
Reducing + Oxidizing→ +
Reduced Oxidized
agent agent
Whenelectronsareaddedtoacompound,itisreduced.Acompoundthatreducesanotheriscalledareducing
+
agent. In the above equation, RH is a reducing agent, and NAD is reduced to NADH. When electrons are
removedfromacompound,itisoxidized.Acompoundthatoxidizesanotheriscalledanoxidizingagent.Inthe
+
above equation, NAD is an oxidizing agent, and RH is oxidized to R.
+
Similarly, flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD ) is derived from vitamin B2, also called riboflavin. Its reduced form
+ +
is FADH2. A second variation of NAD, NADP, contains an extra phosphate group. Both NAD and FAD are
extensivelyusedinenergyextractionfromsugars,andNADPplaysanimportantroleinanabolicreactionsand
photosynthesis in plants.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 212
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 201
Figure 7.2 The oxidized form of the electron carrier (NAD+) is shown on the left, and the reduced form (NADH) is
shownontheright.ThenitrogenousbaseinNADHhasonemorehydrogenionandtwomoreelectronsthaninNAD+.
ATP in Living Systems
A living cell cannot store significant amounts of free energy. Excess free energy would result in an increase of
heat in the cell, which would result in excessive thermal motion that could damage and then destroy the cell.
Rather,acellmustbeabletohandlethatenergyinawaythatenablesthecelltostoreenergysafelyandrelease
it for use only as needed. Living cells accomplish this by using the compound adenosine triphosphate (ATP).
ATPisoftencalledthe“energycurrency”ofthecell,and,likecurrency,thisversatilecompoundcanbeusedto
fill any energy need of the cell. How? It functions similarly to a rechargeable battery.
When ATP is broken down, usually by the removal of its terminal phosphate group, energy is released. The
energyisusedtodoworkbythecell,usuallywhenthereleasedphosphatebindstoanothermolecule,thereby
activating it. For example, in the mechanical work of muscle contraction, ATP supplies the energy to move the
contractilemuscleproteins.Recalltheactivetransportworkofthesodium-potassiumpumpincellmembranes.
ATP alters the structure of the integral protein that functions as the pump, changing its affinity for sodium and
potassium. In this way, the cell performs work, pumping ions against their electrochemical gradients.
ATP Structure and Function
At the heart of ATP is a molecule of adenosine monophosphate (AMP), which is composed of an adenine
molecule bonded to a ribose molecule and to a single phosphate group (Figure 7.3). Ribose is a five-carbon
sugar found in RNA, and AMP is one of the nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphate group to
this core molecule results in the formation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP); the addition of a third phosphate
group forms adenosinetriphosphate (ATP).
PAGE: 213
202 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
Figure 7.3 ATP (adenosine triphosphate) has three phosphate groups that can be removed by hydrolysis (addition
of H2O) to form ADP (adenosine diphosphate) or AMP (adenosine monophosphate). The negative charges on the
phosphategroupnaturallyrepeleachother,requiringenergytobondthemtogetherandreleasingenergywhenthese
bonds are broken.
Theadditionofaphosphategrouptoamoleculerequiresenergy.Phosphategroupsarenegativelychargedand
thusrepeloneanotherwhentheyarearrangedinseries,astheyareinADPandATP.Thisrepulsionmakesthe
ADPandATPmoleculesinherentlyunstable.ThereleaseofoneortwophosphategroupsfromATP,aprocess
calleddephosphorylation, releases energy.
Energy from ATP
Hydrolysisistheprocessofbreakingcomplexmacromoleculesapart.Duringhydrolysis,waterissplit,orlysed,
+ -
and the resulting hydrogen atom (H ) and a hydroxyl group (OH), or hydroxide, are added to the larger
molecule. ThehydrolysisofATP producesADP,together with aninorganicphosphate ion(Pi),andtherelease
of free energy. To carry out life processes, ATP is continuously broken down into ADP, and like a rechargeable
battery,ADPiscontinuouslyregeneratedintoATPbythereattachmentofathirdphosphategroup.Water,which
wasbrokendownintoitshydrogenatomandhydroxylgroup(hydroxide)duringATPhydrolysis,isregenerated
when a third phosphate is added to the ADP molecule, reforming ATP.
Obviously, energy must be infused into the system to regenerate ATP. Where does this energy come from? In
nearlyeverylivingthingonEarth,theenergycomesfromthemetabolismofglucose,fructose,orgalactose,all
isomerswiththechemicalformulaC6H12O6butdifferentmolecularconfigurations.Inthisway,ATPisadirectlink
betweenthelimitedsetofexergonicpathwaysofglucosecatabolismandthemultitudeofendergonicpathways
that power living cells.
Phosphorylation
Recallthat, insomechemicalreactions, enzymesmaybindto severalsubstrates that react with eachother on
the enzyme, forming an intermediate complex. An intermediate complex is a temporary structure, and it allows
one of the substrates (such as ATP) and reactants to more readily react with each other; in reactions involving
ATP, ATP is one of the substrates and ADP is a product. During an endergonic chemical reaction, ATP forms
an intermediate complex with the substrate and enzyme in the reaction. This intermediate complex allows the
ATP to transfer its third phosphate group, with its energy, to the substrate, a process called phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation refers to the addition of the phosphate (~P). This is illustrated by the following generic
reaction, in which A and B represent two different substrates:
A + enzyme + ATP → ⎡A − enzyme − ∼P⎤ → B + enzyme + ADP + phosphate ion
⎣ ⎦
When the intermediate complex breaks apart, the energy is used to modify the substrate and convert it into a
product of the reaction. The ADP molecule and a free phosphate ion are released into the medium and are
available for recycling through cell metabolism.
Substrate Phosphorylation
ATP is generated through two mechanisms during the breakdown of glucose. A few ATP molecules are
generated(thatis,regeneratedfromADP)asadirectresultofthechemicalreactionsthatoccurinthecatabolic
pathways.Aphosphategroupisremovedfromanintermediatereactantinthepathway,andthefreeenergyof
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 214
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 203
thereactionisusedtoaddthethirdphosphatetoanavailableADPmolecule,producingATP(Figure7.4).This
very direct method of phosphorylation is calledsubstrate-level phosphorylation.
Figure 7.4In phosphorylation reactions, the gamma (third) phosphate of ATP is attached to a protein.
Oxidative Phosphorylation
MostoftheATPgeneratedduringglucosecatabolism,however,isderivedfromamuchmorecomplexprocess,
chemiosmosis,whichtakesplaceinmitochondria(Figure7.5)withinaeukaryoticcellortheplasmamembrane
of a prokaryotic cell. Chemiosmosis, a process of ATP production in cellular metabolism, is used to generate
90 percent of the ATP made during glucose catabolism and is also the method used in the light reactions of
photosynthesistoharnesstheenergyofsunlight.TheproductionofATPusingtheprocessofchemiosmosisis
calledoxidative phosphorylationbecause of the involvement of oxygen in the process.
Figure 7.5 In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation takes place in mitochondria. In prokaryotes, this process takes
place in the plasma membrane. (Credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Mitochondrial Disease Physician
Whathappenswhenthecriticalreactionsofcellularrespirationdonotproceedcorrectly?Thismayhappen
in mitochondrial diseases, which are genetic disorders of metabolism. Mitochondrial disorders can arise
from mutations in nuclear or mitochondrial DNA, and they result in the production of less energy than
is normal in body cells. In type 2 diabetes, for instance, the oxidation efficiency of NADH is reduced,
impacting oxidative phosphorylation but not the other steps of respiration. Symptoms of mitochondrial
diseases can include muscle weakness, lack of coordination, stroke-like episodes, and loss of vision and
hearing. Most affected people are diagnosed in childhood, although there are some adult-onset diseases.
Identifying and treating mitochondrial disorders is a specialized medical field. The educational preparation
forthisprofessionrequiresacollegeeducation,followedbymedicalschoolwithaspecializationinmedical
genetics.MedicalgeneticistscanbeboardcertifiedbytheAmericanBoardofMedicalGeneticsandgoon
tobecomeassociatedwithprofessionalorganizationsdevotedtothestudyofmitochondrialdiseases,such
as the Mitochondrial Medicine Society and the Society for Inherited Metabolic Disorders.
PAGE: 215
204 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
7.2 | Glycolysis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describetheoverallresultintermsofmoleculesproducedduringthechemicalbreakdownofglucoseby
glycolysis
• Compare the output of glycolysis in terms of ATP molecules and NADH molecules produced
Asyouhaveread,nearlyalloftheenergyusedbylivingcellscomestotheminthebondsofthesugarglucose.
Glycolysisisthefirststepinthebreakdownofglucosetoextractenergyforcellularmetabolism.Infact,nearly
all living organisms carry out glycolysis as part of their metabolism. The process does not use oxygen directly
and therefore is termed anaerobic. Glycolysis takes place in the cytoplasm of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic
cells.Glucoseentersheterotrophiccellsintwoways.Onemethodisthroughsecondaryactivetransportinwhich
the transport takes place against the glucose concentration gradient. The other mechanism uses a group of
integral proteins called GLUT proteins, also known as glucose transporter proteins. These transporters assist
in the facilitated diffusion of glucose.
Glycolysis begins with the six-carbon ring-shaped structure of a single glucose molecule and ends with two
molecules of a three-carbon sugar called pyruvate. Glycolysis consists of two distinct phases. The first part of
theglycolysispathwaytrapstheglucosemoleculeinthecellandusesenergytomodifyitsothatthesix-carbon
sugar molecule can be split evenly into the two three-carbon molecules. The second part of glycolysis extracts
energy from the molecules and stores it in the form of ATP and NADH—remember: this is the reduced form of
NAD.
First Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Requiring Steps)
Step 1. The first step in glycolysis (Figure 7.6) is catalyzed by hexokinase, an enzyme with broad specificity
that catalyzes the phosphorylation of six-carbon sugars. Hexokinase phosphorylates glucose using ATP as
the source of the phosphate, producing glucose-6-phosphate, a more reactive form of glucose. This reaction
preventsthephosphorylatedglucosemoleculefromcontinuingtointeractwiththeGLUTproteins,anditcanno
longerleavethecellbecausethenegativelychargedphosphatewillnotallowittocrossthehydrophobicinterior
of the plasma membrane.
Step 2. In the second step of glycolysis, an isomerase converts glucose-6-phosphate into one of its isomers,
fructose-6-phosphate (this isomer has a phosphate attached at the location of the sixth carbon of the ring). An
isomeraseisanenzymethatcatalyzestheconversionofamoleculeintooneofitsisomers.(Thischangefrom
phosphoglucose to phosphofructose allows the eventual split of the sugar into two three-carbon molecules.)
Step 3. The third step is the phosphorylation of fructose-6-phosphate, catalyzed by the enzyme
phosphofructokinase. A second ATP molecule donates a high-energy phosphate to fructose-6-phosphate,
producingfructose-1,6-bisphosphate.Inthispathway,phosphofructokinaseisarate-limitingenzyme.Itisactive
when the concentration of ADP is high; it is less active when ADP levels are low and the concentration of ATP
is high. Thus, if there is “sufficient” ATP in the system, the pathway slows down. This is a type of end product
inhibition, since ATP is the end product of glucose catabolism.
Step4.Thenewlyaddedhigh-energyphosphatesfurtherdestabilizefructose-1,6-bisphosphate.Thefourthstep
inglycolysisemploysanenzyme,aldolase,tocleavefructose-1,6-bisphosphateintotwothree-carbonisomers:
dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Step 5. In the fifth step, an isomerase transforms the dihydroxyacetone-phosphate into its isomer,
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Thus, the pathway will continue with two molecules of a
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. At this point in the pathway, there is a net investment of energy from two ATP
molecules in the breakdown of one glucose molecule.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 216
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 205
Figure 7.6 The first half of glycolysis uses two ATP molecules in the phosphorylation of glucose, which is then split
into two three-carbon molecules.
Second Half of Glycolysis (Energy-Releasing Steps)
So far, glycolysis has cost the cell two ATP molecules and produced two small, three-carbon sugar molecules.
Both of these molecules will proceed through the second half of the pathway, and sufficient energy will be
extracted to pay back the two ATP molecules used as an initial investment and produce a profit for the cell of
two additional ATP molecules and two even higher-energy NADH molecules.
Step 6. The sixth step in glycolysis (Figure 7.7) oxidizes the sugar (glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate), extracting
+
high-energy electrons, which are picked up by the electron carrier NAD , producing NADH. The sugar is then
phosphorylatedbytheadditionofasecondphosphategroup,producing1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.Notethatthe
second phosphate group does not require another ATP molecule.
Figure7.7ThesecondhalfofglycolysisinvolvesphosphorylationwithoutATPinvestment(step6)andproducestwo
NADH and four ATP molecules per glucose.
Here again is a potential limiting factor for this pathway. The continuation of the reaction depends upon the
+
availability of the oxidized form of the electron carrier, NAD . Thus, NADH must be continuously oxidized back
+ +
into NAD in order to keep this step going. If NAD is not available, the second half of glycolysis slows down
orstops.Ifoxygenisavailableinthesystem,theNADHwillbeoxidizedreadily,thoughindirectly,andthehigh-
energy electrons from the hydrogen released in this process will be used to produce ATP. In an environment
+
without oxygen, an alternate pathway (fermentation) can provide the oxidation of NADH to NAD .
Step7.Intheseventhstep,catalyzedbyphosphoglyceratekinase(anenzymenamedforthereversereaction),
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate donates a high-energy phosphate to ADP, forming one molecule of ATP. (This is an
example of substrate-level phosphorylation.) A carbonyl group on the 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is oxidized to a
carboxyl group, and 3-phosphoglycerate is formed.
Step8.Intheeighthstep,theremainingphosphategroupin3-phosphoglyceratemovesfromthethirdcarbonto
the second carbon, producing 2-phosphoglycerate (an isomer of 3-phosphoglycerate). The enzyme catalyzing
this step is a mutase (isomerase).
Step 9. Enolase catalyzes the ninth step. This enzyme causes 2-phosphoglycerate to lose water from its
structure; thisisadehydration reaction, resulting intheformation ofadoublebondthat increasesthepotential
PAGE: 217
206 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
energy in the remaining phosphate bond and produces phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).
Step 10. The last step in glycolysis is catalyzed by the enzyme pyruvate kinase (the enzyme in this case is
named for the reverse reaction of pyruvate’s conversion into PEP) and results in the production of a second
ATP molecule by substrate-level phosphorylation and the compound pyruvic acid (or its salt form, pyruvate).
Manyenzymesinenzymaticpathwaysarenamedforthereversereactions,sincetheenzymecancatalyzeboth
forwardandreversereactions(thesemayhavebeendescribedinitiallybythereversereactionthattakesplace
in vitro, under nonphysiological conditions).
Gain a better understanding of the breakdown of glucose by glycolysis by visiting this site
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/glycolysis)to see the process in action.
Outcomes of Glycolysis
Glycolysis begins with glucose and produces two pyruvate molecules, four new ATP molecules, and two
moleculesofNADH.(Note:twoATPmoleculesareusedinthefirsthalfofthepathwaytopreparethesix-carbon
ring for cleavage, so the cell has a net gain of two ATP molecules and two NADH molecules for its use). If the
cellcannotcatabolizethepyruvatemoleculesfurther,itwillharvestonlytwoATPmoleculesfromonemolecule
of glucose. Mature mammalian red blood cells do not have mitochondria and thus are not capable of aerobic
respiration—theprocessinwhichorganismsconvertenergyinthepresenceofoxygen—andglycolysisistheir
sole source of ATP. If glycolysis is interrupted, these cells lose their ability to maintain their sodium-potassium
pumps, and eventually, they die.
Thelaststepinglycolysiswillnotoccurifpyruvatekinase,theenzymethatcatalyzestheformationofpyruvate,
is not available in sufficient quantities. In this situation, the entire glycolysis pathway will proceed, but only two
ATP molecules will be made in the second half. Thus, pyruvate kinase is a rate-limiting enzyme for glycolysis.
7.3 | Oxidation of Pyruvate and the Citric Acid Cycle
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how a circular pathway, such as the citric acid cycle, fundamentally differs from a linear
biochemical pathway, such as glycolysis
• Describe how pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, is prepared for entry into the citric acid cycle
If oxygen is available, aerobic respiration will go forward. In eukaryotic cells, the pyruvate molecules produced
at the end of glycolysis are transported into the mitochondria, which are the sites of cellular respiration. There,
pyruvate is transformed into an acetyl group that will be picked up and activated by a carrier compound called
coenzymeA(CoA).TheresultingcompoundiscalledacetylCoA.CoAisderivedfromvitaminB5,pantothenic
acid.AcetylCoAcanbeusedinavarietyofwaysbythecell,butitsmajorfunctionistodelivertheacetylgroup
derived from pyruvate to the next stage of the pathway in glucose catabolism.
Breakdown of Pyruvate
Inorderforpyruvate,theproductofglycolysis,toenterthenextpathway,itmustundergoseveralchanges.The
conversion is a three-step process (Figure 7.8).
Step1.Acarboxylgroupisremovedfrompyruvate,releasingamoleculeofcarbondioxideintothesurrounding
medium. This reaction creates a two-carbon hydroxyethyl group bound to the enzyme (pyruvate
dehydrogenase).Weshouldnotethatthisisthefirstofthesixcarbonsfromtheoriginalglucosemoleculetobe
removed.(Thisstepproceedstwicebecausetherearetwopyruvatemoleculesproducedattheendofglycolsis
foreverymoleculeofglucosemetabolizedanaerobically;thus,twoofthesixcarbonswillhavebeenremovedat
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 218
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 207
the end of both steps.)
+
Step2.Thehydroxyethylgroupisoxidizedtoanacetylgroup,andtheelectronsarepickedupbyNAD ,forming
NADH. The high-energy electrons from NADH will be used later to generate ATP.
Step 3.The enzyme-bound acetyl group is transferred to CoA, producing a molecule of acetyl CoA.
Figure7.8Uponenteringthemitochondrialmatrix,amultienzymecomplexconvertspyruvateintoacetylCoA.Inthe
process, carbon dioxide is released, and one molecule of NADH is formed.
Note that during the second stage of glucose metabolism, whenever a carbon atom is removed, it is bound to
two oxygen atoms, producing carbon dioxide, one of the major end products of cellular respiration.
Acetyl CoA to CO
2
In the presence of oxygen, acetyl CoA delivers its acetyl (2C) group to a four-carbon molecule, oxaloacetate,
toformcitrate,asix-carbonmoleculewiththreecarboxylgroups;thispathwaywillharvesttheremainderofthe
extractableenergyfromwhatbeganasaglucosemoleculeandreleasetheremainingfourCO2molecules.This
single pathway is called by different names: the citric acid cycle (for the first intermediate formed—citric acid,
or citrate—when acetate joins to the oxaloacetate), the TCA cycle (because citric acid or citrate and isocitrate
are tricarboxylic acids), and the Krebs cycle, after Hans Krebs, who first identified the steps in the pathway in
the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles.
Citric Acid Cycle
Like the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl CoA, the citric acid cycle takes place in the matrix of mitochondria.
Almostalloftheenzymesofthecitricacidcyclearesoluble,withthesingleexceptionoftheenzymesuccinate
dehydrogenase, which is embedded in the inner membrane of the mitochondrion. Unlike glycolysis, the citric
acid cycle is a closed loop: the last part of the pathway regenerates the compound used in the first step. The
eightstepsofthecycleareaseriesofredox,dehydration,hydration,anddecarboxylationreactionsthatproduce
two carbondioxide molecules, oneGTP/ATP, andthe reduced carriersNADH andFADH2(Figure 7.9). This is
considered an aerobic pathway because the NADH and FADH2 produced must transfer their electrons to the
nextpathwayinthesystem,whichwilluseoxygen.Ifthistransferdoesnotoccur,theoxidationstepsofthecitric
acidcyclealsodonotoccur.NotethatthecitricacidcycleproducesverylittleATPdirectlyanddoesnotdirectly
consume oxygen.
PAGE: 219
208 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
Figure7.9Inthecitricacidcycle,theacetylgroupfromacetylCoAisattachedtoafour-carbonoxaloacetatemolecule
to form a six-carbon citrate molecule. Through a series of steps, citrate is oxidized, releasing two carbon dioxide
moleculesforeachacetylgroupfedintothecycle.Intheprocess,threeNAD+moleculesarereducedtoNADH,one
FADmoleculeisreducedtoFADH2,andoneATPorGTP(dependingonthecelltype)isproduced(bysubstrate-level
phosphorylation).Becausethefinalproductofthecitricacidcycleisalsothefirstreactant,thecyclerunscontinuously
in the presence of sufficient reactants. (credit: modification of work by “Yikrazuul”/Wikimedia Commons)
Steps in the Citric Acid Cycle
Step 1.Priortothefirststep, atransitional phaseoccursduringwhichpyruvicacidisconvertedtoacetylCoA.
Then, the first step of the cycle begins: This condensation step combines the two-carbon acetyl group with a
four-carbonoxaloacetate moleculetoformasix-carbonmoleculeofcitrate. CoAisboundtoasulfhydrylgroup
(-SH)anddiffusesawaytoeventuallycombinewithanotheracetylgroup.Thisstepisirreversiblebecauseitis
highlyexergonic.TherateofthisreactioniscontrolledbynegativefeedbackandtheamountofATPavailable.If
ATP levels increase, the rate of this reaction decreases. If ATP is in short supply, the rate increases.
Step 2. In step two, citrate loses one water molecule and gains another as citrate is converted into its isomer,
isocitrate.
Step 3. In step three, isocitrate is oxidized, producing a five-carbon molecule, α-ketoglutarate, along with a
+
molecule of CO2 and two electrons, which reduce NAD to NADH. This step is also regulated by negative
feedback from ATP and NADH and a positive effect of ADP.
Step 4. Steps three and four are both oxidation and decarboxylation steps, which as we have seen, release
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 220
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 209
+
electronsthatreduceNAD toNADHandreleasecarboxylgroupsthatformCO2molecules.Alpha-ketoglutarate
istheproductofstepthree,andasuccinylgroupistheproductofstepfour.CoAbindswiththesuccinylgroup
to form succinyl CoA. The enzyme that catalyzes step four is regulated by feedback inhibition of ATP, succinyl
CoA, and NADH.
Step5.Instepfive,aphosphategroupissubstituted forcoenzymeA,andahigh-energybondisformed.This
energy is used in substrate-level phosphorylation (during the conversion of the succinyl group to succinate) to
formeitherguaninetriphosphate(GTP)orATP.Therearetwoformsoftheenzyme,calledisoenzymes,forthis
step, depending upon the type of animal tissue in which they are found. One form is found in tissues that use
large amounts of ATP, such as heart and skeletal muscle. This form produces ATP. The second form of the
enzyme is found in tissues that have a high number of anabolic pathways, such as liver. This form produces
GTP.GTPisenergeticallyequivalenttoATP;however,itsuseismorerestricted.Inparticular,proteinsynthesis
primarily uses GTP.
Step 6. Step six is a dehydration process that converts succinate into fumarate. Two hydrogen atoms are
transferred to FAD, reducing it to FADH2. (Note: the energy contained in the electrons of these hydrogens is
+
insufficient to reduce NAD but adequate to reduce FAD.) Unlike NADH, this carrier remains attached to the
enzymeandtransferstheelectronstotheelectrontransportchaindirectly.Thisprocessismadepossiblebythe
localization of the enzyme catalyzing this step inside the inner membrane of the mitochondrion.
Step 7. Water is added by hydrolysis to fumarate during step seven, and malate is produced. The last step in
thecitricacidcycleregeneratesoxaloacetatebyoxidizingmalate.AnothermoleculeofNADHisthenproduced
in the process.
Click through each step of the citric acid cyclehere (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/krebs_cycle).
Products of the Citric Acid Cycle
Twocarbonatomscomeintothecitricacidcyclefromeachacetylgroup,representingfouroutofthesixcarbons
ofoneglucosemolecule.Twocarbondioxidemoleculesarereleasedoneachturnofthecycle;however,these
donotnecessarilycontainthemostrecentlyaddedcarbonatoms.Thetwoacetylcarbonatomswilleventuallybe
releasedonlaterturnsofthecycle;thus,allsixcarbonatomsfromtheoriginalglucosemoleculeareeventually
incorporatedintocarbondioxide.EachturnofthecycleformsthreeNADHmoleculesandoneFADH2molecule.
These carriers will connect with the last portion of aerobic respiration, the electron transport chain, to produce
ATP molecules. One GTP or ATP is also made in each cycle. Several of the intermediate compounds in the
citricacidcyclecanbeusedinsynthesizingnonessentialaminoacids;therefore,thecycleisamphibolic(both
catabolic and anabolic).
7.4 | Oxidative Phosphorylation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how electrons move through the electron transport chain and explain what happens to their
energy levels during this process
+
• Explain how a proton (H ) gradient is established and maintained by the electron transport chain
You have just read about two pathways in glucose catabolism—glycolysis and the citric acid cycle—that
generate ATP. Most of the ATP generated during the aerobic catabolism of glucose, however, is not generated
directly from these pathways. Instead, it is derived from a process that begins by moving electrons through
a series of electron carriers that undergo redox reactions. This process causes hydrogen ions to accumulate
within the matrix space. Therefore, a concentration gradient forms in which hydrogen ions diffuse out of the
PAGE: 221
210 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
matrixspacebypassingthroughATPsynthase.ThecurrentofhydrogenionspowersthecatalyticactionofATP
synthase, which phosphorylates ADP, producing ATP.
Electron Transport Chain
The electron transport chain (Figure 7.10) is the last component of aerobic respiration and is the only part of
glucose metabolism that uses atmospheric oxygen. Oxygen continuously diffuses into plant tissues (typically
through stomata), as well as into fungi and bacteria; however, in animals, oxygen enters the body through a
variety of respiratory systems. Electron transport is a series of redox reactions that resembles a relay race or
bucketbrigadeinthatelectronsarepassedrapidlyfromonecomponenttothenext,totheendpointofthechain
where the electrons reduce molecular oxygen and, along with associated protons, produces water. There are
four complexes composed of proteins, labeled I through IV in Figure 7.10, and the aggregation of these four
complexes,togetherwithassociatedmobile,accessoryelectroncarriers,iscalledtheelectrontransportchain.
Theelectrontransportchainispresentwithmultiplecopiesintheinnermitochondrialmembraneofeukaryotes
and within the plasma membrane of prokaryotes.
Figure 7.10 The electron transport chain is a series of electron transporters embedded in the inner mitochondrial
membrane that shuttles electrons from NADH and FADH2 to molecular oxygen. In the process, protons are pumped
from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, and oxygen is reduced to form water.
Complex I
First, two electrons are carried to the first complex via NADH. This complex, labeled I, is composed of flavin
mononucleotide(FMN)andaniron-sulfur(Fe-S)-containingprotein.FMN,whichisderivedfromvitaminB2(also
called riboflavin), is one of several prosthetic groups or cofactors in the electron transport chain. A prosthetic
groupisanonproteinmoleculerequiredfortheactivityofaprotein.Prostheticgroupsareorganicorinorganic,
nonpeptidemoleculesboundtoaproteinthatfacilitateitsfunction.Prostheticgroupsincludecoenzymes,which
are the prosthetic groups of enzymes. The enzyme in complex I is NADH dehydrogenase and is a very large
protein, containing 45 amino acid chains. Complex I can pump four hydrogen ions across the membrane from
thematrixintotheintermembranespace,anditisinthiswaythatthehydrogeniongradientisestablishedand
maintained between the two compartments separated by the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Q and Complex II
ComplexIIdirectlyreceivesFADH2—whichdoesnotpassthroughcomplexI.Thecompoundconnectingthefirst
and second complexes to the third is ubiquinone B. The Q molecule is lipid soluble and freely moves through
the hydrophobic core of the membrane. Once it is reduced (QH2), ubiquinone delivers its electrons to the next
complex in the electron transport chain. Q receives the electrons derived from NADH from complex I, and the
electrons derived from FADH2 from complex II. This enzyme and FADH2 form a small complex that delivers
electronsdirectlytotheelectrontransportchain,bypassingthefirstcomplex.Sincetheseelectronsbypassand
thus do not energize the proton pump in the first complex, fewer ATP molecules are made from the FADH2
electrons. The number of ATP molecules ultimately obtained is directly proportional to the number of protons
pumped across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 222
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 211
Complex III
The third complex is composed of cytochrome b—another Fe-S protein, a Rieske center (2Fe-2S center), and
cytochrome c proteins. This complex is also called cytochrome oxidoreductase. Cytochrome proteins have a
prostheticgroupofheme.Thehememoleculeissimilartothehemeinhemoglobin,butitcarrieselectrons,not
oxygen.Asaresult,theironionatitscoreisreducedandoxidizedasitpassestheelectrons,fluctuatingbetween
++ +++
different oxidation states: Fe (reduced) and Fe (oxidized). The heme molecules in the cytochromes have
slightlydifferentcharacteristicsduetotheeffectsofthedifferentproteinsbindingtothem,givingslightlydifferent
characteristicstoeachcomplex.ComplexIIIpumpsprotonsthroughthemembraneandpassesitselectronsto
cytochrome c for transport to the fourth complex of proteins and enzymes. (Cytochrome c receives electrons
from Q; however, whereas Q carries pairs of electrons, cytochrome c can accept only one at a time.)
Complex IV
Thefourth complexiscomposedofcytochromeproteinsc,a,anda3.Thiscomplexcontainstwohemegroups
(oneineachofthetwocytochromes,a,anda3)andthreecopperions(apairofCuAandoneCuBincytochrome
a3).Thecytochromesholdanoxygenmoleculeverytightlybetweentheironandcopperionsuntiltheoxygenis
completelyreducedbythegainoftwoelectrons.Thereducedoxygenthenpicksuptwohydrogenionsfromthe
surroundingmediumtomakewater(H2O).Theremovalofthehydrogenionsfromthesystemcontributestothe
ion gradient that forms the foundation for the process of chemiosmosis.
Chemiosmosis
In chemiosmosis, the free energy from the series of redox reactions just described is used to pump hydrogen
+
ions (protons) across the mitochondrial membrane. The uneven distribution of H ions across the membrane
establishes both concentration and electrical gradients (thus, an electrochemical gradient), owing to the
hydrogen ions’ positive charge and their aggregation on one side of the membrane.
If the membrane were continuously open to simple diffusion by the hydrogen ions, the ions would tend to
diffusebackacrossintothematrix,drivenbytheconcentrationsproducingtheirelectrochemicalgradient.Recall
that many ions cannot diffuse through the nonpolar regions of phospholipid membranes without the aid of ion
channels.Similarly,hydrogenionsinthematrixspacecanonlypassthroughtheinnermitochondrialmembrane
by an integral membrane protein called ATP synthase (Figure 7.11). This complex protein acts as a tiny
generator,turnedbytheforceofthehydrogenionsdiffusingthroughit,downtheirelectrochemicalgradient.The
turningofpartsofthismolecularmachinefacilitatestheadditionofaphosphatetoADP,formingATP,usingthe
potential energy of the hydrogen ion gradient.
PAGE: 223
212 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
Figure 7.11 ATP synthase is a complex, molecular machine that uses a proton (H+) gradient to form ATP from
ADP and inorganic phosphate (Pi). (Credit: modification of work by Klaus Hoffmeier)
Dinitrophenol (DNP) is an “uncoupler” that makes the inner mitochondrial membrane “leaky” to protons. It
wasuseduntil1938asaweight-lossdrug.WhateffectwouldyouexpectDNPtohaveonthechangeinpH
across the inner mitochondrial membrane? Why do you think this might be an effective weight-loss drug?
Chemiosmosis(Figure7.12)isusedtogenerate90percentoftheATPmadeduringaerobicglucosecatabolism;
itisalsothemethodusedinthelightreactionsofphotosynthesistoharnesstheenergyofsunlightintheprocess
of photophosphorylation. Recall that the production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis in mitochondria
iscalledoxidativephosphorylation.TheoverallresultofthesereactionsistheproductionofATPfromtheenergy
oftheelectronsremovedfromhydrogenatoms.Theseatomswereoriginallypartofaglucosemolecule.Atthe
end of the pathway, the electrons are used to reduce an oxygen molecule to oxygen ions. The extra electrons
ontheoxygenattracthydrogenions(protons)fromthesurroundingmedium,andwaterisformed.Thus,oxygen
is the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 224
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 213
Figure7.12Inoxidativephosphorylation,thepHgradientformedbytheelectrontransportchainisusedbyATP
synthase to form ATP.
Cyanide inhibits cytochrome c oxidase, a component of the electron transport chain. If cyanide poisoning
occurs, wouldyouexpect the pHofthe intermembrane spacetoincreaseordecrease?What effect would
cyanide have on ATP synthesis?
ATP Yield
The number of ATP molecules generated from the catabolism of glucose varies. For example, the number of
hydrogen ions that the electron transport chain complexes can pump through the membrane varies between
species. Another source of variance stems from the shuttle of electrons across the membranes of the
mitochondria. (The NADH generated from glycolysis cannot easily enter mitochondria.) Thus, electrons are
+ + +
picked up on the inside of mitochondria by either NAD or FAD . As you have learned earlier, these FAD
+
molecules can transport fewer ions; consequently, fewer ATP molecules are generated when FAD acts as a
+ +
carrier. NAD is used as the electron transporter in the liver and FAD acts in the brain.
Another factor that affects the yield of ATP molecules generated from glucose is the fact that intermediate
compoundsinthesepathwaysarealsousedforotherpurposes.Glucosecatabolismconnectswiththepathways
thatbuildorbreakdownallotherbiochemicalcompoundsincells,andtheresultissomewhatmessierthanthe
ideal situations described thus far. For example, sugars other than glucose are fed into the glycolytic pathway
for energy extraction. In addition, the five-carbon sugars that form nucleic acids are made from intermediates
inglycolysis.Certainnonessentialaminoacidscanbemadefromintermediatesofbothglycolysisandthecitric
acid cycle. Lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, are also made from intermediates in these pathways,
and both amino acids and triglycerides are broken down for energy through these pathways. Overall, in living
systems, these pathways of glucose catabolism extract about 34 percent of the energy contained in glucose,
with the remainder being released as heat.
PAGE: 225
214 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
7.5 | Metabolism without Oxygen
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the fundamental difference between anaerobic cellular respiration and fermentation
• Describe the type of fermentation that readily occursinanimal cells and the conditions that initiate that
fermentation
In aerobic respiration, the final electron acceptor is an oxygen molecule, O2. If aerobic respiration occurs, then
ATP will be produced using the energy of high-energy electrons carried by NADH or FADH2 to the electron
+
transportchain.Ifaerobicrespirationdoesnotoccur,NADHmustbereoxidizedtoNAD forreuseasanelectron
carrier for the glycolytic pathway to continue. How is this done? Some living systems use an organic molecule
+
as the final electron acceptor. Processes that use an organic molecule to regenerate NAD from NADH are
collectively referred to as fermentation. In contrast, some living systems use an inorganic molecule as a final
electronacceptor.Bothmethodsarecalledanaerobiccellularrespiration,inwhichorganismsconvertenergy
for their use in the absence of oxygen.
Anaerobic Cellular Respiration
Certain prokaryotes, including some species in the domains Bacteria and Archaea, use anaerobic respiration.
For example, a group of archaeans called methanogens reduces carbon dioxide to methane to oxidize NADH.
These microorganisms are found in soil and in the digestive tracts of ruminants, such as cows and sheep.
Similarly, sulfate-reducing bacteria, most of which are anaerobic (Figure 7.13), reduce sulfate to hydrogen
+
sulfide to regenerate NAD from NADH.
Figure7.13Thegreencolorseeninthesecoastalwatersisfromaneruptionofhydrogensulfide–producingbacteria.
These anaerobic, sulfate-reducing bacteria release hydrogen sulfide gas as they decompose algae in the water.
(credit: modification of work by NASA/Jeff Schmaltz, MODIS Land Rapid Response Team at NASA GSFC, Visible
Earth Catalog of NASA images)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 226
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 215
Visit thissite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/fermentation)to see anaerobic cellular respiration in action.
Lactic Acid Fermentation
The fermentation method used by animals and certain bacteria, such as those in yogurt, is lactic acid
fermentation (Figure 7.14). This type of fermentation is used routinely in mammalian red blood cells, which do
nothavemitochondria,andinskeletalmusclethathasaninsufficientoxygensupplytoallowaerobicrespiration
to continue (that is, in muscles used to the point of fatigue). In muscles, lactic acid accumulation must be
removed by the blood circulation, and when the lactic acid loses a hydrogen, the resulting lactate is brought to
the liver for further metabolism. The chemical reactions of lactic acid fermentation are the following:
+
Pyruvic acid+NADH↔lactic acid+NAD
Theenzymeusedinthisreactionislactatedehydrogenase(LDH).Thereactioncanproceedineitherdirection,
but the reaction from left to right is inhibited by acidic conditions. Such lactic acid accumulation was once
believed to cause muscle stiffness, fatigue, and soreness, although more recent research disputes this
hypothesis. Once the lactic acid has been removed from the muscle and circulated to the liver, it can be
reconverted into pyruvic acid and further catabolized for energy.
PAGE: 227
216 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
Figure 7.14Lactic acid fermentation is common in muscle cells that have run out of oxygen.
Tremetol,ametabolicpoisonfoundinthewhitesnakerootplant,preventsthemetabolismoflactate.When
cows eat this plant, tremetol is concentrated in the milk they produce. Humans who consume the milk
can become seriously ill. Symptoms of this disease, which include vomiting, abdominal pain, and tremors,
become worse after exercise. Why do you think this is the case?
Alcohol Fermentation
Another familiar fermentation process is alcohol fermentation (Figure 7.15), which produces ethanol. The first
chemical reaction of alcohol fermentation is the following (CO2does not participate in the second reaction):
+ + +
pyruvic acid+H →CO +acetaldehyde+NADH+H →ethanol+NAD
2
The first reaction is catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase, a cytoplasmic enzyme, with a coenzyme of thiamine
pyrophosphate (TPP, derived from vitamin B1 and also called thiamine). A carboxyl group is removed from
pyruvic acid, releasing carbon dioxide as a gas. The loss of carbon dioxide reduces the size of the molecule
byonecarbon,producingacetaldehyde.Thesecondreactioniscatalyzedbyalcoholdehydrogenasetooxidize
+
NADH to NAD and reduce acetaldehyde to ethanol. The fermentation of pyruvic acid by yeast produces the
ethanolfoundinalcoholicbeverages.Ethanoltoleranceofyeastisvariable,rangingfromabout5percentto21
percent, depending on the yeast strain and environmental conditions.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 228
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 217
Figure7.15FermentationofgrapejuiceintowineproducesCO2asabyproduct.Fermentationtankshavevalvesso
that the pressure inside the tanks created by the carbon dioxide produced can be released.
Other Types of Fermentation
Other fermentation methods take place in bacteria. We should note that many prokaryotes are facultatively
anaerobic. This means that they can switch between aerobic respiration and fermentation, depending on the
availabilityoffreeoxygen.Certainprokaryotes,suchasClostridia,areobligateanaerobes.Obligateanaerobes
liveandgrowintheabsenceofmolecularoxygen.Oxygenisapoisontothesemicroorganismsandkillsthemon
exposure.Weshouldalsonotethatallformsoffermentation,exceptlacticacidfermentation,producegas.The
productionofparticulartypesofgasisusedasanindicatorofthefermentationofspecificcarbohydrates,which
playsaroleinthelaboratoryidentificationofthebacteria.Variousmethodsoffermentationareusedbyassorted
+
organisms to ensure an adequate supply of NAD for the sixth step in glycolysis. Without these pathways, this
step would not occur, and ATP could not be harvested from the breakdown of glucose.
7.6 | Connections of Carbohydrate, Protein, and Lipid
Metabolic Pathways
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the ways in which carbohydrate metabolic pathways, glycolysis, and the citric acid cycle
interrelate with protein and lipid metabolic pathways
• Explain why metabolic pathways are not considered closed systems
You have learned about the catabolism of glucose, which provides energy to living cells. But living things
consumeorganiccompoundsotherthanglucoseforfood.HowdoesaturkeysandwichendupasATPinyour
cells? This happens because all of the catabolic pathways for carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids eventually
connect into glycolysis and the citric acid cycle pathways (see Figure 7.17). Metabolic pathways should be
thought of as porous and interconnecting—that is, substances enter from other pathways, and intermediates
leave for other pathways. These pathways are not closed systems! Many of the substrates, intermediates, and
products in a particular pathway are reactants in other pathways.
Connections of Other Sugars to Glucose Metabolism
Glycogen, a polymer of glucose, is an energy storage molecule in animals. When there is adequate ATP
present, excess glucose is stored as glycogen in both liver and muscle cells. The glycogen will be hydrolyzed
intoglucose1-phosphatemonomers(G-1-P)ifbloodsugarlevelsdrop.Thepresenceofglycogenasasource
ofglucoseallowsATPtobeproducedforalongerperiodoftimeduringexercise.Glycogenisbrokendowninto
PAGE: 229
218 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
glucose-1-phosphate (G-1-P) and converted into glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-P) in both muscle and liver cells,
and this product enters the glycolytic pathway.
Sucrose is a disaccharide with a molecule of glucose and a molecule of fructose bonded together with a
glycosidic linkage. Fructose is one of the three “dietary” monosaccharides, along with glucose and galactose
(partofthemilksugardissacharidelactose),whichareabsorbeddirectlyintothebloodstreamduringdigestion.
The catabolism of both fructose and galactose produces the same number of ATP molecules as glucose.
Connections of Proteins to Glucose Metabolism
Proteinsarehydrolyzedbyavarietyofenzymesincells.Mostofthetime,theaminoacidsarerecycledintothe
synthesis of new proteins. If there are excess amino acids, however, or if the body is in a state of starvation,
someaminoacidswillbeshuntedintothepathwaysofglucosecatabolism(Figure7.16).Itisveryimportantto
note that each amino acid must have its amino group removed prior to entry into these pathways. The amino
group is converted into ammonia. In mammals, the liver synthesizes urea from two ammonia molecules and
a carbon dioxide molecule. Thus, urea is the principal waste product in mammals, produced from the nitrogen
originatinginaminoacids,anditleavesthebodyinurine.Itshouldbenotedthataminoacidscanbesynthesized
from the intermediates and reactants in the cellular respiration cycle.
Figure7.16Thecarbonskeletonsofcertainaminoacids(indicatedinboxes)derivedfromproteinscanfeedintothe
citric acid cycle. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Connections of Lipid and Glucose Metabolisms
The lipids connected to the glucose pathway include cholesterol and triglycerides. Cholesterol is a lipid that
contributestocellmembraneflexibilityandisaprecursorofsteroidhormones.Thesynthesisofcholesterolstarts
with acetyl groups and proceeds in only one direction. The process cannot be reversed.
Triglycerides—made from the bonding of glycerol and three fatty acids—are a form of long-term energy
storage in animals. Animals can make most of the fatty acids they need. Triglycerides can be both made
and broken down through parts of the glucose catabolism pathways. Glycerol can be phosphorylated to
glycerol-3-phosphate, whichcontinuesthroughglycolysis.Fatty acidsarecatabolizedinaprocesscalledbeta-
oxidation,whichtakesplaceinthematrixofthemitochondriaandconvertstheirfattyacidchainsintotwo-carbon
units ofacetyl groups. The acetyl groupsarepickedupbyCoA toformacetyl CoA that proceedsinto the citric
acid cycle.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 230
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 219
Figure 7.17 Glycogen from the liver and muscles, as well as other carbohydrates, hydrolyzed into
glucose-1-phosphate, together with fats and proteins, can feed into the catabolic pathways for carbohydrates.
Pathways of Photosynthesis and Cellular Metabolism
The processes of photosynthesis and cellular metabolism consist of several very complex pathways. It
is generally thought that the first cells arose in an aqueous environment—a “soup” of nutrients—possibly
on the surface of some porous clays, perhaps in warm marine environments. If these cells reproduced
successfullyandtheirnumbersclimbedsteadily,itfollowsthatthecellswouldbegintodepletethenutrients
fromthemediuminwhichtheylivedastheyshiftedthenutrientsintothecomponentsoftheirownbodies.
Thishypotheticalsituationwouldhaveresultedinnaturalselectionfavoringthoseorganismsthatcouldexist
byusingthenutrientsthatremainedintheirenvironmentandbymanipulatingthesenutrientsintomaterials
uponwhichtheycouldsurvive.Selectionwouldfavorthoseorganismsthatcouldextractmaximalvaluefrom
the nutrients to which they had access.
An early form of photosynthesis developed that harnessed the sun’s energy using water as a source of
hydrogenatoms,butthispathwaydidnotproducefreeoxygen(anoxygenicphotosynthesis).(Anothertype
of anoxygenic photosynthesis did not produce free oxygen because it did not use water as the source
of hydrogen ions; instead, it used materials such as hydrogen sulfide and consequently produced sulfur).
It is thought that glycolysis developed at this time and could take advantage of the simple sugars being
producedbutthatthesereactionswereunabletofullyextracttheenergystoredinthecarbohydrates. The
developmentofglycolysisprobablypredatedtheevolutionofphotosynthesis,asitwaswellsuitedtoextract
energy from materials spontaneously accumulating in the “primeval soup.” A later form of photosynthesis
usedwaterasasourceofelectronsandhydrogenandgeneratedfreeoxygen.Overtime,theatmosphere
becameoxygenated,butnotbeforetheoxygenreleasedoxidizedmetalsintheoceanandcreateda“rust”
layerinthesediment,permittingthedatingoftheriseofthefirstoxygenicphotosynthesizers.Livingthings
adapted to exploit this new atmosphere that allowed aerobic respiration as we know it to evolve. When
thefullprocessofoxygenicphotosynthesisdevelopedandtheatmospherebecameoxygenated,cellswere
finally able to use the oxygen expelled by photosynthesis to extract considerably more energy from the
sugar molecules using the citric acid cycle and oxidative phosphorylation.
7.7 | Regulation of Cellular Respiration
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describehowfeedbackinhibitionwouldaffecttheproductionofanintermediateorproductinapathway
• Identifythemechanismthatcontrolstherateofthetransportofelectronsthroughtheelectrontransport
chain
Cellular respiration must be regulated in order to provide balanced amounts of energy in the form of ATP. The
cell also must generate a number of intermediate compounds that are used in the anabolism and catabolism
ofmacromolecules.Withoutcontrols,metabolicreactionswouldquicklycometoastandstillastheforwardand
backward reactions reached a state of equilibrium. Resources would be used inappropriately. A cell does not
PAGE: 231
220 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
need the maximum amount of ATP that it can make all the time: At times, the cell needs to shunt some of the
intermediatestopathwaysforaminoacid,protein,glycogen,lipid,andnucleicacidproduction.Inshort,thecell
needs to control its metabolism.
Regulatory Mechanisms
A variety of mechanisms is used to control cellular respiration. Some type of control exists at each stage of
glucose metabolism. Access of glucose to the cell can be regulated using the GLUT (glucose transporter)
proteins that transport glucose (Figure 7.18). Different forms of the GLUT protein control passage of glucose
into the cells of specific tissues.
Figure 7.18 GLUT4 is a glucose transporter that is stored in vesicles. A cascade of events that occurs upon insulin
bindingtoareceptorintheplasmamembranecausesGLUT4-containingvesiclestofusewiththeplasmamembrane
so that glucose may be transported into the cell.
Somereactionsarecontrolledbyhavingtwodifferentenzymes—oneeachforthetwodirectionsofareversible
reaction. Reactions that are catalyzed by only one enzyme can go to equilibrium, stalling the reaction. In
contrast,iftwodifferentenzymes(eachspecificforagivendirection)arenecessaryforareversiblereaction,the
opportunity to control the rate of the reaction increases, and equilibrium is not reached.
Anumberofenzymesinvolvedineachofthepathways—inparticular,theenzymecatalyzingthefirstcommitted
reaction of the pathway—are controlled by attachment of a molecule to an allosteric site on the protein.
+
The molecules most commonly used in this capacity are the nucleotides ATP, ADP, AMP, NAD , and NADH.
Theseregulators—allostericeffectors—mayincreaseordecreaseenzymeactivity,dependingontheprevailing
conditions.Theallostericeffectoraltersthestericstructureoftheenzyme,usuallyaffectingtheconfigurationof
the active site. This alteration of the protein’s (the enzyme’s) structure either increases or decreases its affinity
for its substrate, with the effect of increasing or decreasing the rate of the reaction. The attachment signals to
theenzyme.Thisbindingcanincreaseordecreasetheenzyme’sactivity,providingafeedbackmechanism.This
feedback type of control is effective as long as the chemical affecting it is attached to the enzyme. Once the
overall concentration of the chemical decreases, it will diffuse away from the protein, and the control is relaxed.
Control of Catabolic Pathways
Enzymes, proteins, electron carriers, and pumps that play roles in glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and the
electrontransportchaintendtocatalyzenonreversiblereactions.Inotherwords,iftheinitialreactiontakesplace,
the pathway is committed to proceeding with the remaining reactions. Whether a particular enzyme activity is
released depends upon the energy needs of the cell (as reflected by the levels of ATP, ADP, and AMP).
Glycolysis
The control of glycolysis begins with the first enzyme in the pathway, hexokinase (Figure 7.19). This enzyme
catalyzesthephosphorylationofglucose,whichhelpstopreparethecompoundforcleavageinalaterstep.The
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 232
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 221
presence of the negatively charged phosphate in the molecule also prevents the sugar from leaving the cell.
Whenhexokinaseisinhibited,glucosediffusesoutofthecellanddoesnotbecomeasubstratefortherespiration
pathways in that tissue. The product of the hexokinase reaction is glucose-6-phosphate, which accumulates
when a later enzyme, phosphofructokinase, is inhibited.
Figure7.19Theglycolysispathwayisprimarilyregulatedatthethreekeyenzymaticsteps(1,2,and7)asindicated.
Note that the first two steps that are regulated occur early in the pathway and involve hydrolysis of ATP.
Phosphofructokinaseisthemainenzymecontrolledinglycolysis.HighlevelsofATPorcitrateoralower,more
acidicpHdecreasestheenzyme’sactivity.Anincreaseincitrateconcentrationcanoccurbecauseofablockage
inthecitricacidcycle.Fermentation,withitsproductionoforganicacidssuchaslacticacid,frequentlyaccounts
for the increased acidity in a cell; however, the products of fermentation do not typically accumulate in cells.
Thelaststepinglycolysisiscatalyzedbypyruvatekinase.Thepyruvateproducedcanproceedtobecatabolized
or converted into the amino acid alanine. If no more energy is needed and alanine is in adequate supply, the
enzymeisinhibited.Theenzyme’sactivityisincreasedwhenfructose-1,6-bisphosphatelevelsincrease.(Recall
thatfructose-1,6-bisphosphateisanintermediateinthefirsthalfofglycolysis.)Theregulationofpyruvatekinase
involvesphosphorylationbyakinase(pyruvatekinase),resultinginaless-activeenzyme.Dephosphorylationby
a phosphatase reactivates it. Pyruvate kinase is also regulated by ATP (a negative allosteric effect).
If more energy is needed, more pyruvate will be converted into acetyl CoA through the action of pyruvate
dehydrogenase. If either acetyl groups or NADH accumulates, there is less need for the reaction, and the rate
decreases.Pyruvatedehydrogenaseisalsoregulatedbyphosphorylation:akinasephosphorylatesittoforman
inactive enzyme, and a phosphatase reactivates it. The kinase and the phosphatase are also regulated.
Citric Acid Cycle
The citric acid cycle is controlled through the enzymes that catalyze the reactions that make the first two
molecules of NADH (Figure 7.9). These enzymes are isocitrate dehydrogenase and α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase. When adequate ATP and NADH levels are available, the rates of these reactions decrease.
When more ATP is needed, as reflected in rising ADP levels, the rate increases. Alpha-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase will also be affected by the levels of succinyl CoA—a subsequent intermediate in the
cycle—causing a decrease in activity. A decrease in the rate of operation of the pathway at this point is not
necessarilynegative,astheincreasedlevelsoftheα-ketoglutaratenotusedbythecitricacidcyclecanbeused
by the cell for amino acid (glutamate) synthesis.
Electron Transport Chain
Specific enzymes of the electron transport chain are unaffected by feedback inhibition, but the rate of electron
transport through the pathway is affected by the levels of ADP and ATP. Greater ATP consumption by a cell is
indicated by a buildup of ADP. As ATP usage decreases, the concentration of ADP decreases, and now, ATP
PAGE: 233
222 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
begins to build up in the cell. This change in the relative concentration of ADP to ATP triggers the cell to slow
down the electron transport chain.
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/electron_transp) to see an animation of the electron transport
chain and ATP synthesis.
For a summary of feedback controls in cellular respiration, seeTable 7.1.
Summary of Feedback Controls in Cellular Respiration
Effect on
Enzyme
Pathway Elevated levels of effector pathway
affected
activity
glycolysis hexokinase glucose-6-phosphate decrease
low-energy charge (ATP, AMP),
phosphofructokinase fructose-6-phosphate via increase
fructose-2,6-bisphosphate
high-energy charge (ATP, AMP), citrate, acidic
decrease
pH
pyruvate kinase fructose-1,6-bisphosphate increase
high-energy charge (ATP, AMP), alanine decrease
pyruvate to acetyl pyruvate
ADP, pyruvate increase
CoA conversion dehydrogenase
acetyl CoA, ATP, NADH decrease
isocitrate
citric acid cycle ADP increase
dehydrogenase
ATP, NADH decrease
α-ketoglutarate
calcium ions, ADP increase
dehydrogenase
ATP, NADH, succinyl CoA decrease
electron transport
ADP increase
chain
ATP decrease
Table 7.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 234
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 223
KEY TERMS
acetyl CoA combination of an acetyl group derived from pyruvic acid and coenzyme A, which is made from
pantothenic acid (a B-group vitamin)
aerobic respiration process in which organisms convert energy in the presence of oxygen
anaerobic process that does not use oxygen
anaerobic cellular respiration process in which organisms convert energy for their use in the absence of
oxygen
ATP synthase (alsoF1F0ATPsynthase)membrane-embeddedproteincomplexthataddsaphosphatetoADP
with energy from protons diffusing through it
chemiosmosis process in which there is a production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in cellular metabolism
by the involvement of a proton gradient across a membrane
citric acid cycle (also Krebs cycle) series of enzyme-catalyzed chemical reactions of central importance in all
living cells for extraction of energy from carbohydrates
dephosphorylation removal of a phosphate group from a molecule
fermentation processofregeneratingNAD + witheitheraninorganicororganiccompoundservingasthefinal
electron acceptor; occurs in the absence of oxygen
GLUT protein integral membrane protein that transports glucose
glycolysis process of breaking glucose into two three-carbon molecules with the production of ATP and NADH
isomerase enzyme that converts a molecule into its isomer
Krebs cycle (also citric acid cycle) alternate name for the citric acid cycle, named after Hans Krebs, who first
identified the steps in the pathway in the 1930s in pigeon flight muscles; see citric acid cycle
oxidative phosphorylation production of ATP using the process of chemiosmosis in the presence of oxygen
phosphorylation addition of a high-energy phosphate to a compound, usually a metabolic intermediate, a
protein, or ADP
prosthetic group (also prosthetic cofactor) molecule bound to a protein that facilitates the function of the
protein
pyruvate three-carbon sugar that can be decarboxylated and oxidized to make acetyl CoA, which enters the
citric acid cycle under aerobic conditions; the end product of glycolysis
redox reaction chemicalreactionthatconsistsofthecouplingofanoxidationreactionandareductionreaction
substrate-level phosphorylation production of ATP from ADP using the excess energy from a chemical
reaction and a phosphate group from a reactant
TCA cycle (alsocitricacidcycle)alternatenameforthecitricacidcycle,namedafterthegroupnameforcitric
acid, tricarboxylic acid (TCA); see citric acid cycle
ubiquinone solubleelectrontransporterintheelectrontransportchainthatconnectsthefirstorsecondcomplex
to the third
CHAPTER SUMMARY
7.1Energy in Living Systems
ATP functions as the energy currency for cells. It allows the cell to store energy briefly and transport it within
PAGE: 235
224 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
the cell to support endergonic chemical reactions. The structure of ATP is that of an RNA nucleotide with three
phosphates attached. As ATP is used for energy, a phosphate group or two are detached, and either ADP or
AMP is produced. Energy derived from glucose catabolism is used to convert ADP into ATP. When ATP is used
in a reaction, the third phosphate is temporarily attached to a substrate in a process called phosphorylation.
The two processes of ATP regeneration that are used in conjunction with glucose catabolism are substrate-
level phosphorylation and oxidative phosphorylation through the process of chemiosmosis.
7.2Glycolysis
Glycolysis is the first pathway within the cytoplasm used in the breakdown of glucose to extract energy. It was
probably one of the earliest metabolic pathways to evolve and is used by nearly all of the organisms on Earth.
Glycolysis consists of two parts: The first part prepares the six-carbon ring of glucose for cleavage into two
three-carbon sugars. ATP is invested in the process during this half to energize the separation. The second half
+
of glycolysis extracts ATP and high-energy electrons from hydrogen atoms and attaches them to NAD . Two
ATP molecules are invested in the first half and four ATP molecules are formed by substrate phosphorylation
during the second half. This produces a net gain of two ATP and two NADH molecules for the cell.
7.3Oxidation of Pyruvate and the Citric Acid Cycle
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvate is transformed into an acetyl group attached to a carrier molecule of
coenzyme A. The resulting acetyl CoA can enter several pathways, but most often, the acetyl group is
delivered to the citric acid cycle for further catabolism. During the conversion of pyruvate into the acetyl group,
a molecule of carbon dioxide and two high-energy electrons are removed. The carbon dioxide accounts for two
(conversion of two pyruvate molecules) of the six carbons of the original glucose molecule. The electrons are
+
picked up by NAD , and the NADH carries the electrons to a later pathway for ATP production. At this point, the
glucose molecule that originally entered cellular respiration has been completely oxidized. Chemical potential
energy stored within the glucose molecule has been transferred to electron carriers or has been used to
synthesize a few ATPs.
The citric acid cycle is a series of redox and decarboxylation reactions that removes high-energy electrons and
carbon dioxide. The electrons, temporarily stored in molecules of NADH and FADH2, are used to generate ATP
in a subsequent pathway. One molecule of either GTP or ATP is produced by substrate-level phosphorylation
on each turn of the cycle. There is no comparison of the cyclic pathway with a linear one.
7.4Oxidative Phosphorylation
The electron transport chain is the portion of aerobic respiration that uses free oxygen as the final electron
acceptor of the electrons removed from the intermediate compounds in glucose catabolism. The electron
transport chain is composed of four large, multiprotein complexes embedded in the inner mitochondrial
membrane and two small diffusible electron carriers shuttling electrons between them. The electrons are
passed through a series of redox reactions, with a small amount of free energy used at three points to transport
hydrogen ions across a membrane. This process contributes to the gradient used in chemiosmosis. The
electrons passing through the electron transport chain gradually lose energy. High-energy electrons donated to
the chain by either NADH or FADH2complete the chain, as low-energy electrons reduce oxygen molecules and
form water. The level of free energy of the electrons drops from about 60 kcal/mol in NADH or 45 kcal/mol in
FADH2to about 0 kcal/mol in water. The end products of the electron transport chain are water and ATP. A
number of intermediate compounds of the citric acid cycle can be diverted into the anabolism of other
biochemical molecules, such as nonessential amino acids, sugars, and lipids. These same molecules can
serve as energy sources for the glucose pathways.
7.5Metabolism without Oxygen
If NADH cannot be oxidized through aerobic respiration, another electron acceptor is used. Most organisms will
+
use some form of fermentation to accomplish the regeneration of NAD , ensuring the continuation of glycolysis.
+
The regeneration of NAD in fermentation is not accompanied by ATP production; therefore, the potential of
NADH to produce ATP using an electron transport chain is not utilized.
7.6Connections of Carbohydrate, Protein, and Lipid Metabolic Pathways
The breakdown and synthesis of carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids connect with the pathways of glucose
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 236
Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration 225
catabolism. The simple sugars are galactose, fructose, glycogen, and pentose. These are catabolized during
glycolysis. The amino acids from proteins connect with glucose catabolism through pyruvate, acetyl CoA, and
components of the citric acid cycle. Cholesterol synthesis starts with acetyl groups, and the components of
triglycerides come from glycerol-3-phosphate from glycolysis and acetyl groups produced in the mitochondria
from pyruvate.
7.7Regulation of Cellular Respiration
Cellular respiration is controlled by a variety of means. The entry of glucose into a cell is controlled by the
transport proteins that aid glucose passage through the cell membrane. Most of the control of the respiration
processes is accomplished through the control of specific enzymes in the pathways. This is a type of negative
feedback mechanism, turning the enzymes off. The enzymes respond most often to the levels of the available
+
nucleosides ATP, ADP, AMP, NAD , and FAD. Other intermediates of the pathway also affect certain enzymes
in the systems.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 7.11Dinitrophenol (DNP) is an "uncoupler" decrease? What effect would cyanide have on ATP
that makes the inner mitochondrial membrane "leaky" synthesis?
to protons. It was used until 1938 as a weight-loss
3.(Figure 7.14) Tremetol, a metabolic poison found
drug. What effect would you expect DNP to have on
in the white snake root plant, prevents the
the change in pH across the inner mitochondrial
metabolism of lactate. When cows eat this plant,
membrane? Why do you think this might be an
tremetol is concentrated in the milk they produce.
effective weight-loss drug?
Humans who consume the milk can become
2.Figure 7.12Cyanide inhibits cytochrome c seriously ill. Symptoms of this disease, which include
oxidase, a component of the electron transport chain. vomiting, abdominal pain, and tremors, become
If cyanide poisoning occurs, would you expect the pH worse after exercise. Why do you think this is the
of the intermembrane space to increase or case?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The energy currency used by cells is ________.
a. They become part of a fermentation
a. ATP pathway.
b. ADP b. They go to another pathway for ATP
c. AMP production.
d. adenosine c. They energize the entry of the acetyl group
into the citric acid cycle.
5.A reducing chemical reaction ________.
d. They are converted to NADP.
a. reduces the compound to a simpler form
b. adds an electron to the substrate 9.GTP or ATP is produced during the conversion of
c. removes a hydrogen atom from the ________.
substrate a. isocitrate into α-ketoglutarate
d. is a catabolic reaction b. succinyl CoA into succinate
c. fumarate into malate
6.During the second half of glycolysis, what occurs?
d. malate into oxaloacetate
a. ATP is used up. 10.How many NADH molecules are produced on
b. Fructose is split in two. each turn of the citric acid cycle?
c. ATP is made. a. one
d. Glucose becomes fructose. b. two
c. three
7.What is removed from pyruvate during its
d. four
conversion into an acetyl group?
a. oxygen 11.What compound receives electrons from NADH?
b. ATP
c. B vitamin a. FMN
d. carbon dioxide b. ubiquinone
+
c. cytochrome c1
8.What do the electrons added to NAD do?
d. oxygen
PAGE: 237
226 Chapter 7 | Cellular Respiration
12.Chemiosmosis involves ________. 15.Beta-oxidation is ________.
a. the movement of electrons across the cell a. the breakdown of sugars
membrane b. the assembly of sugars
b. the movement of hydrogen atoms across a c. the breakdown of fatty acids
mitochondrial membrane d. the removal of amino groups from amino
c. the movement of hydrogen ions across a acids
mitochondrial membrane
16.The effect of high levels of ADP is to ________ in
d. the movement of glucose through the cell
cellular respiration.
membrane
a. increase the activity of specific enzymes
13.Which of the following fermentation methods can b. decrease the activity of specific enzymes
occur in animal skeletal muscles? c. have no effect on the activity of specific
a. lactic acid fermentation enzymes
b. alcohol fermentation d. slow down the pathway
c. mixed acid fermentation
17.The control of which enzyme exerts the most
d. propionic fermentation
control on glycolysis?
14.A major connection for sugars in glycolysis is a. hexokinase
________. b. phosphofructokinase
a. glucose-6-phosphate c. glucose-6-phosphatase
b. fructose-1,6-bisphosphate d. aldolase
c. dihydroxyacetone phosphate
d. phosphoenolpyruvate
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
18.Why is it beneficial for cells to use ATP rather 22.How do the roles of ubiquinone and cytochrome c
than energy directly from the bonds of differ from the roles of the other components of the
carbohydrates? What are the greatest drawbacks to electron transport chain?
harnessing energy directly from the bonds of several
23.What accounts for the different number of ATP
different compounds?
molecules that are formed through cellular
19.Nearly all organisms on Earth carry out some respiration?
form of glycolysis. How does this fact support or not
24.What is the primary difference between
support the assertion that glycolysis is one of the
fermentation and anaerobic respiration?
oldest metabolic pathways?
25.Would you describe metabolic pathways as
20.Because they lose their mitochondria during
inherently wasteful or inherently economical? Why?
development, red blood cells cannot perform aerobic
respiration; however, they do perform glycolysis in 26.How does citrate from the citric acid cycle affect
the cytoplasm. Why do all cells need an energy glycolysis?
source, and what would happen if glycolysis were 27.Why might negative feedback mechanisms be
blocked in a red blood cell? more common than positive feedback mechanisms in
21.What is the primary difference between a circular living cells?
pathway and a linear pathway?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 238
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 227
8 | PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Figure 8.1 This world map shows Earth’s distribution of photosynthetic activity determined by chlorophyll a
concentrations. On land, chlorophyll is evident from terrestrial plants, and within oceanic zones, from chlorophyll
from phytoplankton. (credit: modification of work by SeaWiFS Project, NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center and
ORBIMAGE)
Chapter Outline
8.1:Overview of Photosynthesis
8.2:The Light-Dependent Reactions of Photosynthesis
8.3:Using Light Energy to Make Organic Molecules
Introduction
Themetabolicprocessesinallorganisms—frombacteriatohumans—requireenergy.Togetthisenergy,many
organisms access stored energy by eating, that is, by ingesting other organisms. But where does the stored
energy in food originate? All of this energy can be traced back to photosynthesis.
8.1 | Overview of Photosynthesis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the significance of photosynthesis to other living organisms
• Describe the main structures involved in photosynthesis
• Identify the substrates and products of photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is essential to all life on earth; both plants and animals depend on it. It is the only biological
process that can capture energy that originates from sunlight and converts it into chemical compounds
PAGE: 239
228 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
(carbohydrates) that every organism uses to power its metabolism. It is also a source of oxygen necessary for
manylivingorganisms.Inbrief,theenergyofsunlightis“captured”toenergizeelectrons,whoseenergyisthen
stored in the covalent bonds of sugar molecules. How long lasting and stable are those covalent bonds? The
energyextractedtodaybytheburningofcoalandpetroleumproductsrepresentssunlightenergycapturedand
stored by photosynthesis 350 to 200 million years ago during the Carboniferous Period.
Plants, algae, and a group of bacteria called cyanobacteria are the only organisms capable of performing
photosynthesis (Figure 8.2). Because they use light to manufacture their own food, they are called
photoautotrophs (literally,“self-feedersusinglight”).Otherorganisms,suchasanimals,fungi,andmostother
bacteria, are termed heterotrophs (“other feeders”), because they must rely on the sugars produced by
photosynthetic organisms for their energy needs. A third very interesting group of bacteria synthesize sugars,
not by using sunlight’s energy, but by extracting energy from inorganic chemical compounds. For this reason,
they are referred to aschemoautotrophs.
Figure8.2Photoautotrophsincluding(a)plants,(b)algae,and(c)cyanobacteriasynthesizetheirorganiccompounds
viaphotosynthesisusingsunlightasanenergysource.Cyanobacteriaandplanktonicalgaecangrowoverenormous
areas in water, at times completely covering the surface. In a (d) deep sea vent, chemoautotrophs, such as these
(e)thermophilicbacteria,captureenergyfrominorganiccompoundstoproduceorganiccompounds.Theecosystem
surrounding the vents has a diverse array of animals, such as tubeworms, crustaceans, and octopuses that derive
energyfromthebacteria.(credita:modificationofworkbySteveHillebrand,U.S.FishandWildlifeService;creditb:
modificationofworkby"eutrophication&hypoxia"/Flickr;creditc:modificationofworkbyNASA;creditd:Universityof
Washington,NOAA;credite:modificationofworkbyMarkAmend,WestCoastandPolarRegionsUnderseaResearch
Center, UAF, NOAA)
Theimportanceofphotosynthesisisnotjustthatitcancapturesunlight’senergy.Afterall,alizardsunningitself
onacolddaycanusethesun’senergytowarmupinaprocesscalledbehavioralthermoregulation.Incontrast,
photosynthesisisvitalbecauseitevolvedasawaytostoretheenergyfromsolarradiation(the“photo-”part)to
energyinthecarbon-carbonbondsofcarbohydratemolecules(the“-synthesis”part).Thosecarbohydratesare
theenergysourcethatheterotrophsusetopowerthesynthesisofATPviarespiration.Therefore,photosynthesis
powers 99 percent of Earth’s ecosystems. When a top predator, such as a wolf, preys on a deer (Figure 8.3),
thewolfisattheendofanenergypaththatwentfromnuclearreactionsonthesurfaceofthesun,tovisiblelight,
to photosynthesis, to vegetation, to deer, and finally to the wolf.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 240
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 229
Figure 8.3 The energy stored in carbohydrate molecules from photosynthesis passes through the food chain. The
predatorthateatsthesedeerreceivesaportionoftheenergythatoriginatedinthephotosyntheticvegetationthatthe
deer consumed. (credit: modification of work by Steve VanRiper, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
Main Structures and Summary of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis is a multi-step process that requires specific wavelengths of visible sunlight, carbon dioxide
(whichislowinenergy),andwaterassubstrates(Figure8.4).Aftertheprocessiscomplete,itreleasesoxygen
and produces glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate (GA3P), as well as simple carbohydrate molecules (high in energy)
that can then be converted into glucose, sucrose, or any of dozens of other sugar molecules. These sugar
molecules contain energy and the energized carbon that all living things need to survive.
Figure 8.4 Photosynthesis uses solar energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce energy-storing carbohydrates.
Oxygen is generated as a waste product of photosynthesis.
The following is the chemical equation for photosynthesis (Figure 8.5):
PAGE: 241
230 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
Figure 8.5 The basic equation for photosynthesis is deceptively simple. In reality, the process takes place in many
steps involving intermediate reactants and products. Glucose, the primary energy source in cells, is made from two
three-carbon GA3Ps.
Although the equation looks simple, the many steps that take place during photosynthesis are actually quite
complex. Before learning the details of how photoautotrophs turn sunlight into food, it is important to become
familiar with the structures involved.
Basic Photosynthetic Structures
In plants, photosynthesis generally takes place in leaves, which consist of several layers of cells. The process
of photosynthesis occurs in a middle layer called the mesophyll. The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and
oxygenoccursthroughsmall,regulatedopeningscalledstomata(singular:stoma),whichalsoplayrolesinthe
regulation of gas exchange and water balance. The stomata are typically located on the underside of the leaf,
which helps to minimize water loss due to high temperatures on the upper surface of the leaf. Each stoma is
flankedbyguardcellsthatregulatetheopeningandclosingofthestomatabyswellingorshrinkinginresponse
to osmotic changes.
In all autotrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside an organelle called a chloroplast. For plants,
chloroplast-containing cells exist mostly in the mesophyll. Chloroplasts have a double membrane envelope
(composedofanoutermembraneandaninnermembrane),andareancestrallyderivedfromancientfree-living
cyanobacteria. Within the chloroplast are stacked, disc-shaped structures called thylakoids. Embedded in the
thylakoidmembraneischlorophyll,apigment(moleculethatabsorbslight)responsiblefortheinitialinteraction
betweenlightandplantmaterial,andnumerousproteinsthatmakeuptheelectrontransportchain.Thethylakoid
membraneenclosesaninternalspacecalledthethylakoidlumen.AsshowninFigure8.6,astackofthylakoids
is called a granum, and the liquid-filled space surrounding the granum is called stroma or “bed” (not to be
confused with stoma or “mouth,” an opening on the leaf epidermis).
Figure8.6Photosynthesistakesplaceinchloroplasts,whichhaveanoutermembraneandaninnermembrane.
Stacks of thylakoids called grana form a third membrane layer.
Onahot,dryday,theguardcellsofplantsclosetheirstomatatoconservewater.Whatimpactwillthishave
on photosynthesis?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 242
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 231
The Two Parts of Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis takes place in two sequential stages: the light-dependent reactions and the light-independent
reactions. In the light-dependent reactions, energy from sunlight is absorbed by chlorophyll and that energy
is converted into stored chemical energy. In the light-independent reactions, the chemical energy harvested
during the light-dependent reactions drives the assembly of sugar molecules from carbon dioxide. Therefore,
although the light-independent reactions do not use light as a reactant, they require the products of the light-
dependent reactions to function. In addition, however, several enzymes of the light-independent reactions are
activatedbylight.Thelight-dependentreactionsutilizecertainmoleculestotemporarilystoretheenergy:These
arereferredtoasenergycarriers.Theenergycarriersthatmoveenergyfromlight-dependentreactionstolight-
independent reactionscanbethought ofas“full”becausetheyarerichinenergy.After theenergyisreleased,
the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dependent reaction to obtain more energy. Figure 8.7 illustrates
the components inside the chloroplast where the light-dependent and light-independent reactions take place.
Figure8.7Photosynthesistakesplaceintwostages:light-dependentreactionsandtheCalvincycle.Light-dependent
reactions,whichtakeplaceinthethylakoidmembrane,uselightenergytomakeATPandNADPH.TheCalvincycle,
which takes place in the stroma, uses energy derived from these compounds to make GA3P from CO2.
Click thelink (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/photosynthesis)to learn more about photosynthesis.
PAGE: 243
232 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis at the Grocery Store
Figure 8.8 Foods that humans consume originate from photosynthesis. (credit: Associação Brasileira de
Supermercados)
Major grocery stores in the United States are organized into departments, such as dairy, meats, produce,
bread, cereals, and so forth. Each aisle (Figure 8.8) contains hundreds, if not thousands, of different
products for customers to buy and consume.
Althoughthereisalargevariety,eachitemultimatelycanbelinkedbacktophotosynthesis.Meatsanddairy
link, because the animals were fed plant-based foods. The breads, cereals, and pastas come largely from
starchygrains,whicharetheseedsofphotosynthesis-dependentplants.Whataboutdessertsanddrinks?
All of these products contain sugar—sucrose is a plant product, a disaccharide, a carbohydrate molecule,
which is built directly from photosynthesis. Moreover, many items are less obviously derived from plants:
For instance, paper goods are generally plant products, and many plastics (abundant as products and
packaging) are derived from “algae” (unicellular plant-like organisms, and cyanobacteria). Virtually every
spice and flavoring in the spice aisle was produced by a plant as a leaf, root, bark, flower, fruit, or stem.
Ultimately, photosynthesis connects to every meal and every food a person consumes.
8.2 | The Light-Dependent Reactions of
Photosynthesis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how plants absorb energy from sunlight
• Describe short and long wavelengths of light
• Describe how and where photosynthesis takes place within a plant
How can light energy be used to make food? When a person turns on a lamp, electrical energy becomes light
energy.Likeallotherformsofkineticenergy,lightcantravel,changeform,andbeharnessedtodowork.Inthe
caseofphotosynthesis,lightenergyisconvertedintochemicalenergy,whichphotoautotrophsusetobuildbasic
carbohydrate molecules (Figure 8.9). However, autotrophs only use a few specific wavelengths of sunlight.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 244
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 233
Figure8.9Photoautotrophscancapturevisiblelightenergyinspecificwavelengthsfromthesun,convertingitintothe
chemical energy used to build food molecules. (credit: Gerry Atwell)
What Is Light Energy?
The sun emits an enormous amount of electromagnetic radiation (solar energy in a spectrum from very short
gamma rays to very long radio waves). Humans can see only a tiny fraction of this energy, which we refer to
as“visiblelight.”Themannerinwhichsolarenergytravelsisdescribedaswaves.Scientistscandeterminethe
amountofenergyofawavebymeasuringitswavelength(shorterwavelengthsaremorepowerfulthanlonger
wavelengths)—thedistancebetweenconsecutivecrestpointsofawave.Therefore,asinglewaveismeasured
from two consecutive points, such as from crest to crest or from trough to trough (Figure 8.10).
Figure8.10Thewavelengthofasinglewaveisthedistancebetweentwoconsecutivepointsofsimilarposition(two
crests or two troughs) along the wave.
Visiblelightconstitutesonlyoneofmanytypesofelectromagneticradiationemittedfromthesunandotherstars.
Scientistsdifferentiatethevarioustypesofradiantenergyfromthesunwithintheelectromagneticspectrum.The
electromagnetic spectrum is the range of all possible frequencies of radiation (Figure 8.11). The difference
between wavelengths relates to the amount of energy carried by them.
PAGE: 245
234 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
Figure 8.11 The sun emits energy in the form of electromagnetic radiation. This radiation exists at different
wavelengths, each of which has its own characteristic energy. All electromagnetic radiation, including visible light, is
characterized by its wavelength.
Each type of electromagnetic radiation travels at a particular wavelength. The longer the wavelength, the less
energy it carries. Short, tight waves carry the most energy. This may seem illogical, but think of it in terms of a
pieceofmovingheavyrope.Ittakeslittleeffortbyapersontomovearopeinlong,widewaves.Tomakearope
move in short, tight waves, a person would need to apply significantly more energy.
The electromagnetic spectrum (Figure 8.11) shows several types of electromagnetic radiation originating from
thesun,includingX-raysandultraviolet(UV)rays.Thehigher-energywavescanpenetratetissuesanddamage
cells and DNA, which explains why both X-rays and UV rays can be harmful to living organisms.
Absorption of Light
Lightenergyinitiatestheprocessofphotosynthesiswhenpigmentsabsorbspecificwavelengthsofvisiblelight.
Organic pigments, whether in the human retina or the chloroplast thylakoid, have a narrow range of energy
levels that they can absorb. Energy levels lower than those represented by red light are insufficient to raise an
orbital electron to a excited (quantum) state. Energy levels higher than those in blue light will physically tear
the molecules apart, in a process called bleaching. Our retinal pigments can only “see” (absorb) wavelengths
between 700 nm and 400 nm of light, a spectrum that is therefore called visible light. For the same reasons,
plants, pigment molecules absorb only light in the wavelength range of 700 nm to 400 nm; plant physiologists
refer to this range for plants as photosynthetically active radiation.
The visible light seen by humans as white light actually exists in a rainbow of colors. Certain objects, such as
a prism or a drop of water, disperse white light to reveal the colors to the human eye. The visible light portion
of the electromagnetic spectrum shows the rainbow of colors, with violet and blue having shorter wavelengths,
andthereforehigherenergy.Attheotherendofthespectrumtowardred,thewavelengthsarelongerandhave
lower energy (Figure 8.12).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 246
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 235
Figure8.12Thecolorsofvisiblelightdonotcarrythesameamountofenergy.Violethastheshortestwavelengthand
therefore carries the most energy, whereas red has the longest wavelength and carries the least amount of energy.
(credit: modification of work by NASA)
Understanding Pigments
Differentkindsofpigmentsexist,andeachabsorbsonlyspecificwavelengths(colors)ofvisiblelight.Pigments
reflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, making them appear a mixture of the reflected or
transmitted light colors.
Chlorophylls and carotenoids are the two major classes of photosynthetic pigments found in plants and algae;
eachclasshasmultipletypesofpigmentmolecules.Therearefivemajorchlorophylls:a,b,canddandarelated
moleculefoundinprokaryotescalledbacteriochlorophyll.Chlorophyllaandchlorophyllbarefoundinhigher
plant chloroplasts and will be the focus of the following discussion.
With dozens of different forms, carotenoids are a much larger group of pigments. The carotenoids found in
fruit—such as the red of tomato (lycopene), the yellow of corn seeds (zeaxanthin), or the orange of an orange
peel (β-carotene)—are used as advertisements to attract seed dispersers. In photosynthesis, carotenoids
functionasphotosyntheticpigmentsthatareveryefficientmoleculesforthedisposalofexcessenergy.Whena
leafisexposedtofullsun,thelight-dependentreactionsarerequiredtoprocessanenormousamountofenergy;
if that energy is not handled properly, it can do significant damage. Therefore, many carotenoids reside in the
thylakoid membrane, absorb excess energy, and safely dissipate that energy as heat.
Each type of pigment can be identified by the specific pattern of wavelengths it absorbs from visible light: This
is termed the absorption spectrum. The graph in Figure 8.13 shows the absorption spectra for chlorophyll
a, chlorophyll b, and a type of carotenoid pigment called β-carotene (which absorbs blue and green light).
Notice how each pigment has a distinct set of peaks and troughs, revealing a highly specific pattern of
absorption. Chlorophyll a absorbs wavelengths from either end of the visible spectrum (blue and red), but not
green. Because green is reflected or transmitted, chlorophyll appears green. Carotenoids absorb in the short-
wavelength blue region, and reflect the longer yellow, red, and orange wavelengths.
PAGE: 247
236 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
Figure 8.13 (a) Chlorophyll a, (b) chlorophyll b, and (c) β-carotene are hydrophobic organic pigments found in
the thylakoid membrane. Chlorophyll a and b, which are identical except for the part indicated in the red box, are
responsibleforthegreencolorofleaves.β-caroteneisresponsiblefortheorangecolorincarrots.Eachpigmenthas
(d) a unique absorbance spectrum.
Many photosynthetic organisms have a mixture of pigments, and by using these pigments, the organism can
absorbenergyfromawiderrangeofwavelengths.Notallphotosyntheticorganismshavefullaccesstosunlight.
Some organisms grow underwater where light intensity and quality decrease and change with depth. Other
organismsgrowincompetitionforlight.Plantsontherainforestfloormustbeabletoabsorbanybitoflightthat
comes through, because the taller trees absorb most of the sunlight and scatter the remaining solar radiation
(Figure 8.14).
Figure 8.14 Plants that commonly grow in the shade have adapted to low levels of light by changing the relative
concentrations of their chlorophyll pigments. (credit: Jason Hollinger)
Whenstudyingaphotosyntheticorganism,scientistscandeterminethetypesofpigmentspresentbygenerating
absorption spectra. An instrument called a spectrophotometer can differentiate which wavelengths of light a
substance can absorb. Spectrophotometers measure transmitted light and compute from it the absorption. By
extracting pigments from leaves and placing these samples into a spectrophotometer, scientists can identify
which wavelengths of light an organism can absorb. Additional methods for the identification of plant pigments
includevarioustypesofchromatographythatseparatethepigmentsbytheirrelativeaffinitiestosolidandmobile
phases.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 248
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 237
How Light-Dependent Reactions Work
The overall function of light-dependent reactions is to convert solar energy into chemical energy in the form
of NADPH and ATP. This chemical energy supports the light-independent reactions and fuels the assembly of
sugar molecules. The light-dependent reactions are depicted in Figure 8.15. Protein complexes and pigment
molecules work together to produce NADPH and ATP. The numbering of the photosystems is derived from the
order in which they were discovered, not in the order of the transfer of electrons.
Figure 8.15 A photosystem consists of 1) a light-harvesting complex and 2) a reaction center. Pigments in the light-
harvesting complex pass light energy to two special chlorophyll a molecules in the reaction center. The light excites
anelectronfromthechlorophyllapair,whichpassestotheprimaryelectronacceptor.Theexcitedelectronmustthen
bereplaced.In(a)photosystemII,theelectroncomesfromthesplittingofwater,whichreleasesoxygenasawaste
product. In (b) photosystem I, the electron comes from the chloroplast electron transport chain discussed below.
The actual step that converts light energy into chemical energy takes place in a multiprotein complex called a
photosystem,twotypesofwhicharefoundembeddedinthethylakoidmembrane:photosystemII(PSII)and
photosystem I (PSI) (Figure 8.16). The two complexes differ on the basis of what they oxidize (that is, the
sourceofthelow-energyelectronsupply)andwhattheyreduce(theplacetowhichtheydelivertheirenergized
electrons).
Both photosystems have the same basic structure; a number of antenna proteins to which the chlorophyll
moleculesareboundsurroundthereactioncenterwherethephotochemistrytakesplace.Eachphotosystemis
servicedbythelight-harvestingcomplex,whichpassesenergyfromsunlighttothereactioncenter;itconsists
ofmultipleantennaproteinsthatcontainamixtureof300to400chlorophyllaandbmoleculesaswellasother
pigments like carotenoids. The absorption of a single photon or distinct quantity or “packet” of light by any of
the chlorophylls pushes that molecule into an excited state. In short, the light energy has now been captured
PAGE: 249
238 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
by biological molecules but is not stored in any useful form yet. The energy is transferred from chlorophyll to
chlorophyll until eventually (after about a millionth of a second), it is delivered to the reaction center. Up to this
point, only energy has been transferred between molecules, not electrons.
Figure 8.16 In the photosystem II (PSII) reaction center, energy from sunlight is used to extract electrons from
water.TheelectronstravelthroughthechloroplastelectrontransportchaintophotosystemI(PSI),whichreduces
NADP+toNADPH.Theelectrontransportchainmovesprotonsacrossthethylakoidmembraneintothelumen.At
thesametime,splittingofwateraddsprotonstothelumen,andreductionofNADPHremovesprotonsfromthe
stroma. The net result is a low pH in the thylakoid lumen, and a high pH in the stroma. ATP synthase uses this
electrochemical gradient to make ATP.
What is the initial source of electrons for the chloroplast electron transport chain?
a. water
b. oxygen
c. carbon dioxide
d. NADPH
The reaction center contains a pair of chlorophyll a molecules with a special property. Those two chlorophylls
can undergo oxidation upon excitation; they can actually give up an electron in aprocess called a photoact. It
isatthisstepinthereactioncenterduringphotosynthesisthatlightenergyisconvertedintoanexcitedelectron.
AllofthesubsequentstepsinvolvegettingthatelectronontotheenergycarrierNADPHfordeliverytotheCalvin
cycle where the electron is deposited onto carbon for long-term storage in the form of a carbohydrate. PSII
and PSI are two major components of the photosynthetic electron transport chain, which also includes the
cytochrome complex. The cytochrome complex, an enzyme composed of two protein complexes, transfers the
electrons from the carrier molecule plastoquinone (Pq) to the protein plastocyanin (Pc), thus enabling both the
transfer of protons across the thylakoid membrane and the transfer of electrons from PSII to PSI.
The reaction center of PSII (called P680) delivers its high-energy electrons, one at the time, to the primary
electron acceptor, and through the electron transport chain (Pq to cytochrome complex to plastocyanine) to
PSI. P680’s missing electron is replaced by extracting a low-energy electron from water; thus, water is “split”
during this stage of photosynthesis, and PSII is re-reduced after every photoact. Splitting one H2O molecule
releases two electrons, two hydrogen atoms, and one atom of oxygen. However, splitting two molecules is
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 250
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 239
requiredtoformonemoleculeofdiatomicO2gas.About10percentoftheoxygenisusedbymitochondriainthe
leaftosupportoxidativephosphorylation.Theremainderescapestotheatmospherewhereitisusedbyaerobic
organisms to support respiration.
AselectronsmovethroughtheproteinsthatresidebetweenPSIIandPSI,theyloseenergy.Thisenergyisused
tomovehydrogenatomsfromthestromalsideofthemembranetothethylakoidlumen.Thosehydrogenatoms,
plus the ones produced by splitting water, accumulate in the thylakoid lumen and will be used synthesize ATP
inalaterstep.BecausetheelectronshavelostenergypriortotheirarrivalatPSI,theymustbere-energizedby
PSI, hence, another photon is absorbed by the PSI antenna. That energy is relayed to the PSI reaction center
+
(calledP700).P700isoxidizedandsendsahigh-energyelectrontoNADP toformNADPH.Thus,PSIIcaptures
+
theenergytocreateprotongradientstomakeATP,andPSIcapturestheenergytoreduceNADP intoNADPH.
Thetwophotosystemsworkinconcert,inpart,toguaranteethattheproductionofNADPHwillroughlyequalthe
production of ATP. Other mechanisms exist to fine-tune that ratio to exactly match the chloroplast’s constantly
changing energy needs.
Generating an Energy Carrier: ATP
As in the intermembrane space of the mitochondria during cellular respiration, the buildup of hydrogen ions
inside the thylakoid lumen creates a concentration gradient. The passive diffusion of hydrogen ions from high
concentration(inthethylakoidlumen)tolowconcentration(inthestroma)isharnessedtocreateATP,justasin
the electron transport chain of cellular respiration. The ions build up energy because of diffusion and because
they all have the same electrical charge, repelling each other.
Toreleasethisenergy,hydrogenionswillrushthroughanyopening,similartowaterjettingthroughaholeina
dam.Inthethylakoid,thatopeningisapassagethroughaspecializedproteinchannelcalledtheATPsynthase.
The energy released by the hydrogen ion stream allows ATP synthase to attach a third phosphate group to
ADP, which forms a molecule of ATP (Figure 8.16). The flow of hydrogen ions through ATP synthase is called
chemiosmosis because the ions move from an area of high to an area of low concentration through a semi-
permeable structure of the thylakoid.
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/light_reactions) and click through the animation to view the
process of photosynthesis within a leaf.
8.3 | Using Light Energy to Make Organic Molecules
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the Calvin cycle
• Define carbon fixation
• Explain how photosynthesis works in the energy cycle of all living organisms
After the energy from the sun is converted into chemical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH
molecules, the cell has the fuel needed to build carbohydrate molecules for long-term energy storage. The
productsofthelight-dependentreactions,ATPandNADPH,havelifespansintherangeofmillionthsofseconds,
whereastheproductsofthelight-independentreactions(carbohydratesandotherformsofreducedcarbon)can
survivealmostindefinitely.Thecarbohydratemoleculesmadewillhaveabackboneofcarbonatoms.Butwhere
does the carbon come from? It comes from carbon dioxide—the gas that is a waste product of respiration in
microbes, fungi, plants, and animals.
PAGE: 251
240 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
The Calvin Cycle
Inplants,carbondioxide(CO2)enterstheleavesthroughstomata,whereitdiffusesovershortdistancesthrough
intercellularspacesuntilitreachesthemesophyllcells.Onceinthemesophyllcells,CO2diffusesintothestroma
of the chloroplast—the site of light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. These reactions actually have
several names associated with them. Another term, the Calvin cycle, is named for the man who discovered
it, and because these reactions function as a cycle. Others call it the Calvin-Benson cycle to include the name
of another scientist involved in its discovery. The most outdated name is “dark reaction,” because light is not
directlyrequired(Figure8.17).However,thetermdarkreactioncanbemisleadingbecauseitimpliesincorrectly
that the reaction only occurs at night or is independent of light, which is why most scientists and instructors no
longer use it.
Figure8.17Lightreactionsharnessenergyfromthesuntoproducechemicalbonds,ATP,andNADPH.Theseenergy-
carrying molecules are made in the stroma where carbon fixation takes place.
Thelight-independentreactionsoftheCalvincyclecanbeorganizedintothreebasicstages:fixation,reduction,
and regeneration.
Stage 1: Fixation
Inthestroma,inadditiontoCO2,twoothercomponentsarepresenttoinitiatethelight-independentreactions:an
enzyme called ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), and three molecules of ribulose
bisphosphate (RuBP), as shown inFigure 8.18. RuBP has five atoms of carbon, flanked by two phosphates.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 252
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 241
Figure8.18TheCalvincyclehasthreestages.Instage1,theenzymeRuBisCOincorporatescarbondioxideinto
anorganicmolecule,3-PGA.Instage2,theorganicmoleculeisreducedusingelectronssuppliedbyNADPH.In
stage3,RuBP,themoleculethatstartsthecycle,isregeneratedsothatthecyclecancontinue.Onlyonecarbon
dioxidemoleculeisincorporatedatatime,sothecyclemustbecompletedthreetimestoproduceasinglethree-
carbon GA3P molecule, and six times to produce a six-carbon glucose molecule.
Which of the following statements is true?
a. In photosynthesis, oxygen, carbon dioxide, ATP, and NADPH are reactants. GA3P and water are
products.
b. In photosynthesis, chlorophyll, water, and carbon dioxide are reactants. GA3P and oxygen are
products.
c. In photosynthesis, water, carbon dioxide, ATP, and NADPH are reactants. RuBP and oxygen are
products.
d. In photosynthesis, water and carbon dioxide are reactants. GA3P and oxygen are products.
RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO2 and RuBP. For each CO2 molecule that reacts with one RuBP,
two molecules of another compound 3-phospho glyceric acid (3-PGA) form. PGA has three carbons and one
phosphate. Each turn of the cycle involves only one RuBP and one carbon dioxide and forms two molecules
of 3-PGA. The number of carbon atoms remains the same, as the atoms move to form new bonds during the
reactions(3Catomsfrom3CO2+15Catomsfrom3RuBP=18Catomsin6moleculesof3-PGA).Thisprocess
is calledcarbonfixation, because CO2is “fixed” from an inorganic form into organic molecules.
Stage 2: Reduction
ATP and NADPH are used to convert the six molecules of 3-PGA into six molecules of a chemical called
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). That is a reduction reaction because it involves the gain of electrons by
3-PGA.(Recallthatareductionisthegainofanelectronbyanatomormolecule.)SixmoleculesofbothATP
and NADPH are used. For ATP, energy is released with the loss of the terminal phosphate atom, converting
+
it into ADP; for NADPH, both energy and a hydrogen atom are lost, converting it into NADP . Both of these
molecules return to the nearby light-dependent reactions to be reused and re-energized.
Stage 3: Regeneration
Interestingly, at this point, only one of the G3P molecules leaves the Calvin cycle and is sent to the cytoplasm
to contribute to the formation of other compounds needed by the plant. Because the G3P exported from the
chloroplasthasthreecarbonatoms,ittakesthree“turns”oftheCalvincycletofixenoughnetcarbontoexport
oneG3P.ButeachturnmakestwoG3Ps,thusthreeturnsmakesixG3Ps.Oneisexportedwhiletheremaining
fiveG3PmoleculesremaininthecycleandareusedtoregenerateRuBP,whichenablesthesystemtoprepare
for more CO2to be fixed. Three more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration reactions.
PAGE: 253
242 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
This link (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/calvin_cycle) leads to an animation of the Calvin cycle. Click stage
1, stage 2, and then stage 3 to see G3P and ATP regenerate to form RuBP.
Photosynthesis
During the evolution of photosynthesis, a major shift occurred from the bacterial type of photosynthesis
that involves only one photosystem and is typically anoxygenic (does not generate oxygen) into modern
oxygenic (does generate oxygen) photosynthesis, employing two photosystems. This modern oxygenic
photosynthesis is used by many organisms—from giant tropical leaves in the rainforest to tiny
cyanobacterial cells—and the process and components of this photosynthesis remain largely the same.
Photosystemsabsorblightanduseelectrontransportchainstoconvertenergyintothechemicalenergyof
ATP and NADH. The subsequent light-independent reactions then assemble carbohydrate molecules with
this energy.
In the harsh dry heat of the desert, plants must conserve every drop of water must be used to survive.
Because stomata must open to allow for the uptake of CO2, water escapes from the leaf during active
photosynthesis. Desert plants have evolved processes to conserve water and deal with harsh conditions.
MechanismstocaptureandstoreCO2allowsplantstoadapttolivingwithlesswater.Someplantssuchas
cacti(Figure8.19)canpreparematerialsforphotosynthesisduringthenightbyatemporarycarbonfixation/
storage process, because opening the stomata at this time conserves water due to cooler temperatures.
During the day cacti use the captured CO2for photosynthesis, and keep their stomata closed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 254
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 243
Figure 8.19 The harsh conditions of the desert have led plants like these cacti to evolve variations of the light-
independentreactionsofphotosynthesis.Thesevariationsincreasetheefficiencyofwaterusage,helpingtoconserve
water and energy. (credit: PiotrWojtkowski)
The Energy Cycle
Whether the organism is a bacterium, plant, or animal, all living things access energy by breaking down
carbohydrate and other carbon-rich organic molecules. But if plants make carbohydrate molecules, why would
theyneedtobreakthemdown,especiallywhenithasbeenshownthatthegasorganismsreleaseasa“waste
product” (CO2) acts as a substrate for the formation of more food in photosynthesis? Remember, living things
need energy to perform life functions. In addition, an organism can either make its own food or eat another
organism—either way, the food still needs to be broken down. Finally, in the process of breaking down food,
called cellular respiration, heterotrophs release needed energy and produce “waste” in the form of CO2gas.
However, in nature, there is no such thing as “waste.” Every single atom of matter and energy is conserved,
recycled over and over infinitely. Substances change form or move from one type of molecule to another, but
their constituent atoms never disappear (Figure 8.20).
In reality, CO2 is no more a form of waste than oxygen is wasteful to photosynthesis. Both are byproducts
of reactions that move on to other reactions. Photosynthesis absorbs light energy to build carbohydrates in
chloroplasts, and aerobic cellular respiration releases energy by using oxygen to metabolize carbohydrates in
thecytoplasmandmitochondria.Bothprocessesuseelectrontransportchainstocapturetheenergynecessary
to drive other reactions. These two powerhouse processes, photosynthesis and cellular respiration, function in
biological,cyclicalharmonytoalloworganismstoaccesslife-sustainingenergythatoriginatesmillionsofmiles
away in a burning star humans call the sun.
PAGE: 255
244 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
Figure 8.20 Photosynthesis consumes carbon dioxide and produces oxygen. Aerobic respiration consumes oxygen
andproducescarbondioxide.Thesetwoprocessesplayanimportantroleinthecarboncycle.(credit:modificationof
work by Stuart Bassil)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 256
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 245
KEY TERMS
absorption spectrum range of wavelengths of electromagnetic radiation absorbed by a given substance
antenna protein pigment molecule that directly absorbs light and transfers the energy absorbed to other
pigment molecules
Calvin cycle light-independent reactions of photosynthesis that convert carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
into carbohydrates using the energy and reducing power of ATP and NADPH
carbon fixation process of converting inorganic CO2gas into organic compounds
carotenoid photosynthetic pigment (yellow-orange-red) that functions to dispose of excess energy
chemoautotroph organism that can build organic molecules using energy derived from inorganic chemicals
instead of sunlight
chlorophylla form of chlorophyll that absorbs violet-blue and red light and consequently has a bluish-green
color;theonlypigmentmoleculethatperformsthephotochemistrybygettingexcitedandlosinganelectron
to the electron transport chain
chlorophyllb accessory pigment that absorbs blue and red-orange light and consequently has a yellowish-
green tint
chloroplast organelle in which photosynthesis takes place
cytochrome complex group of reversibly oxidizable and reducible proteins that forms part of the electron
transport chain between photosystem II and photosystem I
electromagnetic spectrum range of all possible frequencies of radiation
electron transport chain group of proteins between PSII and PSI that pass energized electrons and use the
energy released by the electrons to move hydrogen ions against their concentration gradient into the
thylakoid lumen
granum stack of thylakoids located inside a chloroplast
heterotroph organism that consumes organic substances or other organisms for food
light harvesting complex complex that passes energy from sunlight to the reaction center in each
photosystem;itconsistsofmultipleantennaproteinsthatcontainamixtureof300to400chlorophyllaand
bmolecules as well as other pigments like carotenoids
light-dependent reaction first stage of photosynthesis where certain wavelengths of the visible light are
absorbed to form two energy-carrying molecules (ATP and NADPH)
light-independent reaction second stage of photosynthesis, through which carbon dioxide is used to build
carbohydrate molecules using energy from ATP and NADPH
mesophyll middle layer of chlorophyll-rich cells in a leaf
P680 reaction center of photosystem II
P700 reaction center of photosystem I
photoact ejection of an electron from a reaction center using the energy of an absorbed photon
photoautotroph organism capable of producing its own organic compounds from sunlight
photon distinct quantity or “packet” of light energy
photosystem groupofproteins,chlorophyll,andotherpigmentsthatareusedinthelight-dependentreactions
of photosynthesis to absorb light energy and convert it into chemical energy
PAGE: 257
246 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
photosystem I integralpigmentandproteincomplexinthylakoidmembranesthatuseslightenergytotransport
+
electrons from plastocyanin to NADP (which becomes reduced to NADPH in the process)
photosystem II integral protein and pigment complex in thylakoid membranes that transports electrons from
water to the electron transport chain; oxygen is a product of PSII
pigment molecule that is capable of absorbing certain wavelengths of light and reflecting others (which
accounts for its color)
primary electron acceptor pigmentorotherorganicmoleculeinthereactioncenterthatacceptsanenergized
electron from the reaction center
reaction center complex of chlorophyll molecules and other organic molecules that is assembled around a
specialpairofchlorophyllmoleculesandaprimaryelectronacceptor;capableofundergoingoxidationand
reduction
reduction gain of electron(s) by an atom or molecule
spectrophotometer instrument that can measure transmitted light and compute the absorption
stoma opening that regulates gas exchange and water evaporation between leaves and the environment,
typically situated on the underside of leaves
stroma fluid-filled space surrounding the grana inside a chloroplast where the light-independent reactions of
photosynthesis take place
thylakoid disc-shaped,membrane-boundstructureinsideachloroplastwherethelight-dependentreactionsof
photosynthesis take place; stacks of thylakoids are called grana
thylakoid lumen aqueousspaceboundbyathylakoidmembranewhereprotonsaccumulateduringlight-driven
electron transport
wavelength distance between consecutive points of equal position (two crests or two troughs) of a wave in a
graphic representation; inversely proportional to the energy of the radiation
CHAPTER SUMMARY
8.1Overview of Photosynthesis
The process of photosynthesis transformed life on Earth. By harnessing energy from the sun, the evolution of
photosynthesis allowed living things access to enormous amounts of energy. Because of photosynthesis, living
things gained access to sufficient energy that allowed them to build new structures and achieve the biodiversity
evident today.
Only certain organisms (photoautotrophs), can perform photosynthesis; they require the presence of
chlorophyll, a specialized pigment that absorbs certain wavelengths of the visible spectrum and can capture
energy from sunlight. Photosynthesis uses carbon dioxide and water to assemble carbohydrate molecules and
release oxygen as a byproduct into the atmosphere. Eukaryotic autotrophs, such as plants and algae, have
organelles called chloroplasts in which photosynthesis takes place, and starch accumulates. In prokaryotes,
such as cyanobacteria, the process is less localized and occurs within folded membranes, extensions of the
plasma membrane, and in the cytoplasm.
8.2The Light-Dependent Reactions of Photosynthesis
The pigments of the first part of photosynthesis, the light-dependent reactions, absorb energy from sunlight. A
photon strikes the antenna pigments of photosystem II to initiate photosynthesis. The energy travels to the
reaction center that contains chlorophyllaand then to the electron transport chain, which pumps hydrogen ions
into the thylakoid interior. This action builds up a high concentration of hydrogen ions. The hydrogen ions flow
through ATP synthase during chemiosmosis to form molecules of ATP, which are used for the formation of
sugar molecules in the second stage of photosynthesis. Photosystem I absorbs a second photon, which results
in the formation of an NADPH molecule, another energy and reducing carrier for the light-independent
reactions.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 258
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 247
8.3Using Light Energy to Make Organic Molecules
Using the energy carriers formed in the first steps of photosynthesis, the light-independent reactions, or the
Calvin cycle, take in CO2from the atmosphere. An enzyme, RuBisCO, catalyzes a reaction with CO2and
another organic compound, RuBP. After three cycles, a three-carbon molecule of G3P leaves the cycle to
become part of a carbohydrate molecule. The remaining G3P molecules stay in the cycle to be regenerated
into RuBP, which is then ready to react with more CO2. Photosynthesis forms an energy cycle with the process
of cellular respiration. Because plants contain both chloroplasts and mitochondria, they rely upon both
photosynthesis and respiration for their ability to function in both the light and dark, and to be able to
interconvert essential metabolites.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 8.6On a hot, dry day, plants close their a. In photosynthesis, oxygen, carbon dioxide,
stomata to conserve water. What impact will this ATP, and NADPH are reactants. G3P and
have on photosynthesis? water are products.
b. In photosynthesis, chlorophyll, water, and
2.Figure 8.16What is the source of electrons for the
carbon dioxide are reactants. G3P and
chloroplast electron transport chain?
oxygen are products.
a. Water
c. In photosynthesis, water, carbon dioxide,
b. Oxygen
ATP, and NADPH are reactants. RuBP and
c. Carbon dioxide
oxygen are products.
d. NADPH
d. In photosynthesis, water and carbon dioxide
3.Figure 8.18Which of the following statements is are reactants. G3P and oxygen are
true? products.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following components isnotused by independent enzymes developed a mutation that
both plants and cyanobacteria to carry out prevented them from activating in response to light.
photosynthesis?
a. chloroplasts a. GA3P accumulation
b. chlorophyll b. ATP and NADPH accumulation
c. carbon dioxide c. Water accumulation
d. water d. Carbon dioxide depletion
5.What two main products result from 9.How are the NADPH and GA3P molecules made
photosynthesis? during photosynthesis similar?
a. oxygen and carbon dioxide a. They are both end products of
b. chlorophyll and oxygen photosynthesis.
c. sugars/carbohydrates and oxygen b. They are both substrates for
d. sugars/carbohydrates and carbon dioxide photosynthesis.
c. They are both produced from carbon
6.In which compartment of the plant cell do the light-
dioxide.
independent reactions of photosynthesis take place?
d. They both store energy in chemical bonds.
a. thylakoid 10.Which of the following structures isnota
b. stroma component of a photosystem?
c. outer membrane a. ATP synthase
d. mesophyll b. antenna molecule
c. reaction center
7.Which statement about thylakoids in eukaryotes is
d. primary electron acceptor
notcorrect?
a. Thylakoids are assembled into stacks. 11.How many photons does it take to fully reduce
b. Thylakoids exist as a maze of folded one molecule of NADP + to NADPH?
membranes. a. 1
c. The space surrounding thylakoids is called b. 2
stroma. c. 4
d. Thylakoids contain chlorophyll. d. 8
8.Predict the end result if a chloroplast’s light-
PAGE: 259
248 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
12.Which complex isnotinvolved in the place?
establishment of conditions for ATP synthesis? a. RuBisCO
b. RuBP
a. photosystem I c. 3-PGA
b. ATP synthase d. CO2
c. photosystem II
17.Which order of molecular conversions is correct
d. cytochrome complex
for the Calvin cycle?
13.From which component of the light-dependent a. RuBP + G3P → 3-PGA → sugar
reactions does NADPH form most directly?
b. RuBisCO → CO → RuBP → G3P
a. photosystem II 2
b. photosystem I c. RuBP + CO → [RuBisCO] 3-PGA → G3P
2
c. cytochrome complex d. CO → 3-PGA → RuBP → G3P
d. ATP synthase 2
18.Where in eukaryotic cells does the Calvin cycle
14.Three of the same species of plant are each
take place?
grown under a different colored light for the same
a. thylakoid membrane
amount of time. Plant A is grown under blue light,
b. thylakoid lumen
Plant B is grown under green light, and Plant C is
c. chloroplast stroma
grown under orange light. Assuming the plants use
d. granum
only chlorophyllaand chlorophyllbfor
photosynthesis, what would be the predicted order of 19.Which statement correctly describes carbon
the plants from most growth to least growth? fixation?
a. the conversion of CO2into an organic
a. A, C, B compound
b. A, B, C b. the use of RuBisCO to form 3-PGA
c. C, A, B c. the production of carbohydrate molecules
d. B, A, C from G3P
d. the formation of RuBP from G3P molecules
15.Plants containing only chlorophyllbare exposed
to radiation with the following wavelengths: 10nm (x-
e. the use of ATP and NADPH to reduce CO2
rays), 450nm (blue light), 670nm (red light), and 20.If four molecules of carbon dioxide enter the
800nm (infrared light). Which plants harness the Calvin cycle (four “turns” of the cycle), how many
most energy for photosynthesis? G3P molecules are produced and how many are
a. X-ray irradiated plants exported?
b. Blue light irradiated plants a. 4 G3P made, 1 G3P exported
c. Red light irradiated plants b. 4 G3P made, 2 G3P exported
d. Infrared irradiated plants c. 8 G3P made, 1 G3P exported
16.Which molecule must enter the Calvin cycle d. 8 G3P made, 4 G3P exported
continually for the light-independent reactions to take
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
21.What is the overall outcome of the light reactions 27.What are the roles of ATP and NADPH in
in photosynthesis? photosynthesis?
22.Why are carnivores, such as lions, dependent on 28.How and why would the end products of
photosynthesis to survive? photosynthesis be changed if a plant had a mutation
that eliminated its photosystem II complex?
23.Why are energy carriers thought of as either “full”
or “empty”? 29.Why is the third stage of the Calvin cycle called
the regeneration stage?
24.Describe how the grey wolf population would be
impacted by a volcanic eruption that spewed a dense 30.Which part of the light-independent reactions
ash cloud that blocked sunlight in a section of would be affected if a cell could not produce the
Yellowstone National Park. enzyme RuBisCO?
25.How does the closing of the stomata limit 31.Why does it take three turns of the Calvin cycle to
photosynthesis? produce G3P, the initial product of photosynthesis?
26.Describe the pathway of electron transfer from 32.Imagine a sealed terrarium containing a plant and
photosystem II to photosystem I in light-dependent a beetle. How does each organism provide resources
reactions. for the other? Could each organism survive if it was
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 260
Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis 249
the only living thing in the terrarium? Why or why nutrients in a closed, sunny ecosystem consisting of
not? a giraffe and a tree.
33.Compare the flow of energy with the flow of
PAGE: 261
250 Chapter 8 | Photosynthesis
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 262
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 251
9 | CELL
COMMUNICATION
Figure9.1Haveyoueverbecomeseparatedfromafriendwhileinacrowd?Ifso,youknowthechallengeofsearching
for someone when surrounded by thousands of other people. If you and your friend have cell phones, your chances
offindingeachotheraregood.Cellphonenetworksusevariousmethodsofencodingtoensurethatthesignalsreach
theirintendedrecipientswithoutinterference.Similarly,cellsmustcommunicateusingspecificsignalsandreceptorsto
ensure that messages are clear. (credit: modification of work by Vincent and Bella Productions)
Chapter Outline
9.1:Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
9.2:Propagation of the Signal
9.3:Response to the Signal
9.4:Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
Introduction
Imagine what life would be like if you and the people around you could not communicate. You would not be
able to express your wishes to others, nor could you ask questions about your location. Social organization is
dependentoncommunicationbetweentheindividualsthatcomprisethatsociety;withoutcommunication,society
would fall apart.
As with people, it is vital for individual cells to be able to interact with their environment. This is true for both a
one-celled organism growing in a puddle and a large animal living on a savanna. In order to properly respond
to external stimuli, cells have developed complex mechanisms of communication that can receive a message,
transfertheinformationacrosstheplasmamembrane,andthenproducechangeswithinthecellinresponseto
the message.
In multicellular organisms, cells send and receive chemical messages constantly to coordinate the actions of
distantorgans,tissues,andcells.Theabilitytosendmessagesquicklyandefficientlyenablescellstocoordinate
and fine-tune their functions.
PAGE: 263
252 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Whilethenecessityforcellularcommunicationinlargerorganismsseemsobvious,evensingle-celledorganisms
communicate with each other. Yeast cells signal each other to aid in finding other yeast cells for reproduction.
Some forms of bacteria coordinate their actions in order to form large complexes called biofilms or to organize
the production of toxins to remove competing organisms. The ability of cells to communicate through chemical
signalsoriginatedinsinglecellsandwasessentialfortheevolutionofmulticellularorganisms.Theefficientand
relatively error-free function of communication systems is vital for all life as we know it.
9.1 | Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe four types of signaling mechanisms found in multicellular organisms
• Compare internal receptors with cell-surface receptors
• Recognize the relationship between a ligand’s structure and its mechanism of action
There are two kinds of communication in the world of living cells. Communication between cells is called
intercellular signaling, and communication within a cell is called intracellular signaling. An easy way to
remember the distinction is by understanding the Latin origin of the prefixes: inter- means "between" (for
example, intersecting lines are those that cross each other) andintra-means "inside" (as in intravenous).
Chemicalsignalsarereleasedbysignalingcellsintheformofsmall,usuallyvolatileorsolublemoleculescalled
ligands. A ligand is a molecule that binds another specific molecule, in some cases, delivering a signal in the
process. Ligands can thus be thought of as signaling molecules. Ligands interact with proteins in target cells,
which are cells that are affected by chemical signals; these proteins are also called receptors. Ligands and
receptors exist in several varieties; however, a specific ligand will have a specific receptor that typically binds
only that ligand.
Forms of Signaling
Therearefourcategoriesofchemicalsignalingfoundinmulticellularorganisms:paracrinesignaling,endocrine
signaling, autocrine signaling, and direct signaling across gap junctions (Figure 9.2). The main difference
betweenthedifferentcategoriesofsignalingisthedistancethatthesignaltravelsthroughtheorganismtoreach
the target cell. We should note here that not all cells are affected by the same signals.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 264
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 253
Figure 9.2 In chemical signaling, a cell may target itself (autocrine signaling), a cell connected by gap junctions,
a nearby cell (paracrine signaling), or a distant cell (endocrine signaling). Paracrine signaling acts on nearby cells,
endocrinesignalingusesthecirculatorysystemtotransportligands,andautocrinesignalingactsonthesignalingcell.
Signaling via gap junctions involves signaling molecules moving directly between adjacent cells.
Paracrine Signaling
Signals that act locally between cells that are close together are called paracrine signals. Paracrine signals
movebydiffusionthroughtheextracellularmatrix.Thesetypesofsignalsusuallyelicitquickresponsesthatlast
only a short period of time. In order to keep the response localized, paracrine ligand molecules are normally
quickly degraded by enzymes or removed by neighboring cells. Removing the signals will reestablish the
concentrationgradientforthesignal,allowingthemtoquicklydiffusethroughtheintracellularspaceifreleased
again.
One example of paracrine signaling is the transfer of signals across synapses between nerve cells. A nerve
cell consists of a cell body, several short, branched extensions called dendrites that receive stimuli, and a long
extension called an axon, which transmits signals to other nerve cells or muscle cells. The junction between
nerve cells where signal transmission occurs is called a synapse. A synaptic signal is a chemical signal that
travels between nerve cells. Signals within the nerve cells are propagated by fast-moving electrical impulses.
When these impulses reach the end of the axon, the signal continues on to a dendrite of the next cell by the
release of chemical ligands called neurotransmitters from the presynaptic cell (the cell emitting the signal).
Theneurotransmittersaretransportedacrosstheverysmalldistances(20–40nanometers)betweennervecells,
whicharecalledchemicalsynapses(Figure9.3).Thesmalldistancebetweennervecellsallowsthesignalto
travel quickly; this enables an immediate response, such as, "Take your hand off the stove!"
When the neurotransmitter binds the receptor on the surface of the postsynaptic cell, the electrochemical
potential of the target cell changes, and the next electrical impulse is launched. The neurotransmitters that are
released into the chemical synapse are degraded quickly or get reabsorbed by the presynaptic cell so that the
recipient nerve cell can recover quickly and be prepared to respond rapidly to the next synaptic signal.
PAGE: 265
254 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure 9.3 The distance between the presynaptic cell and the postsynaptic cell—called the synaptic gap—is very
small and allows for rapid diffusion of the neurotransmitter. Enzymes in the synapatic gap degrade some types of
neurotransmitters to terminate the signal.
Endocrine Signaling
Signalsfromdistantcellsarecalledendocrinesignals,andtheyoriginatefromendocrinecells.(Inthebody,
many endocrine cells are located in endocrine glands, such as the thyroid gland, the hypothalamus, and the
pituitarygland.)Thesetypesofsignalsusuallyproduceaslowerresponsebuthavealonger-lastingeffect.The
ligandsreleasedinendocrinesignalingarecalledhormones,signalingmoleculesthatareproducedinonepart
of the body but affect other body regions some distance away.
Hormones travel the large distances between endocrine cells and their target cells via the bloodstream, which
is a relatively slow way to move throughout the body. Because of their form of transport, hormones become
dilutedandarepresentinlowconcentrationswhentheyactontheirtargetcells.Thisisdifferentfromparacrine
signaling, in which local concentrations of ligands can be very high.
Autocrine Signaling
Autocrinesignalsareproducedbysignalingcellsthatcanalsobindtotheligandthatisreleased.Thismeans
the signaling cell and the target cell can be the same or a similar cell (the prefix auto- means self, a reminder
thatthesignalingcellsendsasignaltoitself).Thistypeofsignalingoftenoccursduringtheearlydevelopment
of an organism to ensure that cells develop into the correct tissues and take on the proper function. Autocrine
signaling also regulates pain sensation and inflammatory responses. Further, if a cell is infected with a virus,
the cell can signal itself to undergo programmed cell death, killing the virus in the process. In some cases,
neighboring cells of the same type are also influenced by the released ligand. In embryological development,
thisprocessofstimulatingagroupofneighboringcellsmayhelptodirectthedifferentiationofidenticalcellsinto
the same cell type, thus ensuring the proper developmental outcome.
Direct Signaling Across Gap Junctions
Gap junctions in animals and plasmodesmata in plants are connections between the plasma membranes of
neighboringcells.Thesefluid-filledchannelsallowsmallsignalingmolecules,calledintracellularmediators,to
2+
diffusebetweenthetwocells.Smallmolecules,suchascalciumions(Ca ),areabletomovebetweencells,but
largemoleculeslikeproteinsandDNAcannotfitthroughthechannels.Thespecificity ofthechannelsensures
thatthecellsremainindependentbutcanquicklyandeasilytransmitsignals.Thetransferofsignalingmolecules
communicates the current state of the cell that is directly next to the target cell; this allows a group of cells to
coordinate their response to a signal that only one of them may have received. In plants, plasmodesmata are
ubiquitous, making the entire plant into a giant communication network.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 266
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 255
Types of Receptors
Receptors are protein molecules in the target cell or on its surface that bind ligand. There are two types of
receptors, internal receptors and cell-surface receptors.
Internal receptors
Internal receptors,alsoknownasintracellular orcytoplasmicreceptors, arefoundinthecytoplasmofthecell
andrespondtohydrophobicligandmoleculesthatareabletotravelacrosstheplasmamembrane.Onceinside
the cell, many of these molecules bind to proteins that act as regulators of mRNA synthesis (transcription) to
mediategeneexpression.Geneexpressionisthecellularprocessoftransformingtheinformationinacell'sDNA
intoasequenceofaminoacids,whichultimatelyformsaprotein.Whentheligandbindstotheinternalreceptor,a
conformationalchangeistriggeredthatexposesaDNA-bindingsiteontheprotein.Theligand-receptorcomplex
moves into the nucleus, then binds to specific regulatory regions of the chromosomal DNA and promotes the
initiationoftranscription(Figure9.4).Transcriptionistheprocessofcopyingtheinformationinacell'sDNAinto
aspecialformofRNAcalledmessengerRNA(mRNA);thecellusesinformationinthemRNA(whichmovesout
intothecytoplasmandassociateswithribosomes)tolinkspecificaminoacidsinthecorrectorder,producinga
protein. Internal receptors can directly influence gene expression without having to pass the signal on to other
receptors or messengers.
Figure 9.4 Hydrophobic signaling molecules typically diffuse across the plasma membrane and interact with
intracellularreceptorsinthecytoplasm.ManyintracellularreceptorsaretranscriptionfactorsthatinteractwithDNAin
the nucleus and regulate gene expression.
Cell-Surface Receptors
Cell-surface receptors, also known as transmembrane receptors, are cell surface, membrane-anchored
(integral) proteins that bind to external ligand molecules. This type of receptor spans the plasma membrane
andperforms signaltransduction, through whichanextracellular signalisconverted into anintracellular signal.
Ligands that interact with cell-surface receptors do not have to enter the cell that they affect. Cell-surface
receptors are also called cell-specific proteins or markers because they are specific to individual cell types.
Becausecell-surfacereceptorproteinsarefundamentaltonormalcellfunctioning,itshouldcomeasnosurprise
thatamalfunctioninanyoneoftheseproteinscouldhavesevereconsequences.Errorsintheproteinstructures
of certain receptor molecules have been shown to play a role in hypertension (high blood pressure), asthma,
heart disease, and cancer.
Each cell-surface receptor has three main components: an external ligand-binding domain, a hydrophobic
membrane-spanning region called a transmembrane domain, and an intracellular domain inside the cell. The
ligand-binding domain is also called the extracellular domain. The size and extent of each of these domains
vary widely, depending on the type of receptor.
PAGE: 267
256 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
How Viruses Recognize a Host
Unlike living cells, many viruses do not have a plasma membrane or any of the structures necessary to
sustainmetaboliclife.SomevirusesaresimplycomposedofaninertproteinshellenclosingDNAorRNA.
Toreproduce,virusesmustinvadealivingcell,whichservesasahost,andthentakeoverthehostscellular
apparatus. But how does a virus recognize its host?
Viruses often bind to cell-surface receptors on the host cell. For example, the virus that causes human
influenza (flu) binds specifically to receptors on membranes of cells of the respiratory system. Chemical
differences in the cell-surface receptors among hosts mean that a virus that infects a specific species (for
example, humans) often cannot infect another species (for example, chickens).
However, viruses have very small amounts of DNA or RNA compared to humans, and, as a result, viral
reproduction can occur rapidly. Viral reproduction invariably produces errors that can lead to changes in
newlyproducedviruses;thesechangesmeanthattheviralproteinsthatinteractwithcell-surfacereceptors
may evolve in such a way that they can bind to receptors in a new host. Such changes happen randomly
andquiteofteninthereproductivecycleofavirus,butthechangesonlymatterifaviruswithnewbinding
properties comes into contact with a suitable host. In the case of influenza, this situation can occur in
[1]
settings where animals and people are in close contact, such as poultry and swine farms. Once a virus
jumps the former "species barrier" to a new host, it can spread quickly. Scientists watch newly appearing
viruses(calledemergingviruses)closelyinthehopethatsuchmonitoringcanreducethelikelihoodofglobal
viral epidemics.
Cell-surface receptors are involved in most of the signaling in multicellular organisms. There are three general
categoriesofcell-surfacereceptors:ionchannel-linkedreceptors,G-protein-linkedreceptors,andenzyme-linked
receptors.
Ion channel-linked receptors bind a ligand and open a channel through the membrane that allows specific
ionstopassthrough.Toformachannel,thistypeofcell-surfacereceptorhasanextensivemembrane-spanning
region.Inordertointeractwiththedoublelayerofphospholipidfattyacidtailsthatformthecenteroftheplasma
membrane,manyoftheaminoacidsinthemembrane-spanningregionarehydrophobicinnature.Conversely,
the amino acids that line the inside of the channel are hydrophilic to allow for the passage of water or ions.
Whenaligandbindstotheextracellularregionofthechannel,thereisaconformationalchangeintheprotein's
structure that allows ions such as sodium, calcium, magnesium, and hydrogen to pass through (Figure 9.5).
Figure 9.5 Gated ion channels form a pore through the plasma membrane that opens when the signaling molecule
binds. The open pore then allows ions to flow into or out of the cell.
G-protein-linkedreceptorsbindaligandandactivateamembraneproteincalledaG-protein.TheactivatedG-
proteintheninteractswitheitheranionchanneloranenzymeinthemembrane(Figure9.6).AllG-protein-linked
receptorshaveseventransmembranedomains,buteachreceptorhasitsownspecificextracellulardomainand
G-protein-binding site.
1. A. B. Sigalov, The School of Nature. IV. Learning from Viruses,Self/Nonself1, no. 4 (2010): 282-298. Y. Cao, X. Koh, L. Dong, X. Du, A.
Wu, X. Ding, H. Deng, Y. Shu, J. Chen, T. Jiang, Rapid Estimation of Binding Activity of Influenza Virus Hemagglutinin to Human and Avian
Receptors,PLoS One6, no. 4 (2011): e18664.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 268
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 257
Cell signaling using G-protein-linked receptors occurs as a cyclic series of events. Before the ligand binds,
the inactive G-protein can bind to a newly revealed site on the receptor specific for its binding. Once the G-
protein binds to the receptor, the resulting change in shape activates the G-protein, which releases guanosine
diposphate(GDP)andpicksupguanosine3-phosphate(GTP).ThesubunitsoftheG-proteinthensplitintothe
αsubunitandtheβγsubunit.OneorbothoftheseG-proteinfragmentsmaybeabletoactivateotherproteinsas
aresult.Afterawhile,theGTPontheactiveαsubunitoftheG-proteinishydrolyzedtoGDPandtheβγsubunit
is deactivated. The subunits reassociate to form the inactive G-protein and the cycle begins anew.
Figure9.6HeterotrimericG-proteinshavethreesubunits:α,β,andγ.WhenasignalingmoleculebindstoaG-protein-
coupledreceptorintheplasmamembrane,aGDPmoleculeassociatedwiththeαsubunitisexchangedforGTP.The
β and γ subunits dissociate from the α subunit, and a cellular response is triggered either by the α subunit or the
dissociatedβγpair. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP terminates the signal.
G-protein-linked receptors have been extensively studied and much has been learned about their roles in
maintaininghealth.BacteriathatarepathogenictohumanscanreleasepoisonsthatinterruptspecificG-protein-
linked receptor function, leading to illnesses such as pertussis, botulism, and cholera. In cholera (Figure 9.7),
for example, the water-borne bacterium Vibrio cholerae produces a toxin, choleragen, that binds to cells lining
the small intestine. The toxin then enters these intestinal cells, where it modifies a G-protein that controls the
openingofachloridechannelandcausesittoremaincontinuouslyactive,resultinginlargelossesoffluidsfrom
the body and potentially fatal dehydration as a result.
PAGE: 269
258 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure 9.7 Transmitted primarily through contaminated drinking water, cholera is a major cause of death in the
developingworldandinareaswherenaturaldisastersinterrupttheavailabilityofcleanwater.Thecholerabacterium,
Vibrio cholerae, creates a toxin that modifies G-protein-mediated cell signaling pathways in the intestines. Modern
sanitationeliminatesthethreatofcholeraoutbreaks,suchastheonethatsweptthroughNewYorkCityin1866.This
poster from that era shows how, at that time, the way that the disease was transmitted was not understood. (credit:
New York City Sanitary Commission)
Enzyme-linked receptors are cell-surface receptors with intracellular domains that are associated with an
enzyme. In some cases, the intracellular domain of the receptor itself is an enzyme. Other enzyme-linked
receptorshaveasmallintracellulardomainthatinteractsdirectlywithanenzyme.Theenzyme-linkedreceptors
normally have large extracellular and intracellular domains, but the membrane-spanning region consists of a
single alpha-helical region of the peptide strand. When a ligand binds to the extracellular domain, a signal is
transferred through the membrane, activating the enzyme. Activation of the enzyme sets off a chain of events
within the cell that eventually leads to a response. One example of this type of enzyme-linked receptor is
the tyrosine kinase receptor (Figure 9.8). A kinase is an enzyme that transfers phosphate groups from ATP
to another protein. The tyrosine kinase receptor transfers phosphate groups to tyrosine molecules (tyrosine
residues). First, signaling molecules bind to the extracellular domain of two nearby tyrosine kinase receptors.
Thetwoneighboringreceptorsthenbondtogether,ordimerize.Phosphatesarethenaddedtotyrosineresidues
on the intracellular domain of the receptors (phosphorylation). The phosphorylated residues can then transmit
the signal to the next messenger within the cytoplasm.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 270
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 259
Figure9.8Areceptortyrosinekinaseisanenzyme-linkedreceptorwithasinglehelicaltransmembraneregion,
and extracellular and intracellular domains. Binding of a signaling molecule to the extracellular domain causes
thereceptortodimerize.Tyrosineresiduesontheintracellulardomainarethenautophosphorylated,triggeringa
downstreamcellularresponse.Thesignalisterminatedbyaphosphatasethatremovesthephosphatesfromthe
phosphotyrosine residues.
HER2isareceptortyrosinekinase.In30percentofhumanbreastcancers,HER2ispermanentlyactivated,
resulting in unregulated cell division. Lapatinib, a drug used to treat breast cancer, inhibits HER2 receptor
tyrosine kinase autophosphorylation (the process by which the receptor adds phosphates onto itself), thus
reducing tumor growth by 50 percent. Besides autophosphorylation, which of the following steps would be
inhibited by Lapatinib?
a. Signaling molecule binding, dimerization, and the downstream cellular response
b. Dimerization, and the downstream cellular response
c. The downstream cellular response
d. Phosphatase activity, dimerization, and the downsteam cellular response
PAGE: 271
260 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Signaling Molecules
Produced by signaling cells and the subsequent binding to receptors in target cells, ligands act as chemical
signalsthattraveltothetargetcellstocoordinateresponses.Thetypesofmoleculesthatserveasligandsare
2+
incredibly varied and range from small proteins to small ions like calcium (Ca ).
Small Hydrophobic Ligands
Small hydrophobic ligands can directly diffuse through the plasma membrane and interact with internal
receptors. Important members of this class of ligands are the steroid hormones. Steroids are lipids that have
a hydrocarbon skeleton with four fused rings; different steroids have different functional groups attached to the
carbon skeleton. Steroid hormones include the female sex hormone, estradiol, which is a type of estrogen;
the male sex hormone, testosterone; and cholesterol, which is an important structural component of biological
membranes and a precursor of steriod hormones (Figure 9.9). Other hydrophobic hormones include thyroid
hormonesandvitaminD.Inordertobesolubleinblood,hydrophobicligandsmustbindtocarrierproteinswhile
they are being transported through the bloodstream.
Figure9.9Steroidhormoneshavesimilarchemicalstructurestotheirprecursor,cholesterol.Becausethesemolecules
are small and hydrophobic, they can diffuse directly across the plasma membrane into the cell, where they interact
with internal receptors.
Water-Soluble Ligands
Water-solubleligandsarepolarand,therefore,cannotpassthroughtheplasmamembraneunaided;sometimes,
they are too large to pass through the membrane at all. Instead, most water-soluble ligands bind to the
extracellular domain of cell-surface receptors. This group of ligands is quite diverse and includes small
molecules, peptides, and proteins.
Other Ligands
Nitricoxide(NO)isagasthatalsoactsasaligand.Itisabletodiffusedirectlyacrosstheplasmamembrane,and
oneofitsrolesistointeractwithreceptorsinsmoothmuscleandinducerelaxationofthetissue.NOhasavery
short half-life and, therefore, only functions over short distances. Nitroglycerin, a treatment for heart disease,
actsbytriggeringthereleaseofNO,whichcausesbloodvesselstodilate(expand),thusrestoringbloodflowto
theheart.NOhasbecomebetterknownrecentlybecausethepathwaythatitaffectsistargetedbyprescription
medications for erectile dysfunction, such as Viagra (erection involves dilated blood vessels).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 272
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 261
9.2 | Propagation of the Signal
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how the binding of a ligand initiates signal transduction throughout a cell
• Recognize the role of phosphorylation in the transmission of intracellular signals
• Evaluate the role of second messengers in signal transmission
Once a ligand binds to a receptor, the signal is transmitted through the membrane and into the cytoplasm.
Continuationofasignalinthismanneriscalledsignaltransduction.Signaltransductiononlyoccurswithcell-
surfacereceptors,whichcannotinteractwithmostcomponentsofthecellsuchasDNA.Onlyinternalreceptors
are able to interact directly with DNA in the nucleus to initiate protein synthesis.
Whenaligandbindstoitsreceptor,conformationalchangesoccurthataffectthereceptor’sintracellulardomain.
Conformationalchangesoftheextracellulardomainuponligandbindingcanpropagatethroughthemembrane
regionofthereceptorandleadtoactivationoftheintracellulardomainoritsassociatedproteins.Insomecases,
binding of the ligand causes dimerization of the receptor, which means that two receptors bind to each other
to form a stable complex called a dimer. A dimer is a chemical compound formed when two molecules (often
identical) join together. The binding of the receptors in this manner enables their intracellular domains to come
into close contact and activate each other.
Binding Initiates a Signaling Pathway
After the ligand binds to the cell-surface receptor, the activation of the receptor’s intracellular components sets
off a chain of events that is called a signaling pathway, sometimes called a signaling cascade. In a signaling
pathway,secondmessengers–enzymes–andactivatedproteinsinteractwithspecificproteins,whichareinturn
activated in a chain reaction that eventually leads to a change in the cell’s environment (Figure 9.10), such as
anincreaseinmetabolismorspecificgeneexpression.Theeventsinthecascadeoccurinaseries,muchlikea
currentflowsinariver.Interactionsthatoccurbeforeacertainpointaredefinedasupstreamevents,andevents
after that point are called downstream events.
PAGE: 273
262 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure 9.10 The epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR) is a receptor tyrosine kinase involved in
the regulation of cell growth, wound healing, and tissue repair. When EGF binds to the EGFR, a cascade of
downstreameventscausesthecelltogrowanddivide.IfEGFRisactivatedatinappropriatetimes,uncontrolled
cell growth (cancer) may occur.
Incertaincancers,theGTPaseactivityoftheRASG-proteinisinhibited.ThismeansthattheRASprotein
can no longer hydrolyze GTP into GDP. What effect would this have on downstream cellular events?
You can see that signaling pathways can get very complicated very quickly because most cellular proteins can
affect different downstream events, depending on the conditions within the cell. A single pathway can branch
off toward different endpoints based on the interplay between two or more signaling pathways, and the same
ligands are often used to initiate different signals in different cell types. This variation in response is due to
differences in protein expression in different cell types. Another complicating element is signal integration of
the pathways, in which signals from two or more different cell-surface receptors merge to activate the same
responseinthecell.Thisprocesscanensurethatmultipleexternalrequirementsaremetbeforeacellcommits
to a specific response.
The effects of extracellular signals can also be amplified by enzymatic cascades. At the initiation of the signal,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 274
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 263
a single ligand binds to a single receptor. However, activation of a receptor-linked enzyme can activate many
copies of a component of the signaling cascade, which amplifies the signal.
Observe an animation of cell signaling at thissite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/cell_signals).
Methods of Intracellular Signaling
Theinductionofasignalingpathwaydependsonthemodificationofacellularcomponentbyanenzyme.There
are numerous enzymatic modifications that can occur, and they are recognized in turn by the next component
downstream. The following are some of the more common events in intracellular signaling.
Phosphorylation
Oneofthemostcommonchemicalmodificationsthatoccursinsignalingpathwaysistheadditionofaphosphate
–3
group (PO4 ) to a molecule such as a protein in a process called phosphorylation. The phosphate can be
addedtoanucleotidesuchasGMPtoformGDPorGTP.Phosphatesarealsooftenaddedtoserine,threonine,
and tyrosine residues of proteins, where they replace the hydroxyl group of the amino acid (Figure 9.11).
The transfer of the phosphate is catalyzed by an enzyme called a kinase. Various kinases are named for
the substrate they phosphorylate. Phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues often activates enzymes.
Phosphorylation of tyrosine residues can either affect the activity of an enzyme or create a binding site that
interacts with downstream components in the signaling cascade. Phosphorylation may activate or inactivate
enzymes, and the reversal of phosphorylation, dephosphorylation by a phosphatase, will reverse the effect.
Figure 9.11 In protein phosphorylation, a phosphate group (PO4 -3) is added to residues of the amino acids serine,
threonine, and tyrosine.
Second Messengers
Secondmessengersaresmallmoleculesthatpropagateasignalafterithasbeeninitiatedbythebindingofthe
signaling molecule to the receptor. These molecules help to spread a signal through the cytoplasm by altering
the behavior of certain cellular proteins.
2+
Calcium ion is a widely used second messenger. The free concentration of calcium ions (Ca ) within a
PAGE: 275
264 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
cell is very low because ion pumps in the plasma membrane continuously remove it by using adenosine-5'-
2+
triphosphate (ATP). For signaling purposes, Ca is stored in cytoplasmic vesicles, such as the endoplasmic
reticulum, or accessed from outside the cell. When signaling occurs, ligand-gated calcium ion channels allow
2+
thehigherlevelsofCa thatarepresentoutsidethecell(orinintracellularstoragecompartments)toflowinto
2+ 2+
thecytoplasm,whichraisestheconcentrationofcytoplasmicCa .TheresponsetotheincreaseinCa varies
2+
anddependsonthecelltypeinvolved.Forexample,intheβ-cellsofthepancreas,Ca signalingleadstothe
2+
release of insulin, and in muscle cells, an increase in Ca leads to muscle contractions.
Another second messenger utilized in many different cell types is cyclic AMP (cAMP). Cyclic AMP is
synthesizedbytheenzymeadenylylcyclasefromATP(Figure9.12).ThemainroleofcAMPincellsistobindto
and activate an enzyme called cAMP-dependent kinase (A-kinase). A-kinase regulates many vital metabolic
pathways:Itphosphorylatesserineandthreonineresiduesofitstargetproteins,activatingthemintheprocess.
A-kinase is found in many different types of cells, and the target proteins in each kind of cell are different.
Differences give rise to the variation of the responses to cAMP in different cells.
Figure9.12ThisdiagramshowsthemechanismfortheformationofcyclicAMP(cAMP).cAMPservesasasecond
messenger to activate or inactivate proteins within the cell. Termination of the signal occurs when an enzyme called
phosphodiesterase converts cAMP into AMP.
Present in small concentrations in the plasma membrane, inositol phospholipids are lipids that can also be
converted into second messengers. Because these molecules are membrane components, they are located
near membrane-bound receptors and can easily interact with them. Phosphatidylinositol (PI) is the main
phospholipid that plays a role in cellular signaling. Enzymes known as kinases phosphorylate PI to form PI-
phosphate (PIP) and PI-bisphosphate (PIP2).
The enzyme phospholipase C cleaves PIP2 to form diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3)
(Figure 9.13). These products of the cleavage of PIP2 serve as second messengers. Diacylglycerol (DAG)
remains in the plasma membrane and activates protein kinase C (PKC), which then phosphorylates serine
and threonine residues in its target proteins. IP3 diffuses into the cytoplasm and binds to ligand-gated calcium
2+
channels in the endoplasmic reticulum to release Ca that continues the signal cascade.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 276
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 265
Figure 9.13 The enzyme phospholipase C breaks down PIP2 into IP3 and DAG, both of which serve as second
messengers.
9.3 | Response to the Signal
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how signaling pathways direct protein expression, cellular metabolism, and cell growth
• Identify the function of PKC in signal transduction pathways
• Recognize the role of apoptosis in the development and maintenance of a healthy organism
Insidethecell,ligandsbindtotheirinternalreceptors,allowingthemtodirectlyaffectthecell’sDNAandprotein-
producingmachinery.Usingsignaltransductionpathways,receptorsintheplasmamembraneproduceavariety
of effects on the cell. The results of signaling pathways are extremely varied and depend on the type of cell
involved as well as the external and internal conditions. A small sampling of responses is described below.
Gene Expression
SomesignaltransductionpathwaysregulatethetranscriptionofRNA.Othersregulatethetranslationofproteins
from mRNA. An example of a protein that regulates translation in the nucleus is the MAP kinase ERK. The
MAPK/ERK pathway (also known as the Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway) is a chain of proteins in the cell that
communicates a signal from a receptor on the surface of the cell to the nuclear DNA. ERK is activated in a
phosphorylationcascadewhenepidermalgrowthfactor(EGF)bindstheEGFreceptor(seeFigure9.10).Upon
phosphorylation,ERKentersthenucleusandactivatesaproteinkinasethat,inturn,regulatesproteintranslation
(Figure 9.14).
PAGE: 277
266 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure 9.14 ERK is a MAP kinase that activates translation when it is phosphorylated. ERK phosphorylates MNK1,
whichinturnphosphorylateseIF-4E,anelongationinitiationfactorthat,withotherinitiationfactors,isassociatedwith
mRNA.WheneIF-4Ebecomesphosphorylated,themRNAunfolds,allowingproteinsynthesisinthenucleustobegin.
(SeeFigure 9.10for the phosphorylation pathway that activates ERK.)
AnothermechanismofgeneregulationinvolvesPKC,whichcaninteractwithisaproteinthatactsasaninhibitor.
Aninhibitorisamoleculethatbindstoaproteinandpreventsitfromfunctioningorreducesitsfunction.Inthis
case,theinhibitorisaproteincalledIκ-B,whichbindstotheregulatoryproteinNF-κB.(Thesymbolκrepresents
the Greek letter kappa.) When Iκ-B is bound to NF-κB, the complex cannot enter the nucleus of the cell, but
whenIκ-BisphosphorylatedbyPKC,itcannolongerbindNF-κB,andNF-κB(atranscriptionfactor)canenter
thenucleusandinitiateRNAtranscription.Inthiscase,theeffectofphosphorylationistoinactivateaninhibitor
and thereby activate the process of transcription.
Increase in Cellular Metabolism
Theresultofanothersignalingpathwayaffectsmusclecells.Theactivationofβ-adrenergicreceptorsinmuscle
cells by adrenaline leads to an increase in cyclic AMP (cAMP) inside the cell. Also known as epinephrine,
adrenaline is a hormone (produced by the adrenal gland located on top of the kidney) that readies the
body for short-term emergencies. Cyclic AMP activates PKA (protein kinase A), which in turn phosphorylates
two enzymes. The first enzyme promotes the degradation of glycogen by activating intermediate glycogen
phosphorylasekinase(GPK) thatinturnactivatesglycogenphosphorylase(GP)thatcatabolizesglycogeninto
its constituent glucose monomers. (Recall that your body converts excess glucose to glycogen for short-term
storage. When energy is needed, glycogen is quickly reconverted to glucose.) Phosphorylation of the second
enzyme,glycogensynthase(GS),inhibitsitsabilitytoformglycogenfromglucose.Inthismanner,amusclecell
obtainsareadypoolofglucosebyactivatingitsformationviaglycogendegradationandbyinhibitingtheuseof
glucose to form glycogen, thus preventing a futile cycle of glycogen degradation and synthesis. The glucose is
thenavailableforusebythemusclecellinresponsetoasuddensurgeofadrenaline—the“fightorflight”reflex.
Cell Growth
Cell signaling pathways also play a major role in cell division. Cells do not normally divide unless they are
stimulated by signals from other cells. The ligands that promote cell growth are called growth factors. Most
growth factors bind to cell-surface receptors that are linked to tyrosine kinases. These cell-surface receptors
arecalledreceptortyrosinekinases(RTKs).ActivationofRTKsinitiatesasignalingpathwaythatincludesaG-
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 278
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 267
protein called RAS, which activates the MAP kinase pathway described earlier. The enzyme MAP kinase then
stimulates the expression of proteins that interact with other cellular components to initiate cell division.
Cancer Biologist
Cancerbiologistsstudythemolecularoriginsofcancerwiththegoalofdevelopingnewpreventionmethods
and treatment strategies that will inhibit the growth of tumors without harming the normal cells of the
body.Asmentionedearlier,signalingpathwayscontrolcellgrowth.Thesesignalingpathwaysarecontrolled
by signaling proteins, which are, in turn, expressed by genes. Mutations in these genes can result in
malfunctioningsignalingproteins.Thispreventsthecellfromregulatingitscellcycle,triggeringunrestricted
celldivisionandperhapscancer.Thegenesthatregulatethesignalingproteinsareonetypeofoncogene,
which is a gene that has the potential to cause cancer. The gene encoding RAS is an oncogene that
was originally discovered when mutations in the RAS protein were linked to cancer. Further studies have
indicatedthat30percentofcancercellshaveamutationintheRASgenethatleadstouncontrolledgrowth.
Ifleftunchecked,uncontrolledcelldivisioncanleadtotumorformationandmetastasis,thegrowthofcancer
cells in new locations in the body.
Cancer biologists have been able to identify many other oncogenes that contribute to the development of
cancer. For example, HER2 is a cell-surface receptor that is present in excessive amounts in 20 percent
of human breast cancers. Cancer biologists realized that gene duplication led to HER2 overexpression in
25 percent of breast cancer patients and developed a drug called Herceptin (trastuzumab). Herceptin is
a monoclonal antibody that targets HER2 for removal by the immune system. Herceptin therapy helps to
control signaling through HER2. The use of Herceptin in combination with chemotherapy has helped to
increase the overall survival rate of patients with metastatic breast cancer.
More information on cancer biology research can be found at the National Cancer Institute website
(https://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/biology (http://openstax.org/l/cancer_research)).
Cell Death
Whenacellisdamaged,superfluous,orpotentiallydangeroustoanorganism,acellcaninitiateamechanismto
triggerprogrammedcelldeath,orapoptosis.Apoptosisallowsacelltodieinacontrolledmannerthatprevents
the release of potentially damaging molecules from inside the cell. There are many internal checkpoints that
monitoracell’shealth;ifabnormalitiesareobserved,acellcanspontaneouslyinitiatetheprocessofapoptosis.
However, in some cases, such as a viral infection or uncontrolled cell division due to cancer, the cell’s normal
checksandbalancesfail.Externalsignalingcanalsoinitiateapoptosis.Forexample,mostnormalanimalcells
have receptors that interact with the extracellular matrix, a network of glycoproteins that provides structural
supportforcellsinanorganism.Thebindingofcellularreceptorstotheextracellularmatrixinitiatesasignaling
cascadewithinthecell.However,ifthecellmovesawayfromtheextracellularmatrix,thesignalingceases,and
the cell undergoes apoptosis. This system keeps cells from traveling through the body and proliferating out of
control, as happens with tumor cells that metastasize.
AnotherexampleofexternalsignalingthatleadstoapoptosisoccursinT-celldevelopment.T-cellsareimmune
cellsthatbindtoforeignmacromoleculesandparticles,andtargetthemfordestructionbytheimmunesystem.
Normally, T-cells do not target “self” proteins (those of their own organism), a process that can lead to
autoimmunediseases.Inordertodeveloptheabilitytodiscriminatebetweenselfandnon-self,immatureT-cells
undergo screening to determine whether they bind to so-called self proteins. If the T-cell receptor binds to self
proteins, the cell initiates apoptosis to remove the potentially dangerous cell.
Apoptosis is also essential for normal embryological development. In vertebrates, for example, early stages of
developmentincludetheformationofweb-liketissuebetweenindividualfingersandtoes(Figure9.15).During
the course of normal development, these unneeded cells must be eliminated, enabling fully separated fingers
andtoestoform.Acellsignalingmechanismtriggersapoptosis,whichdestroysthecellsbetweenthedeveloping
digits.
PAGE: 279
268 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure9.15Thehistologicalsectionofafootofa15-day-oldmouseembryo,visualizedusinglightmicroscopy,reveals
areasoftissuebetweenthetoes,whichapoptosiswilleliminatebeforethemousereachesitsfullgestationalageat27
days. (credit: modification of work by Michal Mañas)
Termination of the Signal Cascade
Theaberrantsignalingoftenseenintumorcellsisproofthatthetermination ofasignalattheappropriatetime
can be just as important as the initiation of a signal. One method of stopping a specific signal is to degrade
the ligand or remove it so that it can no longer access its receptor. One reason that hydrophobic hormones
like estrogen and testosterone trigger long-lasting events is because they bind carrier proteins. These proteins
allow the insoluble molecules to be soluble in blood, but they also protect the hormones from degradation by
circulating enzymes.
Inside the cell, many different enzymes reverse the cellular modifications that result from signaling cascades.
Forexample,phosphatasesareenzymesthatremovethephosphategroupattachedtoproteinsbykinasesin
aprocesscalleddephosphorylation.CyclicAMP(cAMP)isdegradedintoAMPbyphosphodiesterase,andthe
2+
releaseofcalciumstoresisreversedbytheCa pumpsthatarelocatedintheexternalandinternalmembranes
of the cell.
9.4 | Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how single-celled yeasts use cell signaling to communicate with one another
• Relate the role of quorum sensing to the ability of some bacteria to form biofilms
Within-cell signaling allows bacteria to respond to environmental cues, such as nutrient levels. Some single-
celled organisms also release molecules to signal to each other.
Signaling in Yeast
Yeasts are eukaryotes (fungi), and the components and processes found in yeast signals are similar to those
of cell-surface receptor signals in multicellular organisms. Budding yeasts (Figure 9.16) are able to participate
in a process that is similar to sexual reproduction that entails two haploid cells (cells with one-half the normal
number of chromosomes) combining to form a diploid cell (a cell with two sets of each chromosome, which is
what normal body cells contain). In order to find another haploid yeast cell that is prepared to mate, budding
yeastssecreteasignalingmoleculecalledmatingfactor.Whenmatingfactorbindstocell-surfacereceptorsin
other yeast cells that are nearby, they stop their normal growth cycles and initiate a cell signaling cascade that
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 280
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 269
includes protein kinases and GTP-binding proteins that are similar to G-proteins.
Figure 9.16 Budding Saccharomyces cerevisiae yeast cells can communicate by releasing a signaling molecule
calledmatingfactor.Inthismicrograph,theyarevisualizedusingdifferentialinterferencecontrastmicroscopy,alight
microscopy technique that enhances the contrast of the sample.
Signaling in Bacteria
Signaling in bacteria enables bacteria to monitor extracellular conditions, ensure that there are sufficient
amounts of nutrients, and ensure that hazardous situations are avoided. There are circumstances, however,
when bacteria communicate with each other.
The first evidence of bacterial communication was observed in a bacterium that has a symbiotic relationship
with Hawaiian bobtail squid. When the population density of the bacteria reaches a certain level, specific gene
expression is initiated, and the bacteria produce bioluminescent proteins that emit light. Because the number
of cells present in the environment (cell density) is the determining factor for signaling, bacterial signaling was
namedquorumsensing.Inpoliticsandbusiness,aquorumistheminimumnumberofmembersrequiredtobe
present to vote on an issue.
Quorum sensing uses autoinducers as signaling molecules. Autoinducers are signaling molecules secreted
by bacteria to communicate with other bacteria of the same kind. The secreted autoinducers can be small,
hydrophobic molecules, such as acyl-homoserine lactone (AHL), or larger peptide-based molecules; each type
of molecule has a different mode of action. When AHL enters target bacteria, it binds to transcription factors,
whichthenswitchgeneexpressiononoroff.Whenthenumberofbacteriaincreasessodoestheconcentration
of the autoinducer, triggering increased expression of certain genes including autoinducers, which results in a
self-amplifyingcycle,alsoknownasapositivefeedbackloop(Figure9.17).Thepeptideautoinducersstimulate
morecomplicatedsignalingpathwaysthatincludebacterialkinases.Thechangesinbacteriafollowingexposure
toautoinducers canbequiteextensive. Thepathogenic bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosahas616different
genes that respond to autoinducers.
Somespeciesofbacteriathatusequorumsensingformbiofilms,complexcoloniesofbacteria(oftencontaining
several species) that exchange chemical signals to coordinate the release of toxins that will attack the host.
Bacterialbiofilms(Figure9.18)cansometimesbefoundonmedicalequipment;whenbiofilmsinvadeimplants
such as hip or knee replacements or heart pacemakers, they can cause life-threatening infections.
PAGE: 281
270 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Figure 9.17Autoinducers are small molecules or proteins produced by bacteria that regulate gene expression.
Which of the following statements about quorum sensing is false?
a. Autoinducer must bind to receptor to turn on transcription of genes responsible for the production of
more autoinducer.
b. The receptor stays in the bacterial cell, but the autoinducer diffuses out.
c. Autoinducer can only act on a different cell: it cannot act on the cell in which it is made.
d. Autoinducer turns on genes that enable the bacteria to form a biofilm.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 282
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 271
Figure 9.18 Cell-cell communication enables these (a) Staphylococcus aureus bacteria to work together to
form a biofilm inside a hospital patient’s catheter, seen here via scanning electron microscopy. S. aureus is the
main cause of hospital-acquired infections. (b) Hawaiian bobtail squid have a symbiotic relationship with the
bioluminescentbacteriaVibriofischeri.Theluminescencemakesitdifficulttoseethesquidfrombelowbecauseit
effectivelyeliminatesitsshadow.Inreturnforcamouflage,thesquidprovidesfoodforthebacteria.Free-livingV.
fischeridonotproduceluciferase,theenzymeresponsibleforluminescence,butV.fischerilivinginasymbiotic
relationship with the squid do. Quorum sensing determines whether the bacteria should produce the luciferase
enzyme. (credit a: modifications of work by CDC/Janice Carr; credit b: modifications of work by Cliff1066/Flickr)
What advantage might biofilm production confer on theS. aureusinside the catheter?
Research on the details of quorum sensing has led to advances in growing bacteria for industrial purposes.
Recent discoveries suggest that it may be possible to exploit bacterial signaling pathways to control bacterial
growth; this process could replace or supplement antibiotics that are no longer effective in certain situations.
Watch geneticist Bonnie Bassler discuss her discovery (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/bacteria_talk) of
quorum sensing in biofilm bacteria in squid.
PAGE: 283
272 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
Cellular Communication in Yeasts
The first cellular form of life on our planet likely consisted of single-celled prokaryotic organisms that had
limitedinteractionwitheachother.Whilesomeexternalsignalingoccursbetweendifferentspeciesofsingle-
celled organisms, the majority of signaling within bacteria and yeasts concerns only other members of the
same species. The evolution of cellular communication is an absolute necessity for the development of
multicellular organisms, and this innovation is thought to have required approximately 2 billion years to
appear in early life forms.
Yeasts are single-celled eukaryotes and, therefore, have a nucleus and organelles characteristic of more
complex life forms. Comparisons of the genomes of yeasts, nematode worms, fruit flies, and humans
illustrate the evolution of increasingly complex signaling systems that allow for the efficient inner workings
that keep humans and other complex life forms functioning correctly.
Kinases are a major component of cellular communication, and studies of these enzymes illustrate the
evolutionary connectivity of different species. Yeasts have 130 types of kinases. More complex organisms
such as nematode worms and fruit flies have 454 and 239 kinases, respectively. Of the 130 kinase types
in yeast, 97 belong to the 55 subfamilies of kinases that are found in other eukaryotic organisms. The
onlyobviousdeficiencyseeninyeastsisthecompleteabsenceoftyrosinekinases.Itishypothesizedthat
phosphorylationoftyrosineresiduesisneededtocontrolthemoresophisticatedfunctionsofdevelopment,
differentiation, and cellular communication used in multicellular organisms.
Because yeasts contain many of the same classes of signaling proteins as humans, these organisms
are ideal for studying signaling cascades. Yeasts multiply quickly and are much simpler organisms than
humans or other multicellular animals. Therefore, the signaling cascades are also simpler and easier to
study, although they contain similar counterparts to human signaling.[2]
Watch this collection of interview clips with biofilm researchers in “What Are Bacterial Biofilms?” (This
multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66383/ 1.3/#eip-
id1167232076592)
2. G. Manning, G.D. Plowman, T. Hunter, S. Sudarsanam, “Evolution of Protein Kinase Signaling from Yeast to Man,”Trends in Biochemical
Sciences27, no. 10 (2002): 514–520.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 284
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 273
KEY TERMS
apoptosis programmed cell death
autocrine signal signal that is sent and received by the same or similar nearby cells
autoinducer signaling molecule secreted by bacteria to communicate with other bacteria of its kind
cell-surface receptor cell-surfaceproteinthattransmitsasignalfromtheexteriorofthecelltotheinterior,even
though the ligand does not enter the cell
chemical synapse small space between axon terminals and dendrites of nerve cells where neurotransmitters
function
cyclic AMP (cAMP) second messenger that is derived from ATP
cyclic AMP-dependent kinase (also, protein kinase A, or PKA) kinase that is activated by binding to cAMP
diacylglycerol (DAG) cleavage product of PIP2that is used for signaling within the plasma membrane
dimer chemical compound formed when two molecules join together
dimerization (of receptor proteins) interaction of two receptor proteins to form a functional complex called a
dimer
endocrine cell cell that releases ligands involved in endocrine signaling (hormones)
endocrine signal long-distancesignalthatisdeliveredbyligands(hormones)travelingthroughanorganism's
circulatory system from the signaling cell to the target cell
enzyme-linked receptor cell-surface receptor with intracellular domains that are associated with membrane-
bound enzymes
extracellular domain region of a cell-surface receptor that is located on the cell surface
G-protein-linked receptor cell-surfacereceptorthatactivatesmembrane-boundG-proteinstotransmitasignal
from the receptor to nearby membrane components
growth factor ligand that binds to cell-surface receptors and stimulates cell growth
inhibitor molecule that binds to a protein (usually an enzyme) and keeps it from functioning
inositol phospholipid lipid present at small concentrations in the plasma membrane that is converted into a
second messenger; it has inositol (a carbohydrate) as its hydrophilic head group
inositol triphosphate (IP3) cleavage product of PIP2that is used for signaling within the cell
intercellular signaling communication between a cell
internal receptor (also,intracellularreceptor)receptorproteinthatislocatedinthecytosolofacellandbindsto
ligands that pass through the plasma membrane
intracellular mediator (also, second messenger) small molecule that transmits signals within a cell
intracellular signaling communication within cells
ion channel-linked receptor cell-surfacereceptorthatformsaplasmamembranechannel,whichopenswhen
a ligand binds to the extracellular domain (ligand-gated channels)
kinase enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to another molecule
ligand molecule produced by a signaling cell that binds with a specific receptor, delivering a signal in the
process
PAGE: 285
274 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
mating factor signaling molecule secreted by yeast cells to communicate to nearby yeast cells that they are
available to mate
neurotransmitter chemical ligand that carries a signal from one nerve cell to the next
paracrine signal signal between nearby cells that is delivered by ligands traveling in the liquid medium in the
space between the cells
phosphatase enzyme that removes the phosphate group from a molecule that has been previously
phosphorylated
phosphodiesterase enzyme that degrades cAMP, producing AMP, to terminate signaling
quorum sensing method of cellular communication used by bacteria that informs them of the abundance of
similar (or different) bacteria in the environment
receptor protein in or on a target cell that bind to ligands
second messenger small, non-protein molecule that propagates a signal within the cell after activation of a
receptor causes its release
signal integration interactionofsignalsfromtwoormoredifferentcell-surfacereceptorsthatmergetoactivate
the same response in the cell
signal transduction propagationofthesignalthroughthecytoplasm(andsometimesalsothenucleus)ofthe
cell
signaling cell cell that releases signal molecules that allow communication with another cell
signaling pathway (also signaling cascade) chain of events that occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell to
propagate the signal from the plasma membrane to produce a response
synaptic signal chemical signal (neurotransmitter) that travels between nerve cells
target cell cell that has a receptor for a signal or ligand from a signaling cell
CHAPTER SUMMARY
9.1Signaling Molecules and Cellular Receptors
Cells communicate by both inter- and intracellular signaling. Signaling cells secrete ligands that bind to target
cells and initiate a chain of events within the target cell. The four categories of signaling in multicellular
organisms are paracrine signaling, endocrine signaling, autocrine signaling, and direct signaling across gap
junctions. Paracrine signaling takes place over short distances. Endocrine signals are carried long distances
through the bloodstream by hormones, and autocrine signals are received by the same cell that sent the signal
or other nearby cells of the same kind. Gap junctions allow small molecules, including signaling molecules, to
flow between neighboring cells.
Internal receptors are found in the cell cytoplasm. Here, they bind ligand molecules that cross the plasma
membrane; these receptor-ligand complexes move to the nucleus and interact directly with cellular DNA. Cell-
surface receptors transmit a signal from outside the cell to the cytoplasm. Ion channel-linked receptors, when
bound to their ligands, form a pore through the plasma membrane through which certain ions can pass. G-
protein-linked receptors interact with a G-protein on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane, promoting
the exchange of bound GDP for GTP and interacting with other enzymes or ion channels to transmit a signal.
Enzyme-linked receptors transmit a signal from outside the cell to an intracellular domain of a membrane-
bound enzyme. Ligand binding causes activation of the enzyme. Small hydrophobic ligands (like steroids) are
able to penetrate the plasma membrane and bind to internal receptors. Water-soluble hydrophilic ligands are
unable to pass through the membrane; instead, they bind to cell-surface receptors, which transmit the signal to
the inside of the cell.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 286
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 275
9.2Propagation of the Signal
Ligand binding to the receptor allows for signal transduction through the cell. The chain of events that conveys
the signal through the cell is called a signaling pathway or cascade. Signaling pathways are often very complex
because of the interplay between different proteins. A major component of cell signaling cascades is the
phosphorylation of molecules by enzymes known as kinases. Phosphorylation adds a phosphate group to
serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues in a protein, changing their shapes, and activating or inactivating the
protein. Small molecules like nucleotides can also be phosphorylated. Second messengers are small, non-
protein molecules that are used to transmit a signal within a cell. Some examples of second messengers are
2+
calcium ions (Ca ), cyclic AMP (cAMP), diacylglycerol (DAG), and inositol triphosphate (IP3).
9.3Response to the Signal
The initiation of a signaling pathway is a response to external stimuli. This response can take many different
forms, including protein synthesis, a change in the cell’s metabolism, cell growth, or even cell death. Many
pathways influence the cell by initiating gene expression, and the methods utilized are quite numerous. Some
pathways activate enzymes that interact with DNA transcription factors. Others modify proteins and induce
them to change their location in the cell. Depending on the status of the organism, cells can respond by storing
energy as glycogen or fat, or making it available in the form of glucose. A signal transduction pathway allows
muscle cells to respond to immediate requirements for energy in the form of glucose. Cell growth is almost
always stimulated by external signals called growth factors. Uncontrolled cell growth leads to cancer, and
mutations in the genes encoding protein components of signaling pathways are often found in tumor cells.
Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, is important for removing damaged or unnecessary cells. The use of
cellular signaling to organize the dismantling of a cell ensures that harmful molecules from the cytoplasm are
not released into the spaces between cells, as they are in uncontrolled death, necrosis. Apoptosis also ensures
the efficient recycling of the components of the dead cell. Termination of the cellular signaling cascade is very
important so that the response to a signal is appropriate in both timing and intensity. Degradation of signaling
molecules and dephosphorylation of phosphorylated intermediates of the pathway by phosphatases are two
ways to terminate signals within the cell.
9.4Signaling in Single-Celled Organisms
Yeasts and multicellular organisms have similar signaling mechanisms. Yeasts use cell-surface receptors and
signaling cascades to communicate information on mating with other yeast cells. The signaling molecule
secreted by yeasts is called mating factor.
Bacterial signaling is called quorum sensing. Bacteria secrete signaling molecules called autoinducers that are
either small, hydrophobic molecules or peptide-based signals. The hydrophobic autoinducers, such as AHL,
bind transcription factors and directly affect gene expression. The peptide-based molecules bind kinases and
initiate signaling cascades in the cells.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 9.8HER2 is a receptor tyrosine kinase. In 2.Figure 9.10In certain cancers, the GTPase
30 percent of human breast cancers, HER2 is activity of the RAS G-protein is inhibited. This means
permanently activated, resulting in unregulated cell that the RAS protein can no longer hydrolyze GTP
division. Lapatinib, a drug used to treat breast into GDP. What effect would this have on
cancer, inhibits HER2 receptor tyrosine kinase downstream cellular events?
autophosphorylation (the process by which the
3.Figure 9.17Which of the following statements
receptor adds phosphates onto itself), thus reducing
about quorum sensing is false?
tumor growth by 50 percent. Besides
a. Autoinducer must bind to receptor to turn on
autophosphorylation, which of the following steps
transcription of genes responsible for the
would be inhibited by Lapatinib?
production of more autoinducer.
a. Signaling molecule binding, dimerization,
b. The receptor stays in the bacterial cell, but
and the downstream cellular response.
the autoinducer diffuses out.
b. Dimerization, and the downstream cellular
c. Autoinducer can only act on a different cell:
response.
it cannot act on the cell in which it is made.
c. The downstream cellular response.
d. Autoinducer turns on genes that enable the
d. Phosphatase activity, dimerization, and the
bacteria to form a biofilm.
downsteam cellular response.
PAGE: 287
276 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
4.Figure 9.18What advantage might biofilm catheter?
production confer on theS. aureusinside the
REVIEW QUESTIONS
5.What property prevents the ligands of cell-surface a. They are formed by phosphorylation of
receptors from entering the cell? cAMP.
a. The molecules bind to the extracellular b. They are ligands expressed by signaling
domain. cells.
b. The molecules are hydrophilic and cannot c. They are hormones that diffuse through the
penetrate the hydrophobic interior of the plasma membrane to stimulate protein
plasma membrane. production.
c. The molecules are attached to transport d. They are the cleavage products of the
proteins that deliver them through the inositol phospholipid, PIP2.
bloodstream to target cells.
11.What property enables the residues of the amino
d. The ligands are able to penetrate the
acids serine, threonine, and tyrosine to be
membrane and directly influence gene
phosphorylated?
expression upon receptor binding.
a. They are polar.
6.The secretion of hormones by the pituitary gland is b. They are non-polar.
an example of _______________. c. They contain a hydroxyl group.
a. autocrine signaling d. They occur more frequently in the amino
b. paracrine signaling acid sequence of signaling proteins.
c. endocrine signaling
12.Histamine binds to the H1 G-protein-linked
d. direct signaling across gap junctions
receptor to initiate the itchiness and airway
7.Why are ion channels necessary to transport ions constriction associated with an allergic response. If a
into or out of a cell? mutation in the associated G-protein’s alpha subunit
a. Ions are too large to diffuse through the prevented the hydrolysis of GTP how would the
membrane. allergic response change?
b. Ions are charged particles and cannot a. More severe allergic response compared to
diffuse through the hydrophobic interior of normal G-protein signaling.
the membrane. b. Less severe allergic response compared to
c. Ions do not need ion channels to move normal G-protein signaling.
through the membrane. c. No allergic response.
d. Ions bind to carrier proteins in the d. No change compared to normal G-protein
bloodstream, which must be removed signaling.
before transport into the cell.
13.A scientist observes a mutation in the
8.Endocrine signals are transmitted more slowly transmembrane region of EGFR that eliminates its
than paracrine signals because ___________. ability to be stabilized by binding interactions during
dimerization after ligand binding. Which hypothesis
a. the ligands are transported through the regarding the effect of this mutation on EGF signaling
bloodstream and travel greater distances is most likely to be correct?
b. the target and signaling cells are close a. EGF signaling cascades would be active for
together longer in the cell.
c. the ligands are degraded rapidly b. EGF signaling cascades would be active for
d. the ligands don't bind to carrier proteins a shorter period of time in the cell.
during transport c. EGF signaling cascades would not occur.
d. EGF signaling would be unaffected.
9.A scientist notices that when she adds a small,
water-soluble molecule to a dish of cells, the cells 14.What is the function of a phosphatase?
turn off transcription of a gene. She hypothesizes that a. A phosphatase removes phosphorylated
the ligand she added binds to a(n) ______ receptor. amino acids from proteins.
b. A phosphatase removes the phosphate
a. Intracellular group from phosphorylated amino acid
b. Hormone residues in a protein.
c. Enzyme-linked c. A phosphatase phosphorylates serine,
d. Gated ion channel-linked threonine, and tyrosine residues.
d. A phosphatase degrades second
10.Where do DAG and IP3originate?
messengers in the cell.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 288
Chapter 9 | Cell Communication 277
15.How does NF-κB induce gene expression? 19.A scientist notices that a cancer cell line fails to
die when he adds an inducer of apoptosis to his
a. A small, hydrophobic ligand binds to NF-κB, culture of cells. Which hypothesis could explain why
activating it. the cells fail to die?
b. Phosphorylation of the inhibitor Iκ-B a. The cells have a mutation that prevents the
dissociates the complex between it and NF- initiation of apoptosis signaling.
κB, and allows NF-κB to enter the nucleus b. The cells have lost expression of the
and stimulate transcription. receptor for the apoptosis-inducing ligand.
c. NF-κB is phosphorylated and is then free to c. The cells overexpress a growth factor
enter the nucleus and bind DNA. pathway that inhibits apoptosis.
d. NF-κB is a kinase that phosphorylates a d. All of the above.
transcription factor that binds DNA and
20.Which type of molecule acts as a signaling
promotes protein production.
molecule in yeasts?
16.Apoptosis can occur in a cell when the cell is a. steroid
________________. b. autoinducer
a. damaged c. mating factor
b. no longer needed d. second messenger
c. infected by a virus
21.Quorum sensing is triggered to begin when
d. all of the above
___________.
17.What is the effect of an inhibitor binding an a. treatment with antibiotics occurs
enzyme? b. bacteria release growth hormones
a. The enzyme is degraded. c. bacterial protein expression is switched on
b. The enzyme is activated. d. a sufficient number of bacteria are present
c. The enzyme is inactivated.
22.A doctor is researching new ways to treat biofilms
d. The complex is transported out of the cell.
on artificial joints. Which approach would best help
18.How does PKC’s signaling role change in prevent bacterial colonization of the medical
response to growth factor signaling versus an implants?
immune response? a. Increase antibiotic dosing
a. PKC interacts directly with signaling b. Create implants with rougher surfaces
molecules in both cascades, but only c. Vaccinate patients against all pathogenic
exhibits kinase activity during growth factor bacteria
signaling. d. Inhibit quorum sensing
b. PKC interacts directly with signaling
molecules in growth factor cascades, but
interacts with signaling inhibitors during
immune signaling.
c. PKC amplifies growth factor cascades, but
turns off immune cascades.
d. PKC is activated during growth factor
cascades, but is inactivated during immune
response cascades.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
23.What is the difference between intracellular 27.Insulin is a hormone that regulates blood sugar
signaling and intercellular signaling? by binding to its receptor, insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase. How does insulin’s behavior differ from
24.How are the effects of paracrine signaling limited
steroid hormone signaling, and what can you infer
to an area near the signaling cells?
about its structure?
25.What are the differences between internal
28.The same second messengers are used in many
receptors and cell-surface receptors?
different cells, but the response to second
26.Cells grown in the laboratory are mixed with a messengers is different in each cell. How is this
dye molecule that is unable to pass through the possible?
plasma membrane. If a ligand is added to the cells,
29.What would happen if the intracellular domain of
observations show that the dye enters the cells. What
a cell-surface receptor was switched with the domain
type of receptor did the ligand bind to on the cell
from another receptor?
surface?
PAGE: 289
278 Chapter 9 | Cell Communication
30.If a cell developed a mutation in itsMAP2K1 increase in phosphorylated ERK? Be specific in
gene (encodes the MEK protein) that prevented MEK which proteins are involved.
from being recognized by phosphatases, how would
34.What characteristics make yeasts a good model
the EGFR signaling cascade and the cell’s behavior
for learning about signaling in humans?
change?
35.Why is signaling in multicellular organisms more
31.What is a possible result of a mutation in a kinase
complicated than signaling in single-celled
that controls a pathway that stimulates cell growth?
organisms?
32.How does the extracellular matrix control the
36.Pseudomonasinfections are very common in
growth of cells?
hospital settings. Why would it be important for
33.A scientist notices that a cancer cell line shows doctors to determine the bacterial load before
high levels of phosphorylated ERK in the absence of treating an infected patient?
EGF. What are two possible explanations for the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 290
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 279
10 | CELL
REPRODUCTION
Figure10.1Aseaurchinbeginslifeasasinglediploidcell(zygote)that(a)dividesthroughcelldivisiontoformtwo
geneticallyidenticaldaughtercells,visibleherethroughscanningelectronmicroscopy(SEM).Afterfourroundsofcell
division,(b)thereare16cells,asseeninthisSEMimage.Aftermanyroundsofcelldivision,theindividualdevelops
intoacomplex,multicellularorganism,asseeninthis(c)matureseaurchin.(credita:modificationofworkbyEvelyn
Spiegel,LouisaHoward;creditb:modificationofworkbyEvelynSpiegel,LouisaHoward;creditc:modificationofwork
by Marco Busdraghi; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
10.1:Cell Division
10.2:The Cell Cycle
10.3:Control of the Cell Cycle
10.4:Cancer and the Cell Cycle
10.5:Prokaryotic Cell Division
Introduction
A human, like every sexually reproducing organism, begins life as a fertilized egg (embryo) or zygote. In our
species,billionsofcelldivisionssubsequentlymustoccurinacontrolledmannerinordertoproduceacomplex,
multicellular human comprising trillions of cells. Thus, the original single-celled zygote is literally the ancestor
of all cells in the body. However, once a human is fully grown, cell reproduction is still necessary to repair and
regenerate tissues, and sometimes to increase our size! In fact, all multicellular organisms use cell division for
growthandthemaintenanceandrepairofcellsandtissues.Celldivisioniscloselyregulated,andtheoccasional
failure of this regulation can have life-threatening consequences. Single-celled organisms may also use cell
division as their method of reproduction.
10.1 | Cell Division
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the structure of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes
• Distinguish between chromosomes, genes, and traits
• Describe the mechanisms of chromosome compaction
The continuity of life from one cell to another has its foundation in the reproduction of cells by way of the cell
cycle. The cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events that describes the stages of a cell’slife from the division
of a single parent cell to the production of two new genetically identical daughter cells.
PAGE: 291
280 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Genomic DNA
BeforediscussingthestepsacellmustundertaketoreplicateanddivideitsDNA,adeeperunderstandingofthe
structureandfunctionofacell’sgeneticinformationisnecessary.Acell’sDNA,packagedasadouble-stranded
DNAmolecule,iscalleditsgenome.Inprokaryotes,thegenomeiscomposedofasingle,double-strandedDNA
molecule in the form of a loop or circle (Figure 10.2). The region in the cell containing this genetic material is
called a nucleoid. Some prokaryotes also have smaller loops of DNA called plasmids that are not essential for
normal growth. Bacteria can exchange these plasmids with other bacteria, sometimes receiving beneficial new
genesthattherecipientcanaddtotheirchromosomalDNA.Antibioticresistanceisonetraitthatoftenspreads
through a bacterial colony through plasmid exchange from resistant donors to recipient cells.
Figure10.2Prokaryotes,includingbothBacteriaandArchaea,haveasingle,circularchromosomelocatedinacentral
region called the nucleoid.
In eukaryotes, the genome consists of several double-stranded linear DNA molecules (Figure 10.3). Each
species of eukaryotes has a characteristic number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its cells. Human body
(somatic) cells have 46 chromosomes, while human gametes (sperm or eggs) have 23 chromosomes each.
A typical body cell contains two matched or homologous sets of chromosomes (one set from each biological
parent)—aconfigurationknownasdiploid.(Note:Theletternisusedtorepresentasinglesetofchromosomes;
therefore, a diploid organism is designated 2n.) Human cells that contain one set of chromosomes are called
gametes, or sex cells; these are eggs and sperm, and are designated1n, orhaploid.
Uponfertilization,eachgametecontributesonesetofchromosomes,creatingadiploidcellcontainingmatched
pairsofchromosomescalledhomologous(“sameknowledge”)chromosomes.Homologouschromosomesare
the same length and have specific nucleotide segments called genes in exactly the same location, or locus.
Genes, the functional units of chromosomes, determine specific characteristics by coding for specific proteins.
Traits are the variations of those characteristics. For example, hair color is a characteristic with traits that are
blonde, brown, or black, and many colors in between.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 292
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 281
Figure 10.3 There are 23 pairs of homologous chromosomes in a female human somatic cell. The condensed
chromosomes are viewed within the nucleus (top), removed from a cell during mitosis (also called karyokinesis or
nucleardivision)andspreadoutonaslide(right),andartificiallyarrangedaccordingtolength(left);anarrangement
likethisiscalledakaryotype.Inthisimage,thechromosomeswereexposedtofluorescentstainsfordifferentiationof
thedifferentchromosomes.Amethodofstainingcalled“chromosomepainting”employsfluorescentdyesthathighlight
chromosomes in different colors. (credit: National Human Genome Project/NIH)
Each copy of a homologous pair of chromosomes originates from a different parent; therefore, the different
genes (alleles) themselves are not identical, although they code for the same traits such as “hair color.” The
variation of individuals within a species is due to the specific combination of the genes inherited from both
parents. Even a slightly altered sequence of nucleotides within a gene can result in an alternative trait. For
example, there are three possible gene sequences on the human chromosome that code for blood type:
sequenceA,sequenceB,andsequenceO.Becausealldiploidhumancellshavetwocopiesofthechromosome
thatdeterminesbloodtype,thebloodtype(thetrait)isdeterminedbythetwoallelesofthemarkergenethatare
inherited.Itispossibletohavetwocopiesofthesamegenesequenceonbothhomologouschromosomes,with
one on each (for example, AA, BB, or OO), or two different sequences, such as AB, AO, or BO.
Apparently minor variations of traits, such as blood type, eye color, and handedness, contribute to the natural
variation found within a species, but even though they seem minor, these traits may be connected with the
expression of other traits as of yet unknown. However, if the entire DNA sequence from any pair of human
homologouschromosomesiscompared,thedifferenceismuchlessthanonepercent.Thesexchromosomes,
XandY,arethesingleexceptiontotheruleofhomologouschromosomeuniformity:Otherthanasmallamount
of homology that is necessary to accurately produce gametes, the genes found on the X and Y chromosomes
are different.
Eukaryotic Chromosomal Structure and Compaction
If the DNA from all 46 chromosomes in a human cell nucleus were laid out end-to-end, it would measure
approximately two meters; however, its diameter would be only 2 nm! Considering that the size of a typical
human cell is about 10 µm (100,000 cells lined up to equal one meter), DNA must be tightly packaged to fit in
the cell’s nucleus. At the same time, it must also be readily accessible for the genes to be expressed. For this
reason, the long strands of DNA are condensed into compact chromosomes during certain stages of the cell
cycle. There are a number of ways that chromosomes are compacted.
In the first level of compaction, short stretches of the DNA double helix wrap around a core of eight histone
proteinsatregularintervalsalongtheentirelengthofthechromosome(Figure10.4).TheDNA-histonecomplex
is called chromatin. The beadlike, histone DNA complex is called a nucleosome, and DNA connecting the
nucleosomes is called linker DNA. A DNA molecule in this form is about seven times shorter than the double
helix without the histones, and the beads are about 10 nm in diameter, in contrast with the 2-nm diameter of a
DNA double helix.
ThesecondlevelofcompactionoccursasthenucleosomesandthelinkerDNAbetweenthemcoilintoa30-nm
chromatinfiber.Thiscoilingfurthercondensesthechromosomesothatitisnowabout50timesshorterthanthe
extended form.
PAGE: 293
282 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
In the third level of compaction, a variety of fibrous proteins is used to “pack the chromatin.” These fibrous
proteinsalsoensurethateachchromosomeinanon-dividingcelloccupiesaparticularareaofthenucleusthat
does not overlap with that of any other chromosome (see the top image inFigure 10.3).
Figure 10.4 Double-stranded DNA wraps around histone proteins to form nucleosomes that create the appearance
of“beadsonastring.”Thenucleosomesarecoiledintoa30-nmchromatinfiber.Whenacellundergoesmitosis,the
chromosomes condense even further.
DNAreplicatesintheSphaseofinterphase,whichtechnicallyisnotapartofmitosis,butmustalwaysprecedeit.
Afterreplication,thechromosomesarecomposedoftwolinkedsisterchromatids.Whenfullycompact,thepairs
of identically packed chromosomes are bound to each other by cohesin proteins. The connection between the
sisterchromatidsisclosestinaregioncalledthecentromere.Theconjoinedsisterchromatids,withadiameter
of about 1 µm, are visible under a light microscope. The centromeric region is highly condensed and thus will
appear as a constricted area.
This animation illustrates the different levels of chromosome packing.
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66477/1.3/#eip-
id1165802978636)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 294
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 283
10.2 | The Cell Cycle
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the three stages of interphase
• Discuss the behavior of chromosomes during karyokinesis/mitosis
• Explain how the cytoplasmic content is divided during cytokinesis
• Define the quiescent G0phase
The cell cycle is an ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new
daughter cells. Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of precisely timed and carefully
regulatedstagesofgrowth,DNAreplication,andnuclearandcytoplasmicdivisionthatultimatelyproducestwo
identical (clone) cells. The cell cycle has two major phases: interphase and the mitotic phase (Figure 10.5).
During interphase, the cell grows and DNA is replicated. During the mitotic phase, the replicated DNA and
cytoplasmiccontentsareseparated,andthecellcytoplasmistypicallypartitionedbyathirdprocessofthecell
cycle called cytokinesis. We should note, however, that interphase and mitosis (kayrokinesis) may take place
without cytokinesis, in which case cells with multiple nuclei (multinucleate cells) are produced.
Figure10.5Thecellcycleinmulticellularorganismsconsistsofinterphaseandthemitoticphase.Duringinterphase,
thecellgrowsandthenuclearDNAisduplicated.Interphaseisfollowedbythemitoticphase.Duringthemitoticphase,
theduplicatedchromosomesaresegregatedanddistributedintodaughternuclei.Followingmitosis,thecytoplasmis
usually divided as well by cytokinesis, resulting in two genetically identical daughter cells.
Interphase
Duringinterphase,thecellundergoesnormalgrowthprocesseswhilealsopreparingforcelldivision.Inorderfor
a cell to move from interphase into the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The
three stages of interphase are calledG1, S, and G2.
G1Phase (First Gap)
The first stage of interphase is called the G1 phase (first gap) because, from a microscopic point of view, little
PAGE: 295
284 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
change is visible. However, during the G1 stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is
accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins as well as accumulating
sufficient energy reserves to complete the task of replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.
S Phase (Synthesis of DNA)
Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In the S phase,
DNA replication can proceed through the mechanisms that result in the formation of identical pairs of DNA
molecules—sister chromatids—that are firmly attached to the centromeric region. The centrosome is also
duplicatedduringtheSphase.Thetwocentrosomesofhomologouschromosomeswillgiverisetothemitotic
spindle, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes during mitosis. For example, roughly
atthecenterofeachanimalcell,thecentrosomesareassociatedwithapairofrod-likeobjects,thecentrioles,
which are positioned at right angles to each other. Centrioles help organize cell division. We should note,
however, that centrioles are not present in the centrosomes of other eukaryotic organisms, such as plants and
most fungi.
G2Phase (Second Gap)
In the G2 phase, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes proteins necessary for chromosome
manipulationandmovement.Somecellorganellesareduplicated,andthecytoskeletonisdismantledtoprovide
resources for the mitotic phase. There may be additional cell growth during G2. The final preparations for the
mitotic phase must be completed before the cell is able to enter the first stage of mitosis.
The Mitotic Phase
The mitotic phase is a multistep process during which the duplicated chromosomes are aligned, separated,
and move into two new, identical daughter cells. The first portion of the mitotic phase is called karyokinesis,
or nuclear division. As we have just seen, the second portion of the mitotic phase (and often viewed as a
process separate from and following mitosis) is called cytokinesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic
components into the two daughter cells.
Revisit the stages of mitosis at thissite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/Cell_cycle_mito).
Karyokinesis (Mitosis)
Karyokinesis,alsoknownasmitosis,isdividedintoaseriesofphases—prophase,prometaphase,metaphase,
anaphase, and telophase—that result in the division of the cell nucleus (Figure 10.6).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 296
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 285
Figure 10.6 Karyokinesis (or mitosis) is divided into five stages—prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase,
and telophase. We should note that this is a continuous process, and that the divisions between the stages are
not discrete. The pictures at the bottom were taken by fluorescence microscopy (hence, the black background) of
cellsartificiallystainedbyfluorescentdyes:bluefluorescenceindicatesDNA(chromosomes)andgreenfluorescence
indicatesmicrotubules(spindleapparatus).(credit“mitosisdrawings”:modificationofworkbyMarianaRuizVillareal;
credit“micrographs”:modificationofworkbyRoyvanHeesbeen;credit“cytokinesismicrograph”:WadsworthCenter/
New York State Department of Health; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Prophase(the“firstphase”):thenuclearenvelopestartstodissociateintosmallvesicles,andthemembranous
organelles(suchastheGolgicomplex[Golgiapparatus]andtheendoplasmicreticulum),fragmentanddisperse
toward the periphery of the cell. The nucleolus disappears (disperses) as well, and the centrosomes begin
to move to opposite poles of the cell. Microtubules that will form the mitotic spindle extend between the
centrosomes,pushingthemfartherapartasthemicrotubulefiberslengthen.Thesisterchromatidsbegintocoil
more tightly with the aid ofcondensin proteinsand now become visible under a light microscope.
Prometaphase (the “first change phase”): Many processes that began in prophase continue to advance. The
remnants of the nuclear envelope fragment further, and the mitotic spindle continues to develop as more
microtubules assemble and stretch across the length of the former nuclear area. Chromosomes become even
more condensed and discrete. Each sister chromatid develops a protein structure called a kinetochore in
its centromeric region (Figure 10.7). The proteins of the kinetochore attract and bind to the mitotic spindle
microtubules.Asthespindlemicrotubulesextendfromthecentrosomes,someofthesemicrotubulescomeinto
contactwithandfirmlybindtothekinetochores.Onceamitoticfiberattachestoachromosome,thechromosome
will be oriented until the kinetochores of sister chromatids face the opposite poles. Eventually, all the sister
chromatids will be attached via their kinetochores to microtubules from opposing poles. Spindle microtubules
that do not engage the chromosomes are called polar microtubules. These microtubules overlap each other
midwaybetweenthetwopolesandcontributetocellelongation.Astralmicrotubulesarelocatednearthepoles,
aid in spindle orientation, and are required for the regulation of mitosis.
PAGE: 297
286 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Figure10.7Duringprometaphase,mitoticspindlemicrotubulesfromoppositepolesattachtoeachsisterchromatidat
the kinetochore. In anaphase, the connection between the sister chromatids breaks down, and the microtubules pull
the chromosomes toward opposite poles.
Metaphase (the “change phase”): All the chromosomes are aligned in a plane called the metaphase plate, or
the equatorial plane, roughly midway between the two poles of the cell. The sister chromatids are still tightly
attached to each other by cohesin proteins. At this time, the chromosomes are maximally condensed.
Anaphase (“upward phase”): The cohesin proteins degrade, and the sister chromatids separate at the
centromere.Eachchromatid,nowcalledasinglechromosome,ispulledrapidlytowardthecentrosometowhich
its microtubule is attached. The cell becomes visibly elongated (oval shaped) as the polar microtubules slide
against each other at the metaphase plate where they overlap.
Telophase (the “distance phase”): the chromosomes reach the opposite poles and begin to decondense
(unravel), relaxing once again into a stretched-out chromatin configuration. The mitotic spindles are
depolymerizedintotubulinmonomersthatwillbeusedtoassemblecytoskeletalcomponentsforeachdaughter
cell. Nuclear envelopes form around the chromosomes, and nucleosomes appear within the nuclear area.
Cytokinesis
Cytokinesis,or“cellmotion,”issometimesviewedasthesecondmainstageofthemitoticphase,duringwhich
cell division is completed via the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter cells
However,aswehaveseenearlier,cytokinesiscanalsobeviewedasaseparatephase,whichmayormaynot
takeplacefollowingmitosis.Ifcytokinesisdoestakeplace,celldivisionisnotcompleteuntilthecellcomponents
havebeenapportionedandcompletelyseparatedintothetwodaughtercells.Althoughthestagesofmitosisare
similarformosteukaryotes,theprocessofcytokinesisisquitedifferentforeukaryotesthathavecellwalls,such
as plant cells.
In animal cells, cytokinesis typically starts during late anaphase. A contractile ring composed of actin filaments
forms just inside the plasma membrane at the former metaphase plate. The actin filaments pull the equator of
the cell inward, forming a fissure. This fissure is called the cleavage furrow. The furrow deepens as the actin
ring contracts, and eventually the membrane is cleaved in two (Figure 10.8).
In plant cells, a new cell wall must form between the daughter cells. During interphase, the Golgi apparatus
accumulatesenzymes,structuralproteins,andglucosemoleculespriortobreakingintovesiclesanddispersing
throughout the dividing cell. During telophase, these Golgi vesicles are transported on microtubules to form a
phragmoplast (a vesicular structure) at the metaphase plate. There, the vesicles fuse and coalesce from the
center toward the cell walls; this structure is called a cell plate. As more vesicles fuse, the cell plate enlarges
until it merges with the cell walls at the periphery of the cell. Enzymes use the glucose that has accumulated
between the membrane layers to build a new cell wall. The Golgi membranes become parts of the plasma
membrane on either side of the new cell wall (Figure 10.8).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 298
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 287
Figure 10.8 During cytokinesis in animal cells, a ring of actin filaments forms at the metaphase plate. The ring
contracts,formingacleavagefurrow,whichdividesthecellintwo.Inplantcells,Golgivesiclescoalesceattheformer
metaphaseplate,formingaphragmoplast.Acellplateformedbythefusionofthevesiclesofthephragmoplastgrows
fromthecentertowardthecellwalls,andthemembranesofthevesiclesfusetoformaplasmamembranethatdivides
the cell in two.
G Phase
0
Not all cells adhere to the classic cell-cycle pattern in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately enters
thepreparatoryphasesofinterphase,closelyfollowedbythemitoticphase,andcytokinesis.CellsinG0phase
are not actively preparing to divide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage that occurs when cells exit the
cell cycle. Some cells enter G0 temporarily due to environmental conditions such as availability of nutrients, or
stimulationbygrowthfactors.Thecellwillremaininthisphaseuntilconditionsimproveoruntilanexternalsignal
triggerstheonsetofG1.Othercellsthatneverorrarelydivide,suchasmaturecardiacmuscleandnervecells,
remain in G0permanently.
Which of the following is the correct order of events in mitosis?
a. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate. The kinetochore becomes attached to the mitotic
spindle. The nucleus reforms and the cell divides. Cohesin proteins break down and the sister
chromatids separate.
b. Thekinetochorebecomesattachedtothemitoticspindle.Cohesinproteinsbreakdownandthesister
chromatids separate. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase plate. The nucleus reforms and the
cell divides.
c. Thekinetochorebecomesattachedtothecohesinproteins.Sisterchromatidslineupatthemetaphase
plate.Thekinetochorebreaksdownandthesisterchromatidsseparate.Thenucleusreformsandthe
cell divides.
d. The kinetochore becomes attached to the mitotic spindle. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase
plate. Cohesin proteins break down and the sister chromatids separate. The nucleus reforms and the
cell divides.
PAGE: 299
288 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Determine the Time Spent in Cell-Cycle Stages
Problem: How long does a cell spend in interphase compared to each stage of mitosis?
Background: A prepared microscope slide of whitefish blastula cross-sections will show cells arrested in
various stages of the cell cycle. (Note: It is not visually possible to separate the stages of interphase from
eachother,butthemitoticstagesarereadilyidentifiable.)If100cellsareexamined,thenumberofcellsin
each identifiable cell-cycle stage will give an estimate of the time it takes for the cell to complete that stage.
ProblemStatement:Giventheeventsincludedinallofinterphaseandthosethattakeplaceineachstage
of mitosis, estimate the length of each stage based on a 24-hour cell cycle. Before proceeding, state your
hypothesis.
Test your hypothesis: Test your hypothesis by doing the following:
1. Place a fixed and stained microscope slide of whitefish blastula cross-sections under the scanning
objective of a light microscope.
2. Locateandfocusononeofthesectionsusingthelow-powerobjectiveofyourmicroscope.Noticethat
the section is a circle composed of dozens of closely packed individual cells.
3. Switch to the medium-power objective and refocus. With this objective, individual cells are clearly
visible, but the chromosomes will still be very small.
4. Switch to the high-power objective and slowly move the slide left to right, and up and down to view
all the cells in the section (Figure 10.9). As you scan, you will notice that most of the cells are not
undergoing mitosis but are in the interphase period of the cell cycle.
(b)
(a)
Figure 10.9 Slowly scan whitefish blastula cells with the high-power objective as illustrated in image (a)
to identify their mitotic stage. (b) A microscopic image of the scanned cells is shown. (credit “micrograph”:
modification of work by Linda Flora; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
5. Practice identifying the various stages of the cell cycle, using the drawings of the stages as a guide
(Figure 10.6).
6. Onceyouareconfidentaboutyouridentification,begintorecordthestageofeachcellyouencounter
as you scan left to right, and top to bottom across the blastula section.
7. Keep a tally of your observations and stop when you reach 100 cells identified.
8. The larger the sample size (total number of cells counted), the more accurate the results. If possible,
gather and record group data prior to calculating percentages and making estimates.
Record your observations: Make a table similar toTable 10.1within which to record your observations.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 300
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 289
Results of Cell Stage Identification
Phase or Stage Individual Totals Group Totals Percent
Interphase
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
Totals 100 100 100 percent
Table 10.1
Analyze your data/report your results: To find the length of time whitefish blastula cells spend in each
stage, multiply the percent (recorded as a decimal) by 24 hours. Make a table similar to Table 10.2 to
illustrate your data.
Estimate of Cell Stage Length
Phase or Stage Percent Time in Hours
Interphase
Prophase
Metaphase
Anaphase
Telophase
Cytokinesis
Table 10.2
Drawaconclusion:Didyourresultssupportyourestimatedtimes?Wereanyoftheoutcomesunexpected?
If so, discuss those events in that stage that may have contributed to the calculated time.
10.3 | Control of the Cell Cycle
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understandhowthecellcycleiscontrolledbymechanismsthatarebothinternalandexternaltothecell
• Explain how the three internal “control checkpoints” occur at the end of G1, at the G2/M transition, and
during metaphase
• Describe the molecules that control the cell cycle through positive and negative regulation
Thelengthofthecellcycleishighlyvariable,evenwithinthecellsofasingleorganism.Inhumans,thefrequency
of cell turnover ranges from a few hours in early embryonic development, to an average of two to five days for
epithelial cells, and to an entire human lifetime spent in G0 by specialized cells, such as cortical neurons or
cardiac muscle cells.
PAGE: 301
290 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
There is also variation in the time that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. When rapidly dividing
mammalian cells are grown in a culture (outside the body under optimal growing conditions), the length of
the cell cycle is about 24 hours. In rapidly dividing human cells with a 24-hour cell cycle, the G1 phase lasts
approximatelyninehours,theSphaselasts10hours,theG2phaselastsaboutfourandone-halfhours,andthe
M phase lasts approximately one-half hour. By comparison, in fertilized eggs (and early embryos) of fruit flies,
thecellcycleiscompletedinabouteightminutes.Thisisbecausethenucleusofthefertilizedeggdividesmany
times by mitosis but does not go through cytokinesis until a multinucleate “zygote” has been produced, with
many nuclei located along the periphery of the cell membrane, thereby shortening the time of the cell division
cycle.Thetimingofeventsinthecellcycleofboth“invertebrates”and“vertebrates”iscontrolledbymechanisms
that are both internal and external to the cell.
Regulation of the Cell Cycle by External Events
Both the initiation and inhibition of cell division are triggered by events external to the cell when it is about to
begin the replication process. An event may be as simple as the death of nearby cells or as sweeping as the
release of growth-promoting hormones, such as human growth hormone (HGH or hGH). A lack of HGH can
inhibitcelldivision,resultingindwarfism,whereastoomuchHGHcanresultingigantism.Crowdingofcellscan
alsoinhibitcelldivision.Incontrast,afactorthatcaninitiatecelldivisionisthesizeofthecell:Asacellgrows,it
becomesphysiologicallyinefficientduetoitsdecreasingsurface-to-volumeratio.Thesolutiontothisproblemis
to divide.
Whateverthesourceofthemessage,thecellreceivesthesignal,andaseriesofeventswithinthecellallowsit
to proceed into interphase. Moving forward from this initiation point, every parameter required during each cell
cycle phase must be met or the cycle cannot progress.
Regulation at Internal Checkpoints
Itisessentialthatthedaughtercellsproducedbeexactduplicatesoftheparentcell.Mistakesintheduplication
or distribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced
from an abnormal cell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control
mechanisms that operate at three main cell-cycle checkpoints: A checkpoint is one of several points in the
eukaryoticcellcycleatwhichtheprogressionofacelltothenextstageinthecyclecanbehalteduntilconditions
are favorable. These checkpoints occur near the end of G1, at the G2/M transition, and during metaphase
(Figure 10.10).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 302
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 291
Figure 10.10 The cell cycle is controlled at three checkpoints. The integrity of the DNA is assessed at the G1
checkpoint. Proper chromosome duplication is assessed at the G2 checkpoint. Attachment of each kinetochore to a
spindle fiber is assessed at the M checkpoint.
The G1Checkpoint
The G1 checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G1
checkpoint,alsocalledtherestrictionpoint(inyeast),isapointatwhichthecellirreversiblycommitstothecell
division process. External influences, such as growth factors, play a large role in carrying the cell past the G1
checkpoint. In addition to adequate reserves and cell size, there is a check for genomic DNA damage at the
G1 checkpoint. A cell that does not meet all the requirements will not be allowed to progress into the S phase.
Thecellcanhaltthecycleandattempttoremedytheproblematiccondition,orthecellcanadvanceintoG0and
await further signals when conditions improve.
The G2Checkpoint
The G2 checkpoint bars entry into the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As at the G1 checkpoint,
cellsizeandproteinreservesareassessed.However,themostimportantroleoftheG2checkpointistoensure
thatallofthechromosomeshavebeenreplicatedandthatthereplicatedDNAisnotdamaged.Ifthecheckpoint
mechanismsdetectproblemswiththeDNA,thecellcycleishalted,andthecellattemptstoeithercompleteDNA
replication or repair the damaged DNA.
The M Checkpoint
TheMcheckpointoccursneartheendofthemetaphasestageofkaryokinesis.TheMcheckpointisalsoknown
asthespindlecheckpoint,becauseitdetermineswhetherallthesisterchromatidsarecorrectlyattachedtothe
spindle microtubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step,
thecyclewillnotproceeduntilthekinetochoresofeachpairofsisterchromatidsarefirmlyanchoredtoatleast
two spindle fibers arising from opposite poles of the cell.
PAGE: 303
292 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Watch what occurs at the G1, G2, and M checkpoints by visiting this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
cell_checkpnts)to see an animation of the cell cycle.
Regulator Molecules of the Cell Cycle
In addition to the internally controlled checkpoints, there are two groups of intracellular molecules that regulate
the cell cycle. These regulatory molecules either promote progress of the cell to the next phase (positive
regulation)orhaltthecycle(negativeregulation).Regulatormoleculesmayactindividually,ortheycaninfluence
theactivityorproductionofotherregulatoryproteins.Therefore,thefailureofasingleregulatormayhavealmost
noeffectonthecellcycle,especiallyifmorethanonemechanismcontrolsthesameevent.However,theeffect
ofadeficientornon-functioningregulatorcanbewide-rangingandpossiblyfataltothecellifmultipleprocesses
are affected.
Positive Regulation of the Cell Cycle
Two groups of proteins, called cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), are termed positive regulators.
They are responsible for the progress of the cell through the various checkpoints. The levels of the four cyclin
proteinsfluctuatethroughoutthecellcycleinapredictablepattern(Figure10.11).Increasesintheconcentration
ofcyclinproteinsaretriggeredbybothexternalandinternalsignals.Afterthecellmovestothenextstageofthe
cellcycle,thecyclinsthatwereactiveinthepreviousstagearedegradedbycytoplasmicenzymes,asshownin
Figure 10.11below.
Figure 10.11 The concentrations of cyclin proteins change throughout the cell cycle. There is a direct correlation
between cyclin accumulation and the three major cell-cycle checkpoints. Also note the sharp decline of cyclin levels
following each checkpoint (the transition between phases of the cell cycle), as cyclin is degraded by cytoplasmic
enzymes. (credit: modification of work by "WikiMiMa"/Wikimedia Commons)
CyclinsregulatethecellcycleonlywhentheyaretightlyboundtoCdks.Tobefullyactive,theCdk/cyclincomplex
must also be phosphorylated in specific locations to activate the complex. Like all kinases, Cdks are enzymes
(kinases)thatinturnphosphorylateotherproteins.Phosphorylationactivatestheproteinbychangingitsshape.
The proteins phosphorylated by Cdks are involved in advancing the cell to the next phase. (Figure 10.12).
The levels of Cdk proteins are relatively stable throughout the cell cycle; however, the concentrations of cyclin
fluctuateanddeterminewhenCdk/cyclincomplexesform.ThedifferentcyclinsandCdksbindatspecificpoints
in the cell cycle and thus regulate different checkpoints.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 304
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 293
Figure10.12Cyclin-dependentkinases(Cdks)areproteinkinasesthat,whenfullyactivated,canphosphorylateand
thusactivateotherproteinsthatadvancethecellcyclepastacheckpoint.Tobecomefullyactivated,aCdkmustbind
to a cyclin protein and then be phosphorylated by another kinase.
Becausethecyclicfluctuationsofcyclinlevelsarelargelybasedonthetimingofthecellcycleandnotonspecific
events,regulationofthecellcycleusuallyoccursbyeithertheCdkmoleculesaloneortheCdk/cyclincomplexes.
Without a specific concentration of fully activated cyclin/Cdk complexes, the cell cycle cannot proceed through
the checkpoints.
Althoughthecyclinsarethemainregulatorymoleculesthatdeterminetheforwardmomentumofthecellcycle,
thereareseveralothermechanismsthatfine-tune theprogressofthecyclewithnegative, ratherthanpositive,
effects. These mechanisms essentially block the progression of the cell cycle until problematic conditions are
resolved. Molecules that prevent the full activation of Cdks are called Cdk inhibitors. Many of these inhibitor
molecules directly or indirectly monitor a particular cell-cycle event. The block placed on Cdks by inhibitor
molecules will not be removed until the specific event that the inhibitor monitors is completed.
PAGE: 305
294 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Negative Regulation of the Cell Cycle
The second group of cell-cycle regulatory molecules are negative regulators, which stop the cell cycle.
Remember that in positive regulation, active molecules cause the cycle to progress.
The best understood negative regulatory molecules are retinoblastoma protein (Rb), p53, and p21.
Retinoblastomaproteinsareagroupoftumor-suppressorproteinscommoninmanycells.Weshouldnotehere
that the 53 and 21 designations refer to the functional molecular masses of the proteins (p) in kilodaltons (a
dalton is equal to an atomic mass unit, which is equal to one proton or one neutron or 1 g/mol). Much of what
isknownaboutcell-cycleregulationcomesfromresearchconductedwithcellsthathavelostregulatorycontrol.
All three of these regulatory proteins were discovered to be damaged or non-functional in cells that had begun
to replicate uncontrollably (i.e., became cancerous). In each case, the main cause of the unchecked progress
through the cell cycle was a faulty copy of the regulatory protein.
Rb,p53,andp21actprimarilyattheG1checkpoint.p53isamulti-functionalproteinthathasamajorimpacton
thecommitmentofacelltodivisionbecauseitactswhenthereisdamagedDNAincellsthatareundergoingthe
preparatoryprocessesduringG1.IfdamagedDNAisdetected,p53haltsthecellcycleandthenrecruitsspecific
enzymestorepairtheDNA.IftheDNAcannotberepaired,p53cantriggerapoptosis,orcellsuicide,toprevent
the duplication of damaged chromosomes. As p53 levels rise, the production of p21 is triggered. p21 enforces
thehaltinthecycledictatedbyp53bybindingtoandinhibitingtheactivityoftheCdk/cyclincomplexes.Asacell
isexposedtomorestress,higherlevelsofp53andp21accumulate,makingitlesslikelythatthecellwillmove
into the S phase.
Rb, which largely monitors cell size, exerts its regulatory influence on other positive regulator proteins. In the
active, dephosphorylated state, Rb binds to proteins called transcription factors, most commonly, E2F (Figure
10.13).Transcriptionfactors“turnon”specificgenes,allowingtheproductionofproteinsencodedbythatgene.
When Rb is bound to E2F, production of proteins necessary for the G1/S transition is blocked. As the cell
increasesinsize,Rbisslowlyphosphorylateduntilitbecomesinactivated.RbreleasesE2F,whichcannowturn
onthegenethatproducesthetransitionprotein,andthisparticularblockisremoved.Forthecelltomovepast
eachofthecheckpoints,allpositiveregulatorsmustbe“turnedon,”andallnegativeregulatorsmustbe“turned
off.”
Figure 10.13Rb halts the cell cycle and releases its hold in response to cell growth.
Rbandotherproteinsthatnegativelyregulatethecellcyclearesometimescalledtumorsuppressors.Why
do you think the name tumor suppressor might be appropriate for these proteins?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 306
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 295
10.4 | Cancer and the Cell Cycle
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how cancer is caused by uncontrolled cell growth
• Understand how proto-oncogenes are normal cell genes that, when mutated, become oncogenes
• Describe how tumor suppressors function
• Explain how mutant tumor suppressors cause cancer
Cancercomprisesmanydifferentdiseasescausedbyacommonmechanism:uncontrolledcellgrowth.Despite
the redundancy and overlapping levels of cell-cycle control, errors do occur. One of the critical processes
monitored by the cell-cycle checkpoint surveillance mechanism is the proper replication of DNA during the S
phase. Even when all of the cell-cycle controls are fully functional, a small percentage of replication errors
(mutations) will be passed on to the daughter cells. If changes to the DNA nucleotide sequence occur within a
codingportionofageneandarenotcorrected,agenemutationresults.Allcancersstartwhenagenemutation
gives rise to a faulty protein that plays a key role in cell reproduction.
The change in the cell that results from the malformed protein may be minor: perhaps a slight delay in the
bindingofCdktocyclinoranRbproteinthatdetachesfromitstargetDNAwhilestillphosphorylated.Evenminor
mistakes, however, may allow subsequent mistakes to occur more readily. Over and over, small uncorrected
errors are passed from the parent cell to the daughter cells and amplified as each generation produces more
non-functional proteins from uncorrected DNA damage. Eventually, the pace of the cell cycle speeds up as
the effectiveness of the control and repair mechanisms decreases. Uncontrolled growth of the mutated cells
outpaces the growth of normal cells in the area, and a tumor (“-oma”) can result.
Proto-oncogenes
The genes that code for the positive cell-cycle regulators are called proto-oncogenes. Proto-oncogenes are
normal genes that, when mutated in certain ways, become oncogenes—genes that cause a cell to become
cancerous. Consider what might happen to the cell cycle in a cell with a recently acquired oncogene. In most
instances,thealterationoftheDNAsequencewillresultinalessfunctional(ornon-functional)protein.Theresult
is detrimental to the cell and will likely prevent the cell from completing the cell cycle; however, the organism
is not harmed because the mutation will not be carried forward. If a cell cannot reproduce, the mutation is
not propagated and the damage is minimal. Occasionally, however, a gene mutation causes a change that
increases the activity of a positive regulator. For example, a mutation that allows Cdk to be activated without
beingpartneredwithcyclincouldpushthecellcyclepastacheckpointbeforealloftherequiredconditionsare
met.Iftheresultingdaughtercellsaretoodamagedtoundergofurthercelldivisions,themutationwouldnotbe
propagatedandnoharmwouldcometotheorganism.However,iftheatypicaldaughtercellsareabletoundergo
further cell divisions, subsequent generations of cells may accumulate even more mutations, some possibly in
additional genes that regulate the cell cycle.
TheCdkgeneintheaboveexampleisonlyoneofmanygenesthatareconsideredproto-oncogenes.Inaddition
to the cell-cycle regulatory proteins, any protein that influences the cycle can be altered in such a way as to
overridecell-cyclecheckpoints.Anoncogeneisanygenethat,whenaltered,leadstoanincreaseintherateof
cell-cycle progression.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
Like proto-oncogenes, many of the negative cell-cycle regulatory proteins were discovered in cells that had
becomecancerous.TumorsuppressorgenesaresegmentsofDNAthatcodefornegativeregulatorproteins,
the type of regulators that, when activated, can prevent the cell from undergoing uncontrolled division. The
collective function of the best-understood tumor suppressor gene proteins, Rb, p53, and p21, is to put up a
roadblock to cell-cycle progression until certain events are completed. A cell that carries a mutated form of a
negativeregulatormightnotbeabletohaltthecellcycleifthereisaproblem.Tumorsuppressorsaresimilarto
brakes in a vehicle: Malfunctioning brakes can contribute to a car crash!
Mutatedp53geneshavebeenidentifiedinmorethan50percentofallhumantumorcells.Thisdiscoveryisnot
surprisinginlightofthemultiplerolesthatthep53proteinplaysattheG1checkpoint.Acellwithafaultyp53may
PAGE: 307
296 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
fail to detect errors present in the genomic DNA (Figure 10.14). Even if a partially functional p53 does identify
themutations,itmaynolongerbeabletosignalthenecessaryDNArepairenzymes.Eitherway,damagedDNA
willremainuncorrected.Atthispoint,afunctionalp53willdeemthecellunsalvageableandtriggerprogrammed
cell death (apoptosis). The damaged version of p53 found in cancer cells, however, cannot trigger apoptosis.
Figure10.14Theroleofnormalp53istomonitorDNAandthesupplyofoxygen(hypoxiaisaconditionofreduced
oxygensupply).Ifdamageisdetected,p53triggersrepairmechanisms.Ifrepairsareunsuccessful,p53signals
apoptosis. A cell with an abnormal p53 protein cannot repair damaged DNA and thus cannot signal apoptosis.
Cells with abnormal p53 can become cancerous. (credit: modification of work by Thierry Soussi)
Human papillomavirus can cause cervical cancer. The virus encodes E6, a protein that binds p53. Based
on this fact and what you know about p53, what effect do you think E6 binding has on p53 activity?
a. E6 activates p53
b. E6 inactivates p53
c. E6 mutates p53
d. E6 binding marks p53 for degradation
The loss of p53 function has other repercussions for the cell cycle. Mutated p53 might lose its ability to trigger
p21production.Withoutadequatelevelsofp21,thereisnoeffectiveblockonCdkactivation.Essentially,without
a fully functional p53, the G1 checkpoint is severely compromised and the cell proceeds directly from G1 to
S regardless of internal and external conditions. At the completion of this shortened cell cycle, two daughter
cellsareproducedthathaveinheritedthemutatedp53gene.Giventhenon-optimalconditionsunderwhichthe
parent cell reproduced, it is likely that the daughter cells will have acquired other mutations in addition to the
faultytumor-suppressorgene.Cellssuchasthesedaughtercellsquicklyaccumulatebothoncogenesandnon-
functional tumor-suppressor genes. Again, the result is tumor growth.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 308
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 297
Watch an animation of how cancer results from errors in the cell cycle. (This multimedia resource will open
in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66480/1.3/#eip-id1169995709332)
10.5 | Prokaryotic Cell Division
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the process of binary fission in prokaryotes
• Explain how FtsZ and tubulin proteins are examples of homology
Prokaryotes, such as bacteria, produce daughter cells by binary fission. For unicellular organisms, cell division
is the only method to produce new individuals. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, the outcome of cell
reproduction is a pair of daughter cells that are genetically identical to the parent cell. In unicellular organisms,
daughter cells are individuals.
To achieve the outcome of cloned offspring, certain steps are essential. The genomic DNA must be replicated
andthenallocatedintothedaughtercells;thecytoplasmiccontentsmustalsobedividedtogivebothnewcells
thecellularmachinerytosustainlife.Aswe’veseenwithbacterialcells,thegenomeconsistsofasingle,circular
DNA chromosome; therefore, the process of cell division is simplified. Karyokinesis is unnecessary because
there is no true nucleus and thus no need to direct one copy of the multiple chromosomes into each daughter
cell. This type of cell division is calledbinary (prokaryotic) fission.
Binary Fission
Due to the relative simplicity of the prokaryotes, the cell division process is a less complicated and much
more rapid process than cell division in eukaryotes. As a review of the general information on cell division
we discussed at the beginning of this chapter, recall that the single, circular DNA chromosome of bacteria
occupiesaspecificlocation,thenucleoidregion,withinthecell(Figure10.2).AlthoughtheDNAofthenucleoid
isassociatedwithproteinsthataidinpackagingthemoleculeintoacompactsize,therearenohistoneproteins
andthusnonucleosomesinprokaryotes.Thepackingproteinsofbacteriaare,however,relatedtothecohesin
and condensin proteins involved in the chromosome compaction of eukaryotes.
The bacterial chromosome is attached to the plasma membrane at about the midpoint of the cell. The starting
point of replication, the origin, is close to the binding site of the chromosome to the plasma membrane
(Figure 10.15). Replication of the DNA is bidirectional, moving away from the origin on both strands of the
loop simultaneously. As the new double strands are formed, each origin point moves away from the cell
wall attachment toward the opposite ends of the cell. As the cell elongates, the growing membrane aids in
the transport of the chromosomes. After the chromosomes have cleared the midpoint of the elongated cell,
cytoplasmic separation begins. The formation of a ring composed of repeating units of a protein called FtsZ
(shortfor“filamentingtemperature-sensitivemutantZ”)directsthepartitionbetweenthenucleoids.Formationof
the FtsZ ring triggers the accumulation of other proteins that work together to recruit new membrane and cell
wall materials to the site. A septum is formed between the daughter nucleoids, extending gradually from the
periphery toward the center of the cell. When the new cell walls are in place, the daughter cells separate.
PAGE: 309
298 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
Figure 10.15 These images show the steps of binary fission in prokaryotes. (credit: modification of work by
“Mcstrother”/Wikimedia Commons)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 310
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 299
Mitotic Spindle Apparatus
The precise timing and formation of the mitotic spindle is critical to the success of eukaryotic cell division.
Prokaryoticcells,ontheotherhand,donotundergokaryokinesisandthereforehavenoneedforamitotic
spindle. However, the FtsZ protein that plays such a vital role in prokaryotic cytokinesis is structurally
and functionally very similar to tubulin, the building block of the microtubules which make up the mitotic
spindle fibers that are necessary for eukaryotic nuclear division. FtsZ proteins can form filaments, rings,
and other three-dimensional structures that resemble the way tubulin forms microtubules, centrioles, and
various cytoskeletal components. In addition, both FtsZ and tubulin employ the same energy source, GTP
(guanosine triphosphate), to rapidly assemble and disassemble complex structures.
FtsZandtubulinareconsideredtobehomologousstructuresderivedfromcommonevolutionaryorigins.In
thisexample,FtsZistheancestorproteintotubulin(anevolutionarilyderivedprotein).Whilebothproteins
are found in extant organisms, tubulin function has evolved and diversified tremendously since evolving
from its FtsZ prokaryotic origin. A survey of mitotic assembly components found in present-day unicellular
eukaryotesrevealscrucialintermediarystepstothecomplexmembrane-enclosedgenomesofmulticellular
eukaryotes (Table 10.3).
Cell Division Apparatus among Various Organisms
Separation
Structure of of
Division of nuclear material
genetic material daughter
cells
There is no nucleus. FtsZ proteins
Occurs through binary fission. As the
The single, circular assemble into a
chromosome is replicated, the two copies move
Prokaryotes chromosome exists in a ring that
to opposite ends of the cell by an unknown
region of cytoplasm pinches the cell
mechanism.
called the nucleoid. in two.
Microfilaments
Chromosomes attach to the nuclear envelope, form a
Some Linear chromosomes which remains intact. The mitotic spindle passes cleavage
protists exist in the nucleus. through the envelope and elongates the cell. No furrow that
centrioles exist. pinches the cell
in two.
Microfilaments
A mitotic spindle forms from the centrioles and
Linear chromosomes form a
passes through the nuclear membrane, which
Other wrapped around cleavage
remains intact. Chromosomes attach to the
protists histones exist in the furrow that
mitotic spindle, which separates the
nucleus. pinches the cell
chromosomes and elongates the cell.
in two.
Microfilaments
A mitotic spindle forms from the centrosomes. form a
Linear chromosomes The nuclear envelope dissolves. Chromosomes cleavage
Animal cells
exist in the nucleus. attach to the mitotic spindle, which separates the furrow that
chromosomes and elongates the cell. pinches the cell
in two.
Table 10.3
PAGE: 311
300 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
KEY TERMS
anaphase stage of mitosis during which sister chromatids are separated from each other
binary fission prokaryotic cell division process
cell cycle ordered sequence of events through which a cell passes between one cell division and the next
cell cycle ordered series of events involving cell growth and cell division that produces two new daughter cells
cell plate structure formed during plant cell cytokinesis by Golgi vesicles, forming a temporary structure
(phragmoplast) and fusing at the metaphase plate; ultimately leads to the formation of cell walls that
separate the two daughter cells
cell-cycle checkpoint mechanismthatmonitorsthepreparednessofaeukaryoticcelltoadvancethroughthe
various cell-cycle stages
centriole rod-like structure constructed of microtubules at the center of each animal cell centrosome
centromere region at which sister chromatids are bound together; a constricted area in condensed
chromosomes
chromatid singleDNAmoleculeoftwostrandsofduplicatedDNAandassociatedproteinsheldtogetheratthe
centromere
cleavage furrow constrictionformedbyanactinringduringcytokinesisinanimalcellsthatleadstocytoplasmic
division
condensin proteins that help sister chromatids coil during prophase
cyclin oneofagroupofproteinsthatactinconjunctionwithcyclin-dependentkinasestohelpregulatethecell
cycle by phosphorylating key proteins; the concentrations of cyclins fluctuate throughout the cell cycle
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) one of a group of protein kinases that helps to regulate the cell cycle when
bound to cyclin; it functions to phosphorylate other proteins that are either activated or inactivated by
phosphorylation
cytokinesis division of the cytoplasm following mitosis that forms two daughter cells.
diploid cell, nucleus, or organism containing two sets of chromosomes (2n)
FtsZ tubulin-like protein component of the prokaryotic cytoskeleton that is important in prokaryotic cytokinesis
(name origin:Filamentingtemperature-sensitive mutantZ)
G0phase distinct from the G1phase of interphase; a cell in G0is not preparing to divide
G1phase (also, first gap) first phase of interphase centered on cell growth during mitosis
G2phase (also, second gap) third phase of interphase during which the cell undergoes final preparations for
mitosis
gamete haploid reproductive cell or sex cell (sperm, pollen grain, or egg)
gene physical and functional unit of heredity, a sequence of DNA that codes for a protein.
genome total genetic information of a cell or organism
haploid cell, nucleus, or organism containing one set of chromosomes (n)
histone oneofseveralsimilar,highlyconserved,lowmolecularweight,basicproteinsfoundinthechromatinof
all eukaryotic cells; associates with DNA to form nucleosomes
homologous chromosomes chromosomes of the same morphology with genes in the same location; diploid
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 312
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 301
organisms have pairs of homologous chromosomes (homologs), with each homolog derived from a
different parent
interphase period of the cell cycle leading up to mitosis; includes G1, S, and G2 phases (the interim period
between two consecutive cell divisions)
karyokinesis mitotic nuclear division
kinetochore protein structure associated with the centromere of each sister chromatid that attracts and binds
spindle microtubules during prometaphase
locus position of a gene on a chromosome
metaphase stage of mitosis during which chromosomes are aligned at the metaphase plate
metaphase plate equatorialplanemidwaybetweenthetwopolesofacellwherethechromosomesalignduring
metaphase
mitosis (also, karyokinesis) period of the cell cycle during which the duplicated chromosomes are separated
into identical nuclei; includes prophase, prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase
mitotic phase periodofthecellcycleduringwhichduplicatedchromosomesaredistributedintotwonucleiand
cytoplasmic contents are divided; includes karyokinesis (mitosis) and cytokinesis
mitotic spindle apparatuscomposedofmicrotubulesthatorchestratesthemovementofchromosomesduring
mitosis
nucleosome subunit of chromatin composed of a short length of DNA wrapped around a core of histone
proteins
oncogene mutated version of a normal gene involved in the positive regulation of the cell cycle
origin (also, ORI) region of the prokaryotic chromosome where replication begins (origin of replication)
p21 cell-cycle regulatory protein that inhibits the cell cycle; its levels are controlled by p53
p53 cell-cycleregulatoryproteinthatregulatescellgrowthandmonitorsDNAdamage;ithaltstheprogression
of the cell cycle in cases of DNA damage and may induce apoptosis
prometaphase stage of mitosis during which the nuclear membrane breaks down and mitotic spindle fibers
attach to kinetochores
prophase stage of mitosis during which chromosomes condense and the mitotic spindle begins to form
proto-oncogene normal gene that when mutated becomes an oncogene
quiescent refers to a cell that is performing normal cell functions and has not initiated preparations for cell
division
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) regulatory molecule that exhibits negative effects on the cell cycle by interacting
with a transcription factor (E2F)
S phase second, or synthesis, stage of interphase during which DNA replication occurs
septum structure formed in a bacterial cell as a precursor to the separation of the cell into two daughter cells
telophase stage of mitosis during which chromosomes arrive at opposite poles, decondense, and are
surrounded by a new nuclear envelope
tumor suppressor gene segment of DNA that codes for regulator proteins that prevent the cell from
undergoing uncontrolled division
PAGE: 313
302 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
CHAPTER SUMMARY
10.1Cell Division
Prokaryotes have a single circular chromosome composed of double-stranded DNA, whereas eukaryotes have
multiple, linear chromosomes composed of chromatin wrapped around histones, all of which are surrounded by
a nuclear membrane. The 46 chromosomes of human somatic cells are composed of 22 pairs of autosomes
(matched pairs) and a pair of sex chromosomes, which may or may not be matched. This is the 2nor diploid
state. Human gametes have 23 chromosomes, or one complete set of chromosomes; a set of chromosomes is
complete with either one of the sex chromosomes, X or Y. This is thenor haploid state. Genes are segments of
DNA that code for a specific functional molecule (a protein or RNA). An organism’s traits are determined by the
genes inherited from each parent. Duplicated chromosomes are composed of two sister chromatids.
Chromosomes are compacted using a variety of mechanisms during certain stages of the cell cycle. Several
classes of protein are involved in the organization and packing of the chromosomal DNA into a highly
condensed structure. The condensing complex compacts chromosomes, and the resulting condensed structure
is necessary for chromosomal segregation during mitosis.
10.2The Cell Cycle
The cell cycle is an orderly sequence of events. Cells on the path to cell division proceed through a series of
precisely timed and carefully regulated stages. In eukaryotes, the cell cycle consists of a long preparatory
period, called interphase, during which chromosomes are replicated. Interphase is divided into G1, S, and G2
phases. The mitotic phase begins with karyokinesis (mitosis), which consists of five stages: prophase,
prometaphase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The final stage of the cell division process, and
sometimes viewed as the final stage of the mitotic phase, is cytokinesis, during which the cytoplasmic
components of the daughter cells are separated either by an actin ring (animal cells) or by cell plate formation
(plant cells).
10.3Control of the Cell Cycle
Each step of the cell cycle is monitored by internal controls called checkpoints. There are three major
checkpoints in the cell cycle: one near the end of G1, a second at the G2/M transition, and the third during
metaphase. Positive regulator molecules allow the cell cycle to advance to the next stage of cell division.
Negative regulator molecules monitor cellular conditions and can halt the cycle until specific requirements are
met.
10.4Cancer and the Cell Cycle
Cancer is the result of unchecked cell division caused by a breakdown of the mechanisms that regulate the cell
cycle. The loss of control begins with a change in the DNA sequence of a gene that codes for one of the
regulatory molecules. Faulty instructions lead to a protein that does not function as it should. Any disruption of
the monitoring system can allow other mistakes to be passed on to the daughter cells. Each successive cell
division will give rise to daughter cells with even more accumulated damage. Eventually, all checkpoints
become nonfunctional, and rapidly reproducing cells crowd out normal cells, resulting in a tumor or leukemia
(blood cancer).
10.5Prokaryotic Cell Division
In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell division, the genomic DNA is replicated and then each copy is allocated
into a daughter cell. In addition, the cytoplasmic contents are divided evenly and distributed to the new cells.
However, there are many differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell division. Bacteria have a single,
circular DNA chromosome but no nucleus. Therefore, mitosis (karyokinesis) is not necessary in bacterial cell
division. Bacterial cytokinesis is directed by a ring composed of a protein called FtsZ. Ingrowth of membrane
and cell wall material from the periphery of the cells results in the formation of a septum that eventually
constructs the separate cell walls of the daughter cells.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 10.6Which of the following is the correct
order of events in mitosis?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 314
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 303
a. Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase 2.Figure 10.13Rb and other proteins that negatively
plate. The kinetochore becomes attached to regulate the cell cycle are sometimes called tumor
the mitotic spindle. The nucleus reforms and suppressors. Why do you think the name tumor
the cell divides. Cohesin proteins break suppressor might be appropriate for these proteins?
down and the sister chromatids separate.
3.Figure 10.14Human papillomavirus can cause
b. The kinetochore becomes attached to the
cervical cancer. The virus encodes E6, a protein that
mitotic spindle. Cohesin proteins break
binds p53. Based on this fact and what you know
down and the sister chromatids separate.
about p53, what effect do you think E6 binding has
Sister chromatids line up at the metaphase
on p53 activity?
plate. The nucleus reforms and the cell
a. E6 activates p53
divides.
b. E6 inactivates p53
c. The kinetochore becomes attached to the
c. E6 mutates p53
cohesin proteins. Sister chromatids line up
d. E6 binding marks p53 for degradation
at the metaphase plate. The kinetochore
breaks down and the sister chromatids
separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell
divides.
d. The kinetochore becomes attached to the
mitotic spindle. Sister chromatids line up at
the metaphase plate. Cohesin proteins
break down and the sister chromatids
separate. The nucleus reforms and the cell
divides.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.A diploid cell has_______ the number of 9.Which of the following events does not occur
chromosomes as a haploid cell. during some stages of interphase?
a. one-fourth a. DNA duplication
b. half b. organelle duplication
c. twice c. increase in cell size
d. four times d. separation of sister chromatids
5.An organism’s traits are determined by the specific 10.The mitotic spindles arise from which cell
combination of inherited _____. structure?
a. cells. a. centromere
b. genes. b. centrosome
c. proteins. c. kinetochore
d. chromatids. d. cleavage furrow
6.The first level of DNA organization in a eukaryotic 11.Attachment of the mitotic spindle fibers to the
cell is maintained by which molecule? kinetochores is a characteristic of which stage of
a. cohesin mitosis?
b. condensin a. prophase
c. chromatin b. prometaphase
d. histone c. metaphase
d. anaphase
7.Identical copies of chromatin held together by
cohesin at the centromere are called _____. 12.Unpacking of chromosomes and the formation of
a new nuclear envelope is a characteristic of which
a. histones. stage of mitosis?
b. nucleosomes. a. prometaphase
c. chromatin. b. metaphase
d. sister chromatids. c. anaphase
d. telophase
8.Chromosomes are duplicated during what stage of
the cell cycle? 13.Separation of the sister chromatids is a
a. G1phase characteristic of which stage of mitosis?
b. S phase
c. prophase
d. prometaphase
PAGE: 315
304 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
a. prometaphase 21.Which negative regulatory molecule can trigger
b. metaphase cell suicide (apoptosis) if vital cell cycle events do not
c. anaphase occur?
d. telophase a. p53
b. p21
14.The chromosomes become visible under a light
c. retinoblastoma protein (Rb)
microscope during which stage of mitosis?
d. cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)
a. prophase
b. prometaphase 22.___________ are changes to the order of
c. metaphase nucleotides in a segment of DNA that codes for a
d. anaphase protein.
a. Proto-oncogenes
15.The fusing of Golgi vesicles at the metaphase
b. Tumor suppressor genes
plate of dividing plant cells forms what structure?
c. Gene mutations
d. Negative regulators
a. cell plate
b. actin ring 23.A gene that codes for a positive cell-cycle
c. cleavage furrow regulator is called a(n) _____.
d. mitotic spindle a. kinase inhibitor.
b. tumor suppressor gene.
16.At which of the cell-cycle checkpoints do external
c. proto-oncogene.
forces have the greatest influence?
d. oncogene.
a. G1checkpoint
b. G2checkpoint 24.A mutated gene that codes for an altered version
c. M checkpoint of Cdk that is active in the absence of cyclin is a(n)
d. G0checkpoint _____.
a. kinase inhibitor.
17.What is the main prerequisite for clearance at the
b. tumor suppressor gene.
G2checkpoint?
c. proto-oncogene.
a. cell has reached a sufficient size
d. oncogene.
b. an adequate stockpile of nucleotides
c. accurate and complete DNA replication 25.Which molecule is a Cdk inhibitor that is
d. proper attachment of mitotic spindle fibers to controlled by p53?
kinetochores a. cyclin
b. anti-kinase
18.If the M checkpoint is not cleared, what stage of
c. Rb
mitosis will be blocked?
d. p21
a. prophase
b. prometaphase 26.Which eukaryotic cell-cycle event is missing in
c. metaphase binary fission?
d. anaphase a. cell growth
b. DNA duplication
19.Which protein is a positive regulator that
c. karyokinesis
phosphorylates other proteins when activated?
d. cytokinesis
a. p53 27.FtsZ proteins direct the formation of a _______
b. retinoblastoma protein (Rb) that will eventually form the new cell walls of the
c. cyclin daughter cells.
d. cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) a. contractile ring
b. cell plate
20.Many of the negative regulator proteins of the cell
c. cytoskeleton
cycle were discovered in what type of cells?
d. septum
a. gametes
b. cells in G0
c. cancer cells
d. stem cells
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
28.Compare and contrast a human somatic cell to a chromosomes, and genes?
human gamete.
30.Eukaryotic chromosomes are thousands of times
29.What is the relationship between a genome, longer than a typical cell. Explain how chromosomes
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 316
Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction 305
can fit inside a eukaryotic nucleus. cell-cycle regulators negative regulators.
31.Briefly describe the events that occur in each 38.What steps are necessary for Cdk to become
phase of interphase. fully active?
32.Chemotherapy drugs such asvincristine(derived 39.Rb is a negative regulator that blocks the cell
from Madagascar periwinkle plants) andcolchicine cycle at the G1checkpoint until the cell achieves a
(derived from autumn crocus plants) disrupt mitosis requisite size. What molecular mechanism does Rb
by binding to tubulin (the subunit of microtubules) employ to halt the cell cycle?
and interfering with microtubule assembly and
40.Outline the steps that lead to a cell becoming
disassembly. Exactly what mitotic structure is
cancerous.
targeted by these drugs and what effect would that
have on cell division? 41.Explain the difference between a proto-oncogene
and a tumor-suppressor gene.
33.Describe the similarities and differences between
the cytokinesis mechanisms found in animal cells 42.List the regulatory mechanisms that might be lost
versus those in plant cells. in a cell producing faulty p53.
34.List some reasons why a cell that has just 43.p53 can trigger apoptosis if certain cell-cycle
completed cytokinesis might enter the G0phase events fail. How does this regulatory outcome benefit
instead of the G1phase. a multicellular organism?
35.What cell-cycle events will be affected in a cell 44.Name the common components of eukaryotic cell
that produces mutated (non-functional) cohesin division and binary fission.
protein? 45.Describe how the duplicated bacterial
36.Describe the general conditions that must be met chromosomes are distributed into new daughter cells
at each of the three main cell-cycle checkpoints. without the direction of the mitotic spindle.
37.Compare and contrast the roles of the positive
PAGE: 317
306 Chapter 10 | Cell Reproduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 318
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 307
11 | MEIOSIS AND SEXUAL
REPRODUCTION
Figure11.1Eachofus,liketheorganismsshownabove,beginslifeasafertilizedegg(zygote).Aftertrillionsofcell
divisions,eachofusdevelopsintoacomplex,multicellularorganism.(credita:modificationofworkbyFrankWouters;
credit b: modification of work by Ken Cole, USGS; credit c: modification of work by Martin Pettitt)
Chapter Outline
11.1:The Process of Meiosis
11.2:Sexual Reproduction
Introduction
The ability to reproduce is a basic characteristic of all organisms: Hippopotamuses give birth to hippopotamus
calves; Joshua trees produce seeds from which Joshua tree seedlings emerge; and adult flamingos lay eggs
thathatchintoflamingochicks.However,unliketheorganismsshownabove,offspringmayormaynotresemble
theirparents.Forexample,inthecaseofmostinsectssuchasbutterflies(withacompletemetamorphosis),the
larval forms rarely resemble the adult forms.
Althoughmanyunicellularorganismsandafewmulticellularorganismscanproducegeneticallyidenticalclones
of themselves through asexual reproduction, many single-celled organisms and most multicellular organisms
reproduce regularly using another method—sexual reproduction. This highly evolved method involves the
production by parents of two haploid cells and the fusion of two haploid cells to form a single, genetically
recombined diploid cell—a genetically unique organism. Haploid cells that are part of the sexual reproductive
cycle are produced by a type of cell division called meiosis. Sexual reproduction, involving both meiosis
and fertilization, introduces variation into offspring that may account for the evolutionary success of sexual
reproduction. The vast majority of eukaryotic organisms, both multicellular and unicellular, can or must employ
some form of meiosis and fertilization to reproduce.
Inmostplantsandanimals,throughthousandsofroundsofmitoticcelldivision,diploidcells(whetherproduced
by asexual or sexual reproduction) will develop into an adult organism.
PAGE: 319
308 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
11.1 | The Process of Meiosis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describethebehaviorofchromosomesduringmeiosis,andthedifferencesbetweenthefirstandsecond
meiotic divisions
• Describe the cellular events that take place during meiosis
• Explain the differences between meiosis and mitosis
• Explain the mechanisms within the meiotic process that produce genetic variation among the haploid
gametes
Sexual reproduction requires the union of two specialized cells, called gametes, each of which contains one
set of chromosomes. When gametes unite, they form a zygote, or fertilized egg that contains two sets of
chromosomes. (Note: Cells that contain one set of chromosomes are called haploid; cells containing two
sets of chromosomes are called diploid.) If the reproductive cycle is to continue for any sexually reproducing
species,thenthediploidcellmustsomehowreduceitsnumberofchromosomesetstoproducehaploidgametes;
otherwise,thenumberofchromosomesetswilldoublewitheveryfutureroundoffertilization.Therefore,sexual
reproduction requires a nuclear division that reduces the number of chromosome sets by half.
Most animals and plants and many unicellular organisms are diploid and therefore have two sets of
chromosomes.Ineachsomaticcelloftheorganism(allcellsofamulticellularorganismexceptthegametesor
reproductivecells),thenucleuscontainstwocopiesofeachchromosome,calledhomologouschromosomes.
Homologous chromosomes are matched pairs containing the same genes in identical locations along their
lengths. Diploid organisms inherit one copy of each homologous chromosome from each parent.
Meiosis is the nuclear division that forms haploid cells from diploid cells, and it employs many of the same
cellularmechanismsasmitosis.However,asyouhavelearned,mitosisproducesdaughtercellswhosenuclei
are genetically identical to the original parent nucleus. In mitosis, both the parent and the daughter nuclei are
atthesame“ploidylevel”—diploidinthecaseofmostmulticellularmostanimals.Plantsusemitosistogrowas
sporophytes, andtogrowandproduceeggsandspermasgametophytes; sotheyusemitosis forbothhaploid
and diploid cells (as well as for all other ploidies). In meiosis, the starting nucleus is always diploid and the
daughter nuclei that result are haploid. To achieve this reduction in chromosome number, meiosis consists of
oneroundofchromosomereplicationfollowedbytworoundsofnucleardivision.Becausetheeventsthatoccur
duringeachofthedivisionstagesareanalogoustotheeventsofmitosis,thesamestagenamesareassigned.
However,becausetherearetworoundsofdivision,themajorprocessandthestagesaredesignatedwitha“I”
or a “II.” Thus, meiosis I is the first round of meiotic division and consists of prophase I, prometaphase I, and
soon.Likewise,MeiosisII(duringwhichthesecondroundofmeioticdivisiontakesplace)includesprophaseII,
prometaphase II, and so on.
Meiosis I
Meiosis is preceded by an interphase consisting of G1, S, and G2 phases, which are nearly identical to the
phases preceding mitosis. The G1 phase (the “first gap phase”) is focused on cell growth. During the S
phase—thesecondphaseofinterphase—thecellcopiesorreplicatestheDNAofthechromosomes.Finally,in
the G2phase (the “second gap phase”) the cell undergoes the final preparations for meiosis.
DuringDNAduplicationintheSphase,eachchromosomeisreplicatedtoproducetwoidenticalcopies—sister
chromatids that are held together at the centromere by cohesin proteins, which hold the chromatids together
until anaphase II.
Prophase I
Early in prophase I, before the chromosomes can be seen clearly with a microscope, the homologous
chromosomesareattachedattheirtipstothenuclearenvelopebyproteins.Asthenuclearenvelopebeginsto
break down, the proteins associated with homologous chromosomes bring the pair closer together. Recall that
in mitosis, homologous chromosomes do not pair together. The synaptonemal complex, a lattice of proteins
between the homologous chromosomes, first forms at specific locations and then spreads outward to cover
theentirelengthofthechromosomes.Thetightpairingofthehomologouschromosomesiscalledsynapsis.In
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 320
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 309
synapsis,thegenesonthechromatidsofthehomologouschromosomesarealignedpreciselywitheachother.
The synaptonemal complex supports the exchange of chromosomal segments between homologous nonsister
chromatids—a process called crossing over. Crossing over can be observed visually after the exchange as
chiasmata(singular = chiasma) (Figure 11.2).
In humans, even though the X and Y sex chromosomes are not completely homologous (that is, most of their
genes differ), there is a small region of homology that allows the X and Y chromosomes to pair up during
prophase I. A partial synaptonemal complex develops only between the regions of homology.
Figure11.2EarlyinprophaseI,homologouschromosomescometogethertoformasynapse.Thechromosomesare
bound tightly together and in perfect alignment by a protein lattice called a synaptonemal complex and by cohesin
proteins at the centromere.
Located at intervals along the synaptonemal complex are large protein assemblies called recombination
nodules. These assemblies mark the points of later chiasmata and mediate the multistep process of
crossover—or genetic recombination—between the nonsister chromatids. Near the recombination nodule, the
double-stranded DNA of each chromatid is cleaved, the cut ends are modified, and a new connection is made
between the nonsister chromatids. As prophase I progresses, the synaptonemal complex begins to break
down and the chromosomes begin to condense. When the synaptonemal complex is gone, the homologous
chromosomes remain attached to each other at the centromere and at chiasmata. The chiasmata remain until
anaphase I. The number of chiasmata varies according to the species and the length of the chromosome.
Theremustbeatleastonechiasmaperchromosomeforproperseparationofhomologouschromosomesduring
meiosis I, but there may be as many as 25. Following crossover, the synaptonemal complex breaks down and
the cohesin connection between homologous pairs is removed. At the end of prophase I, the pairs are held
togetheronlyatthechiasmata(Figure11.3).Thesepairsarecalledtetradsbecausethefoursisterchromatids
of each pair of homologous chromosomes are now visible.
The crossover events are the first source of genetic variation in the nuclei produced by meiosis. A single
crossover event between homologous nonsister chromatids leads to a reciprocal exchange of equivalent DNA
betweenamaternalchromosomeandapaternalchromosome.Whenarecombinantsisterchromatidismoved
intoagametecellitwillcarrysomeDNAfromoneparentandsomeDNAfromtheotherparent.Therecombinant
chromatidhasacombinationofmaternalandpaternalgenesthatdidnotexistbeforethecrossover.Crossover
events can occur almost anywhere along the length of the synapsed chromosomes. Different cells undergoing
meiosis will therefore produce different recombinant chromatids, with varying combinations of maternal and
parentalgenes.Multiplecrossoversinanarmofthechromosomehavethesameeffect,exchangingsegments
of DNA to produce genetically recombined chromosomes.
PAGE: 321
310 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
Figure11.3Crossoveroccursbetweennonsisterchromatidsofhomologouschromosomes.Theresultisanexchange
of genetic material between homologous chromosomes.
Prometaphase I
ThekeyeventinprometaphaseIistheattachmentofthespindlefibermicrotubulestothekinetochoreproteinsat
thecentromeres.Kinetochore proteinsaremultiprotein complexesthatbindthecentromeresofachromosome
to the microtubules of the mitotic spindle. Microtubules grow from microtubule-organizing centers (MTOCs).
In animal cells, MTOCs are centrosomes located at opposite poles of the cell. The microtubules from each
pole move toward the middle of the cell and attach to one of the kinetochores of the two fused homologous
chromosomes. Each member of the homologous pair attaches to a microtubule extending from opposite poles
of the cell so that in the next phase, the microtubules can pull the homologous pair apart. A spindle fiber that
hasattachedtoakinetochoreiscalledakinetochoremicrotubule.AttheendofprometaphaseI,eachtetradis
attachedtomicrotubulesfrombothpoles,withonehomologouschromosomefacingeachpole.Thehomologous
chromosomes are still held together at the chiasmata. In addition, the nuclear membrane has broken down
entirely.
Metaphase I
During metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes are arranged at the metaphase plate—roughly in the
midline of the cell, with the kinetochores facing opposite poles. The homologous pairs orient themselves
randomly at the equator. For example, if the two homologous members of chromosome 1 are labeled a and b,
thenthechromosomescouldlineupa-borb-a.Thisisimportantindeterminingthegenescarriedbyagamete,
aseachwillonlyreceiveoneofthetwohomologouschromosomes.(Recallthataftercrossingovertakesplace,
homologouschromosomesarenotidentical.Theycontainslightdifferencesintheirgeneticinformation,causing
each gamete to have a unique genetic makeup.)
The randomness in the alignment of recombined chromosomes at the metaphase plate, coupled with the
crossing over events between nonsister chromatids, are responsible for much of the genetic variation in
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 322
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 311
the offspring. To clarify this further, remember that the homologous chromosomes of a sexually reproducing
organism are originally inherited as two separate sets, one from each parent. Using humans as an example,
one set of 23 chromosomes is present in the egg donated by the mother. The father provides the other set of
23 chromosomes in the sperm that fertilizes the egg. Every cell of the multicellular offspring has copies of the
original two sets of homologous chromosomes. In prophase I of meiosis, the homologous chromosomes form
the tetrads. In metaphase I, these pairs line up at the midway point between the two poles of the cell to form
the metaphase plate. Because there is an equal chance that a microtubule fiber will encounter a maternally or
paternally inherited chromosome, the arrangement of the tetrads at the metaphase plate is random. Thus, any
maternallyinheritedchromosomemayfaceeitherpole.Likewise,anypaternallyinheritedchromosomemayalso
face either pole.The orientation of each tetrad is independent of the orientation of the other 22 tetrads.
Thisevent—therandom(orindependent)assortmentofhomologouschromosomesatthemetaphaseplate—is
the second mechanism that introduces variation into the gametes or spores. In each cell that undergoes
meiosis, the arrangement of the tetrads is different. The number of variations is dependent on the number of
chromosomes making up a set. There are two possibilities for orientation at the metaphase plate; the possible
n
numberofalignments therefore equals2 inadiploid cell, wherenisthe numberofchromosomesperhaploid
23
set. Humans have 23 chromosome pairs, which results in over eight million (2 ) possible genetically-distinct
gametesjustfromtherandomalignmentofchromosomesatthemetaphaseplate.Thisnumberdoesnotinclude
thevariabilitythatwaspreviouslyproducedbycrossingoverbetweenthenonsisterchromatids.Giventhesetwo
mechanisms, it is highly unlikely that any two haploid cells resulting from meiosis will have the same genetic
composition (Figure 11.4).
To summarize, meiosis I creates genetically diverse gametes in two ways. First, during prophase I, crossover
events between the nonsister chromatids of each homologous pair of chromosomes generate recombinant
chromatids with new combinations of maternal and paternal genes. Second, the random assortment of tetrads
on the metaphase plate produces unique combinations of maternal and paternal chromosomes that will make
their way into the gametes.
PAGE: 323
312 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
Figure11.4Random,independentassortmentduringmetaphaseIcanbedemonstratedbyconsideringacellwitha
setoftwochromosomes(n=2).Inthiscase,therearetwopossiblearrangementsattheequatorialplaneinmetaphase
I. The total possible number of different gametes is 2n, where n equals the number of chromosomes in a set. In this
example, there are four possible genetic combinations for the gametes. With n = 23 in human cells, there are over
eight million possible combinations of paternal and maternal chromosomes.
Anaphase I
InanaphaseI,themicrotubulespullthelinkedchromosomesapart.Thesisterchromatidsremaintightlybound
togetheratthecentromere.ThechiasmataarebrokeninanaphaseIasthemicrotubulesattachedtothefused
kinetochores pull the homologous chromosomes apart (Figure 11.5).
Telophase I and Cytokinesis
In telophase, the separated chromosomes arrive at opposite poles. The remainder of the typical telophase
events may or may not occur, depending on the species. In some organisms, the chromosomes “decondense”
and nuclear envelopes form around the separated sets of chromatids produced during telophase I. In other
organisms, cytokinesis—the physical separation of the cytoplasmic components into two daughter
cells—occurs without reformation of the nuclei. In nearly all species of animals and some fungi, cytokinesis
separatesthecellcontentsviaacleavagefurrow(constrictionoftheactinringthatleadstocytoplasmicdivision).
Inplants,acellplateisformedduringcellcytokinesisbyGolgivesiclesfusingatthemetaphaseplate.Thiscell
plate will ultimately lead to the formation of cell walls that separate the two daughter cells.
Two haploid cells are the result of the first meiotic division of a diploid cell. The cells are haploid because at
each pole, there is just one of each pair of the homologous chromosomes. Therefore, only one full set of the
chromosomes is present. This is why the cells are considered haploid—there is only one chromosome set,
even though each chromosome still consists of two sister chromatids. Recall that sister chromatids are merely
duplicatesofoneofthetwohomologouschromosomes(exceptforchangesthatoccurredduringcrossingover).
In meiosis II, these two sister chromatids will separate, creating four haploid daughter cells.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 324
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 313
Review the process of meiosis, observing how chromosomes align and migrate, at Meiosis: An Interactive
Animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/animal_meiosis).
Meiosis II
Insomespecies,cellsenterabriefinterphase,orinterkinesis,beforeenteringmeiosisII.Interkinesislacksan
S phase, so chromosomes are not duplicated. The two cells produced in meiosis I go through the events of
meiosisIIinsynchrony.DuringmeiosisII,thesisterchromatidswithinthetwodaughtercellsseparate,forming
fournewhaploidgametes.ThemechanicsofmeiosisIIaresimilartomitosis,exceptthateachdividingcellhas
onlyonesetofhomologouschromosomes,eachwithtwochromatids.Therefore,eachcellhashalfthenumber
ofsisterchromatidstoseparateoutasadiploidcellundergoingmitosis.Intermsofchromosomalcontent,cells
at the start of meiosis II are similar to haploid cells in G2, preparing to undergo mitosis.
Prophase II
IfthechromosomesdecondensedintelophaseI,theycondenseagain.Ifnuclearenvelopeswereformed,they
fragmentintovesicles.TheMTOCsthatwereduplicatedduringinterkinesismoveawayfromeachothertoward
opposite poles, and new spindles are formed.
Prometaphase II
Thenuclearenvelopesarecompletelybrokendown,andthespindleisfullyformed.Eachsisterchromatidforms
an individual kinetochore that attaches to microtubules from opposite poles.
Metaphase II
The sister chromatids are maximally condensed and aligned at the equator of the cell.
Anaphase II
The sister chromatids are pulled apart by the kinetochore microtubules and move toward opposite poles.
Nonkinetochore microtubules elongate the cell.
PAGE: 325
314 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
Figure 11.5 The process of chromosome alignment differs between meiosis I and meiosis II. In prometaphase I,
microtubulesattachtothefusedkinetochoresofhomologouschromosomes,andthehomologouschromosomesare
arrangedatthemidlineofthecell(themetaphaseplate)inmetaphaseI.InanaphaseI,thehomologouschromosomes
separate.InprometaphaseII,microtubulesattachtothekinetochoresofsisterchromatids,andthesisterchromatids
are arranged at the midpoint of the cells in metaphase II. In anaphase II, the sister chromatids separate.
Telophase II and Cytokinesis
The chromosomes arrive at opposite poles and begin to decondense. Nuclear envelopes form around the
chromosomes. If the parent cell was diploid, as is most commonly the case, then cytokinesis now separates
the two cells into four unique haploid cells. The cells produced are genetically unique because of the random
assortment of paternal and maternal homologs and because of the recombination of maternal and paternal
segmentsofchromosomes(withtheirsetsofgenes)thatoccursduringcrossover.Theentireprocessofmeiosis
is outlined inFigure 11.6.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 326
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 315
Figure11.6Ananimalcellwithadiploidnumberoffour(2n=4)proceedsthroughthestagesofmeiosistoformfour
haploid daughter cells.
Comparing Meiosis and Mitosis
Mitosis and meiosis are both forms of division of the nucleus in eukaryotic cells. They share some similarities,
butalsoexhibitanumberofimportantanddistinctdifferencesthatleadtoverydifferentoutcomes(Figure11.7).
Mitosis is a single nuclear division that results in two nuclei that are usually partitioned into two new cells. The
nuclei resulting from a mitotic division are genetically identical to the original nucleus. They have the same
number of sets of chromosomes: one set in the case of haploid cells and two sets in the case of diploid cells.
Incontrast,meiosisconsistsoftwonucleardivisionsresultinginfournucleithatareusuallypartitionedintofour
new, genetically distinct cells. The four nuclei produced during meiosis are not genetically identical, and they
contain one chromosome set only. This is half the number of chromosome sets in the original cell, which is
PAGE: 327
316 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
diploid.
The main differences between mitosis and meiosis occur in meiosis I, which is a very different nuclear division
than mitosis. In meiosis I, the homologous chromosome pairs physically meet and are bound together with the
synaptonemal complex. Following this, the chromosomes develop chiasmata and undergo crossover between
nonsister chromatids. In the end, the chromosomes line up along the metaphase plate as tetrads—with
kinetochorefibersfromoppositespindlepolesattachedtoeachkinetochoreofahomologtoformatetrad.Allof
these events occur only in meiosis I.
Whenthechiasmataresolveandthetetradisbrokenupwiththehomologsmovingtoonepoleoranother,the
ploidy level—the number of sets of chromosomes in each future nucleus—has been reduced from two to one.
For this reason, meiosis I is referred to as a reductional division. There is no such reduction in ploidy level
during mitosis.
Meiosis II is analogous to a mitotic division. In this case, the duplicated chromosomes (only one set of them)
line up on the metaphase plate with divided kinetochores attached to kinetochore fibers from opposite poles.
During anaphase II, as in mitotic anaphase, the kinetochores divide and one sister chromatid—now referred to
as a chromosome—is pulled to one pole while the other sister chromatid is pulled to the other pole. If it were
not for the fact that there had been crossover, the two products of each individual meiosis II division would be
identical (as in mitosis). Instead, they are different because there has always been at least one crossover per
chromosome. Meiosis II is not a reduction division because although there are fewer copies of the genome in
the resulting cells, there is still one set of chromosomes, as there was at the end of meiosis I.
Figure 11.7 Meiosis and mitosis are both preceded by one cycle of DNA replication; however, meiosis includes two
nucleardivisions.Thefourdaughtercellsresultingfrommeiosisarehaploidandgeneticallydistinct.Thedaughtercells
resulting from mitosis are diploid and identical to the parent cell.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 328
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 317
The Mystery of the Evolution of Meiosis
Some characteristics of organisms are so widespread and fundamental that it is sometimes difficult to
remember that they evolved like other simple traits. Meiosis is such an extraordinarily complex series of
cellular events that biologists have had trouble testing hypotheses concerning how it may have evolved.
Althoughmeiosisisinextricablyentwinedwithsexualreproductionanditsadvantagesanddisadvantages,
itisimportanttoseparatethequestionsoftheevolutionofmeiosisandtheevolutionofsex,becauseearly
meiosis may have been advantageous for different reasons than it is now. Thinking outside the box and
imaginingwhattheearlybenefitsfrommeiosismighthavebeenisoneapproachtouncoveringhowitmay
have evolved.
Meiosis and mitosis share obvious cellular processes, and it makes sense that meiosis evolved from
mitosis. The difficulty lies in the clear differences between meiosis I and mitosis. Adam Wilkins and Robin
[1]
Holliday summarized the unique events that needed to occur for the evolution of meiosis from mitosis.
These steps are homologous chromosome pairing and synapsis, crossover exchanges, sister chromatids
remaining attached during anaphase, and suppression of DNA replication in interphase. They argue that
the first step is the hardest and most important and that understanding how it evolved would make the
evolutionary process clearer. They suggest genetic experiments that might shed light on the evolution of
synapsis.
Thereareotherapproachestounderstandingtheevolutionofmeiosisinprogress.Differentformsofmeiosis
exist in single-celled protists. Some appear to be simpler or more “primitive” forms of meiosis. Comparing
the meiotic divisions of different protists may shed light on the evolution of meiosis. Marilee Ramesh and
[2]
colleagues compared the genes involved in meiosis in protists to understand when and where meiosis
mighthaveevolved.Althoughresearchisstillongoing,recentscholarshipintomeiosisinprotistssuggests
thatsomeaspectsofmeiosismayhaveevolvedlaterthanothers.Thiskindofgeneticcomparisoncantell
us what aspects of meiosis are the oldest and what cellular processes they may have borrowed from in
earlier cells.
Click through the steps of this interactive animation to compare the meiotic process of cell division to that of
mitosis atHow Cells Divide (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/how_cells_dvide).
11.2 | Sexual Reproduction
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain that meiosis and sexual reproduction are highly evolved traits
• Identify variation among offspring as a potential evolutionary advantage of sexual reproduction
• Describe the three different life-cycle types among sexually reproducing multicellular organisms.
1.
Adam S. Wilkins and Robin Holliday, “The Evolution of Meiosis from Mitosis,”Genetics181 (2009): 3–12.
2. Marilee A. Ramesh, Shehre-Banoo Malik and John M. Logsdon, Jr, “A Phylogenetic Inventory of Meiotic Genes: Evidence for Sex in
Giardiaand an Early Eukaryotic Origin of Meiosis,”Current Biology15 (2005):185–91.
PAGE: 329
318 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction was likely an early evolutionary innovation after the appearance of eukaryotic cells. It
appears to have been very successful because most eukaryotes are able to reproduce sexually and, in many
animals, it is the only mode of reproduction. And yet, scientists also recognize some real disadvantages to
sexual reproduction. On the surface, creating offspring that are genetic clones of the parent appears to be a
better system. If the parent organism is successfully occupying a habitat, offspring with the same traits should
be similarly successful. There is also the obvious benefit to an organism that can produce offspring whenever
circumstancesarefavorablebyasexualbudding,fragmentation,orbyproducingeggsasexually.Thesemethods
ofreproductiondonotrequireanotherorganismoftheoppositesex.Indeed,someorganismsthatleadasolitary
lifestyle have retained the ability to reproduce asexually. In addition, in asexual populations, every individual
is capable of reproduction. In sexual populations, the males are not producing the offspring themselves, so
hypothetically an asexual population could grow twice as fast.
However, multicellular organisms that exclusively depend on asexual reproduction are exceedingly rare. Why
are meiosis and sexual reproductive strategies so common? These are important (and as yet unanswered)
questionsinbiology,eventhoughtheyhavebeenthefocusofmuchresearchbeginninginthelatterhalfofthe
20thcentury.Thereareseveralpossibleexplanations,oneofwhichisthatthevariationthatsexualreproduction
createsamongoffspringisveryimportanttothesurvivalandreproductionofthepopulation.Thus,onaverage,
asexuallyreproducingpopulationwillleavemoredescendantsthananotherwisesimilarasexuallyreproducing
population. The only source of variation in asexual organisms is mutation. Mutations that take place during the
formationofgermcelllinesarealsotheultimatesourceofvariationinsexuallyreproducingorganisms.However,
incontrasttomutationduringasexualreproduction,themutationsduringsexualreproductioncanbecontinually
reshuffledfromonegenerationtothenextwhendifferentparentscombinetheiruniquegenomesandthegenes
are mixed into different combinations by crossovers during prophase I and random assortment at metaphase I.
The Red Queen Hypothesis
Genetic variation is the outcome of sexual reproduction, but why are ongoing variations necessary, even
underseeminglystableenvironmentalconditions?EntertheRedQueenhypothesis,firstproposedbyLeigh
[3]
VanValenin1973. TheconceptwasnamedinreferencetotheRedQueen'sraceinLewisCarroll'sbook,
Through the Looking-Glass.
Allspeciescoevolve(evolvetogether)withotherorganisms.Forexample,predatorsevolvewiththeirprey,
and parasites evolve with their hosts. Each tiny advantage gained by favorable variation gives a species
a reproductive edge over close competitors, predators, parasites, or even prey. However, survival of any
given genotype or phenotype in a population is dependent on the reproductive fitness of other genotypes
or phenotypes within a given species. The only method that will allow a coevolving species to maintain
its own share of the resources is to also continually improve its fitness (the capacity of the members to
produce more reproductively viable offspring relative to others within a species). As one species gains an
advantage,thisincreasesselectionontheotherspecies;theymustalsodevelopanadvantageortheywill
beoutcompeted.Nosinglespeciesprogressestoofaraheadbecausegeneticvariationamongtheprogeny
ofsexualreproductionprovidesallspecieswithamechanismtoimproverapidly.Speciesthatcannotkeep
up become extinct. The Red Queen’s catchphrase was, “It takes all the running you can do to stay in the
same place.” This is an apt description of coevolution between competing species.
Life Cycles of Sexually Reproducing Organisms
Fertilization and meiosis alternate in sexual life cycles. What happens between these two events depends
on the organism’s “reproductive strategy.” The process of meiosis reduces the chromosome number by half.
Fertilization, the joining of two haploid gametes, restores the diploid condition. Some organisms have a
multicellular diploid stage that is most obvious and only produce haploid reproductive cells. Animals, including
humans, have this type of life cycle. Other organisms, such as fungi, have a multicellular haploid stage that is
most obvious. Plants and some algae have alternation of generations, in which they have multicellular diploid
and haploid life stages that are apparent to different degrees depending on the group.
Nearlyallanimalsemployadiploid-dominantlife-cyclestrategyinwhichtheonlyhaploidcellsproducedbythe
3. Leigh Van Valen, “A New Evolutionary Law,”Evolutionary Theory1 (1973): 1–30
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 330
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 319
organismarethegametes.Earlyinthedevelopmentoftheembryo,specializeddiploidcells,calledgermcells,
areproducedwithinthegonads(suchasthetestesandovaries).Germcellsarecapableofmitosistoperpetuate
the germ cell line and meiosis to produce haploid gametes. Once the haploid gametes are formed, they lose
the ability to divide again. There is no multicellular haploid life stage. Fertilization occurs with the fusion of two
gametes, usually from different individuals, restoring the diploid state (Figure 11.8).
Figure 11.8 In animals, sexually reproducing adults form haploid gametes from diploid germ cells. Fusion of the
gametesgivesrisetoafertilizedeggcell,orzygote.Thezygotewillundergomultipleroundsofmitosistoproducea
multicellular offspring. The germ cells are generated early in the development of the zygote.
Most fungi and algae employ a life-cycle type in which the “body” of the organism—the ecologically important
part of the life cycle—is haploid. The haploid cells that make up the tissues of the dominant multicellular stage
are formed by mitosis. During sexual reproduction, specialized haploid cells from two individuals—designated
the (+) and (−) mating types—join to form a diploid zygote. The zygote immediately undergoes meiosis to
form four haploid cells called spores. Although these spores are haploid like the “parents,” they contain a new
genetic combination from two parents. The spores can remain dormant for various time periods. Eventually,
whenconditions arefavorable, the sporesformmulticellular haploid structures through manyroundsofmitosis
(Figure 11.9).
PAGE: 331
320 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
Figure 11.9 Fungi, such as black bread mold (Rhizopus nigricans), have a haploid multicellular stage that
produces specialized haploid cells by mitosis that fuse to form a diploid zygote. The haploid multicellular stage
produces specialized haploid cells by mitosis that fuse to form a diploid zygote. The zygote undergoes meiosis
toproducehaploidspores.Eachsporegivesrisetoamulticellularhaploidorganismbymitosis.Above,different
matinghyphaetypes(denotedas+and–)jointoformazygosporethroughnuclearfusion.(credit“zygomycota”
micrograph: modification of work by “Fanaberka”/Wikimedia Commons)
Ifamutationoccurssothatafungusisnolongerabletoproduceaminusmatingtype,willitstillbeableto
reproduce?
The third life-cycle type, employed by some algae and all plants, is a blend of the haploid-dominant and
diploid-dominant extremes. Species with alternation of generations have both haploid and diploid multicellular
organisms as part of their life cycle. The haploid multicellular plants are called gametophytes, because they
producegametesfromspecializedcells.Meiosisisnotdirectlyinvolvedintheproductionofgametesinthiscase,
because the organism that produces the gametes is already haploid. Fertilization between the gametes forms
a diploid zygote. The zygote will undergo many rounds of mitosis and give rise to a diploid multicellular plant
calledasporophyte.Specializedcellsofthesporophytewillundergomeiosisandproducehaploidspores.The
spores will subsequently develop into the gametophytes (Figure 11.10).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 332
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 321
Figure11.10Plantshavealifecyclethatalternatesbetweenamulticellularhaploidorganismandamulticellulardiploid
organism. In some plants, such as ferns, both the haploid and diploid plant stages are free-living. The diploid plant
iscalledasporophytebecauseitproduceshaploidsporesbymeiosis.Thesporesdevelopintomulticellular,haploid
plantsthatarecalledgametophytesbecausetheyproducegametes.Thegametesoftwoindividualswillfusetoform
adiploidzygotethatbecomesthesporophyte.(credit“fern”:modificationofworkbyCoryZanker;credit“sporangia”:
modification of work by "Obsidian Soul"/Wikimedia Commons; credit “gametophyte and sporophyte”: modification of
work by “Vlmastra”/Wikimedia Commons)
Although all plants utilize some version of the alternation of generations, the relative size of the sporophyte
andthegametophyteandtherelationshipbetweenthemvarygreatly.Inplantssuchasmoss,thegametophyte
organismisthefree-livingplantandthesporophyteisphysicallydependentonthegametophyte.Inotherplants,
such as ferns, both the gametophyte and sporophyte plants are free-living; however, the sporophyte is much
larger.Inseedplants,suchasmagnoliatreesanddaisies,thegametophyteiscomposedofonlyafewcellsand,
in the case of the female gametophyte, is completely retained within the sporophyte.
Sexual reproduction takes many forms in multicellular organisms. The fact that nearly every multicellular
organism on Earth employs sexual reproduction is strong evidence for the benefits of producing offspring with
unique gene combinations, though there are other possible benefits as well.
PAGE: 333
322 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
KEY TERMS
alternation of generations life-cycle type in which the diploid and haploid stages alternate
chiasmata (singular, chiasma) the structure that forms at the crossover points after genetic material is
exchanged
cohesin proteinsthatformacomplexthatsealssisterchromatidstogetherattheircentromeresuntilanaphase
II of meiosis
crossover exchange of genetic material between nonsister chromatids resulting in chromosomes that
incorporate genes from both parents of the organism
fertilization union of two haploid cells from two individual organisms
gametophyte a multicellular haploid life-cycle stage that produces gametes
germ cells specialized cell line that produces gametes, such as eggs or sperm
interkinesis (also,interphase II) brief period of rest between meiosis I and meiosis II
life cycle the sequence of events in the development of an organism and the production of cells that produce
offspring
meiosis a nuclear division process that results in four haploid cells
meiosis I firstroundofmeioticcelldivision;referredtoasreductiondivisionbecausetheploidylevelisreduced
from diploid to haploid
meiosis II second round of meiotic cell division following meiosis I; sister chromatids are separated into
individual chromosomes, and the result is four unique haploid cells
recombination nodules protein assemblies formed on the synaptonemal complex that mark the points of
crossover events and mediate the multistep process of genetic recombination between nonsister
chromatids
reduction division nucleardivisionthatproducesdaughternucleieachhavingone-halfasmanychromosome
sets as the parental nucleus; meiosis I is a reduction division
somatic cell all the cells of a multicellular organism except the gametes or reproductive cells
spore haploid cell that can produce a haploid multicellular organism or can fuse with another spore to form a
diploid cell
sporophyte a multicellular diploid life-cycle stage that produces haploid spores by meiosis
synapsis formation of a close association between homologous chromosomes during prophase I
synaptonemal complex protein lattice that forms between homologous chromosomes during prophase I,
supporting crossover
tetrad two duplicated homologous chromosomes (four chromatids) bound together by chiasmata during
prophase I
CHAPTER SUMMARY
11.1The Process of Meiosis
Sexual reproduction requires that organisms produce cells that can fuse during fertilization to produce
offspring. In most animals, meiosis is used to produce haploid eggs and sperm from diploid parent cells so that
the fusion of an egg and sperm produces a diploid zygote. As with mitosis, DNA replication occurs prior to
meiosis during the S-phase of the cell cycle so that each chromosome becomes a pair of sister chromatids. In
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 334
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 323
meiosis, there are two rounds of nuclear division resulting in four nuclei and usually four daughter cells, each
with half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell. The first division separates homologs, and the
second—like mitosis—separates chromatids into individual chromosomes. Meiosis generates variation in the
daughter nuclei during crossover in prophase I as well as during the random alignment of tetrads at metaphase
I. The cells that are produced by meiosis are genetically unique.
Meiosis and mitosis share similar processes, but have distinct outcomes. Mitotic divisions are single nuclear
divisions that produce genetically identical daughter nuclei (i.e., each daughter nucleus has the same number
of chromosome sets as the original cell). In contrast, meiotic divisions include two nuclear divisions that
ultimately produce four genetically different daughter nuclei that have only one chromosome set (instead of the
two sets of chromosomes in the parent cell). The main differences between the two nuclear division processes
take place during the first division of meiosis: homologous chromosomes pair, crossover, and exchange
homologous nonsister chromatid segments. The homologous chromosomes separate into different nuclei
during meiosis I, causing areduction of ploidy level in the first division. The second division of meiosis is similar
to a mitotic division, except that the daughter cells do not contain identical genomes because of crossover and
chromosome recombination in prophase I.
11.2Sexual Reproduction
Nearly all eukaryotes undergo sexual reproduction. The variation introduced into the reproductive cells by
meiosis provides an important advantage that has made sexual reproduction evolutionarily successful. Meiosis
and fertilization alternate in sexual life cycles. The process of meiosis produces unique reproductive cells called
gametes, which have half the number of chromosomes as the parent cell. When two haploid gametes fuse, this
restores the diploid condition in the new zygote. Thus, most sexually reproducing organisms alternate between
haploid and diploid stages. However, the ways in which reproductive cells are produced and the timing between
meiosis and fertilization vary greatly.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 11.9If a mutation occurs so that a fungus it still be able to reproduce?
is no longer able to produce a minus mating type, will
REVIEW QUESTIONS
2.Meiosis usually produces ________ daughter 6.Which of the following isnottrue in regard to
cells. crossover?
a. two haploid a. Spindle microtubules guide the transfer of
b. two diploid DNA across the synaptonemal complex.
c. four haploid b. Nonsister chromatids exchange genetic
d. four diploid material.
c. Chiasmata are formed.
3.What structure is most important in forming the
d. Recombination nodules mark the crossover
tetrads?
point.
a. centromere
b. synaptonemal complex 7.What phase of mitotic interphase is missing from
c. chiasma meiotic interkinesis?
d. kinetochore a. G0phase
4.At which stage of meiosis are sister chromatids
b. G1phase
c. S phase
separated from each other?
a. prophase I
d. G2phase
b. prophase II 8.The part of meiosis that is similar to mitosis is
c. anaphase I ________.
d. anaphase II a. meiosis I
5.At metaphase I, homologous chromosomes are b. anaphase I
connected only at what structures? c. meiosis II
a. chiasmata d. interkinesis
b. recombination nodules 9.If a muscle cell of a typical organism has 32
c. microtubules chromosomes, how many chromosomes will be in a
d. kinetochores gamete of that same organism?
PAGE: 335
324 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
a. 8 diploid multicellular stage?
b. 16 a. asexual life cycles
c. 32 b. most animal life cycles
d. 64 c. most fungal life cycles
d. alternation of generations
10.Which statement best describes the genetic
content of the two daughter cells in prophase II of 15.What is the ploidy of the most conspicuous form
meiosis? of most fungi?
a. haploid with one copy of each gene a. diploid
b. haploid with two copies of each gene b. haploid
c. diploid with two copies of each gene c. alternation of generations
d. diploid with four copies of each gene d. asexual
11.The pea plants used in Mendel’s genetic 16.A diploid, multicellular life-cycle stage that gives
inheritance studies were diploid, with 14 rise to haploid cells by meiosis is called a ________.
chromosomes in somatic cells. Assuming no crossing
over events occur, how many unique gametes could a. sporophyte
one pea plant produce? b. gametophyte
a. 28 c. spore
b. 128 d. gamete
c. 196
17.Hydras and jellyfish both live in a freshwater lake
d. 16,384
that is slowly being acidified by the runoff from a
12.How do telophase I and telophase II differ during chemical plant built upstream. Which population is
meiosis in animal cells? predicted to be better able to cope with the changing
a. Cells remain diploid at the end of telophase environment?
I, but are haploid at the end of telophase II. a. jellyfish
b. Daughter cells form a cell plate to divide b. hydra
during telophase I, but divide by cytokinesis c. The populations will be equally able to cope.
during telophase II. d. Both populations will die.
c. Cells enter interphase after telophase I, but
18.Many farmers are worried about the decreasing
not after telophase II.
genetic diversity of plants associated with
d. Chromosomes can remain condensed at the
generations of artificial selection and inbreeding. Why
end of telophase I, but decondense after
is limiting random sexual reproduction of food crops
telophase II.
concerning?
13.What is a likely evolutionary advantage of sexual a. Mutations during asexual reproduction
reproduction over asexual reproduction? decrease plant fitness.
a. Sexual reproduction involves fewer steps. b. Consumers do not trust identical-appearing
b. There is a lower chance of using up the produce.
resources in a given environment. c. Larger portions of the plant populations are
c. Sexual reproduction results in variation in susceptible to the same diseases.
the offspring. d. Spores are not viable in an agricultural
d. Sexual reproduction is more cost-effective. setting.
14.Which type of life cycle has both a haploid and
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
19.Describe the process that results in the formation meiosis and mitosis?
of a tetrad.
23.Why would an individual with a mutation that
20.Explain how the random alignment of prevented the formation of recombination nodules be
homologous chromosomes during metaphase I considered less fit than other members of its
contributes to the variation in gametes produced by species?
meiosis.
24.Does crossing over occur during prophase II?
21.What is the function of the fused kinetochore From an evolutionary perspective, why is this
found on sister chromatids in prometaphase I? advantageous?
22.In a comparison of the stages of meiosis to the 25.List and briefly describe the three processes that
stages of mitosis, which stages are unique to meiosis lead to variation in offspring with the same parents.
and which stages have the same events in both
26.Animals and plants both have diploid and haploid
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 336
Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction 325
cells. How does the animal life cycle differ from the dominant life cycle and organisms with an alternation
alternation of generations exhibited by plants? of generations life cycle?
27.Explain why sexual reproduction is beneficial to a 29.How do organisms with haploid-dominant life
population but can be detrimental to an individual cycles ensure continued genetic diversification in
offspring. offspring without using a meiotic process to make
gametes?
28.How does the role of meiosis in gamete
production differ between organisms with a diploid-
PAGE: 337
326 Chapter 11 | Meiosis and Sexual Reproduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 338
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 327
12 | MENDEL'S
EXPERIMENTS AND
HEREDITY
Figure12.1Experimentingwiththousandsofgardenpeas,Mendeluncoveredthefundamentalsofgenetics.(credit:
modification of work by Jerry Kirkhart)
Chapter Outline
12.1:Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability
12.2:Characteristics and Traits
12.3:Laws of Inheritance
Introduction
Genetics is the study of heredity. Johann Gregor Mendel set the framework for genetics long before
chromosomesorgeneshadbeenidentified,atatimewhenmeiosiswasnotwellunderstood.Mendelselected
asimplebiologicalsystemandconductedmethodical,quantitativeanalysesusinglargesamplesizes.Because
of Mendel’s work, the fundamental principles of heredity were revealed. We now know that genes, carried
on chromosomes, are the basic functional units of heredity with the capability to be replicated, expressed, or
mutated. Today, the postulates put forth by Mendel form the basis of classical, or Mendelian, genetics. Not all
genes are transmitted from parents to offspring according to Mendelian genetics, but Mendel’s experiments
serve as an excellent starting point for thinking about inheritance.
PAGE: 339
328 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
12.1 | Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of
Probability
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the scientific reasons for the success of Mendel’s experimental work
• Describe the expected outcomes of monohybrid crosses involving dominant and recessive alleles
• Apply the sum and product rules to calculate probabilities
Figure 12.2Johann Gregor Mendel is considered the father of genetics.
Johann Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) (Figure 12.2) was a lifelong learner, teacher, scientist, and man of
faith. As a young adult, he joined the Augustinian Abbey of St. Thomas in Brno in what is now the Czech
Republic.Supportedbythemonastery,hetaughtphysics,botany,andnaturalsciencecoursesatthesecondary
and university levels. In 1856, he began a decade-long research pursuit involving inheritance patterns in
honeybeesandplants,ultimatelysettlingonpeaplantsashisprimarymodelsystem(asystemwithconvenient
characteristicsusedtostudyaspecificbiologicalphenomenontobeappliedtoothersystems).In1865,Mendel
presented the results of his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to the local Natural History Society. He
demonstrated that traits are transmitted from parents to offspring independently of other traits and in dominant
[1]
andrecessivepatterns.In1866,hepublishedhiswork,ExperimentsinPlantHybridization, intheproceedings
of the Natural History Society of Brünn.
Mendel’sworkwentvirtuallyunnoticedbythescientificcommunity,whichbelieved,incorrectly,thattheprocess
of inheritance involved a blending of parental traits that produced an intermediate physical appearance in
offspring.Theblendingtheoryofinheritanceassertedthattheoriginalparentaltraitswerelostorabsorbedby
the blending in the offspring, but we now know that this is not the case. This hypothetical process appeared to
becorrectbecauseofwhatweknownowascontinuousvariation.Continuousvariationresultsfromtheaction
ofmanygenestodetermineacharacteristiclikehumanheight.Offspringappeartobea“blend”oftheirparents’
traits.
Instead of continuous characteristics, Mendel worked with traits that were inherited in distinct classes
(specifically, violet versus white flowers); this is referred to as discontinuous variation. Mendel’s choice of
thesekindsoftraitsallowedhimtoseeexperimentallythatthetraitswerenotblendedintheoffspring,norwere
1. Johann Gregor Mendel,Versuche über Pflanzenhybriden Verhandlungen des naturforschenden Vereines in Brünn, Bd. IV für das Jahr,
1865 Abhandlungen, 3–47. [for English translation seehttp://www.mendelweb.org/Mendel.plain.html (http://openstax.org/l/
mendel_experiments)]
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 340
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 329
they absorbed, but rather that they kept their distinctness and could be passed on. In 1868, Mendel became
abbot of the monastery and exchanged his scientific pursuits for his pastoral duties. He was not recognized
for his extraordinary scientific contributions during his lifetime. In fact, it was not until 1900 that his work was
rediscovered, reproduced, and revitalized by scientists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of
heredity.
Mendel’s Model System
Mendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea, Pisum sativum, to study inheritance. This
species naturally self-fertilizes, such that pollen encounters ova within individual flowers. The flower petals
remain sealed tightly until after pollination, preventing pollination from other plants. The result is highly inbred,
or “true-breeding,” pea plants. These are plants that always produce offspring that look like the parent. By
experimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring
thatmightoccuriftheplantswerenottruebreeding.Thegardenpeaalsogrowstomaturitywithinoneseason,
meaning that several generations could be evaluated over a relatively short time. Finally, large quantities of
gardenpeascouldbecultivatedsimultaneously,allowingMendeltoconcludethathisresultsdidnotcomeabout
simply by chance.
Mendelian Crosses
Mendelperformedhybridizations,whichinvolvematingtwotrue-breedingindividualsthathavedifferenttraits.
In the pea, which is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manually transferring pollen from the anther of a
mature pea plant of one variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety. In plants,
pollen carries the male gametes (sperm) to the stigma, a sticky organ that traps pollen and allows the sperm
to move down the pistil to the female gametes (ova) below. To prevent the pea plant that was receiving pollen
fromself-fertilizingandconfoundinghisresults,Mendelpainstakinglyremovedalloftheanthersfromtheplant’s
flowers before they had a chance to mature.
Plants used in first-generation crosses were called P0, or parental generation one (Figure 12.3). After each
cross, Mendel collected the seeds belonging to the P0 plants and grew them the following season. These
offspring were called the F1, or the first filial (filial = offspring, daughter or son) generation. Once Mendel
examined the characteristics in the F1 generation of plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then
collected and grew the seeds from the F1 plants to produce the F2, or second filial, generation. Mendel’s
experiments extended beyond the F2 generation to the F3 and F4generations, and so on, but it was the ratio
ofcharacteristicsintheP0−F1−F2generationsthatwerethemostintriguingandbecamethebasisforMendel’s
postulates.
PAGE: 341
330 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Figure 12.3 In one of his experiments on inheritance patterns, Mendel crossed plants that were true-breeding for
violet flower color with plants true-breeding for white flower color (the P generation). The resulting hybrids in the F1
generation all had violet flowers. In the F2 generation, approximately three quarters of the plants had violet flowers,
and one quarter had white flowers.
Garden Pea Characteristics Revealed the Basics of Heredity
Inhis1865publication,Mendelreportedtheresultsofhiscrossesinvolvingsevendifferentcharacteristics,each
withtwocontrastingtraits.Atraitisdefinedasavariationinthephysicalappearanceofaheritablecharacteristic.
Thecharacteristicsincludedplantheight,seedtexture,seedcolor,flowercolor,peapodsize,peapodcolor,and
flower position. For the characteristic of flower color, for example, the two contrasting traits were white versus
violet. To fully examine each characteristic, Mendel generated large numbers of F1 and F2 plants, reporting
results from 19,959 F2plants alone. His findings were consistent.
What results did Mendel find in his crosses for flower color? First, Mendel confirmed that he had plants that
bredtrueforwhiteorvioletflowercolor.RegardlessofhowmanygenerationsMendelexamined,allself-crossed
offspring of parents with white flowers had white flowers, and all self-crossed offspring of parents with violet
flowers had violet flowers. In addition, Mendel confirmed that, other than flower color, the pea plants were
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 342
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 331
physically identical.
Once these validations were complete, Mendel applied the pollen from a plant with violet flowers to the stigma
of a plant with white flowers. After gathering and sowing the seeds that resulted from this cross, Mendel
found that 100 percent of the F1 hybrid generation had violet flowers. Conventional wisdom at that time (the
blending theory) would have predicted the hybrid flowers to be pale violet or for hybrid plants to have equal
numbersofwhiteandvioletflowers.Inotherwords,thecontrastingparentaltraitswereexpectedtoblendinthe
offspring.Instead,Mendel’sresultsdemonstratedthatthewhiteflowertraitintheF1generationhadcompletely
disappeared.
Importantly, Mendel did not stop his experimentation there. He allowed the F1 plants to self-fertilize and found
that, of F2-generation plants, 705 had violet flowers and 224 had white flowers. This was a ratio of 3.15 violet
flowers per one white flower, or approximately 3:1. When Mendel transferred pollen from a plant with violet
flowerstothestigmaofaplantwithwhiteflowersandviceversa,heobtainedaboutthesameratioregardlessof
whichparent,maleorfemale,contributedwhichtrait.Thisiscalledareciprocalcross—apairedcrossinwhich
therespectivetraitsofthemaleandfemaleinonecrossbecometherespectivetraitsofthefemaleandmalein
the other cross. For the other six characteristics Mendel examined, the F1 and F2 generations behaved in the
samewayastheyhadforflowercolor.OneofthetwotraitswoulddisappearcompletelyfromtheF1generation
only to reappear in the F2generation at a ratio of approximately 3:1 (Table 12.1).
The Results of Mendel’s Garden Pea Hybridizations
Contrasting P0 F1Offspring F2Offspring F2Trait
Characteristic
Traits Traits Traits Ratios
705 violet
Flower color Violet vs. white 100 percent violet 3.15:1
224 white
651 axial
Flower position Axial vs. terminal 100 percent axial 3.14:1
207 terminal
787 tall
Plant height Tall vs. dwarf 100 percent tall 2.84:1
277 dwarf
5,474 round
Seed texture Round vs. wrinkled 100 percent round 2.96:1
1,850 wrinkled
6,022 yellow
Seed color Yellow vs. green 100 percent yellow 3.01:1
2,001 green
882 inflated
Pea pod texture Inflated vs. constricted 100 percent inflated 2.95:1
299 constricted
428 green
Pea pod color Green vs. yellow 100 percent green 2.82:1
152 yellow
Table 12.1
Upon compiling his results for many thousands of plants, Mendel concluded that the characteristics could be
dividedintoexpressedandlatenttraits.Hecalledthese,respectively,dominantandrecessivetraits.Dominant
traitsarethosethatareinheritedunchangedinahybridization.Recessivetraitsbecomelatent,ordisappear,
in the offspring of a hybridization. The recessive trait does, however, reappear in the progeny of the hybrid
offspring. An example of a dominant trait is the violet-flower trait. For this same characteristic (flower color),
white-colored flowers are a recessive trait. The fact that the recessive trait reappeared in the F2 generation
meantthatthetraitsremainedseparate(notblended)intheplantsoftheF1generation.Mendelalsoproposed
thatplantspossessedtwocopiesofthetraitfortheflower-colorcharacteristic,andthateachparenttransmitted
PAGE: 343
332 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
one of its two copies to its offspring, where they came together. Moreover, the physical observation of a
dominant trait could mean that the genetic composition of the organism included two dominant versions of the
characteristic or that it included one dominant and one recessive version. Conversely, the observation of a
recessive trait meant that the organism lacked any dominant versions of this characteristic.
So why did Mendel repeatedly obtain 3:1 ratios in his crosses? To understand how Mendel deduced the basic
mechanisms of inheritance that lead to such ratios, we must first review the laws of probability.
Probability Basics
Probabilities are mathematical measures of likelihood. The empirical probability of an event is calculated by
dividingthenumberoftimestheeventoccursbythetotalnumberofopportunitiesfortheeventtooccur.Itisalso
possibletocalculatetheoreticalprobabilitiesbydividingthenumberoftimesthataneventisexpectedtooccur
bythenumberoftimesthatitcouldoccur.Empiricalprobabilitiescomefromobservations,likethoseofMendel.
Theoretical probabilities, on the other hand, come from knowing how the events are produced and assuming
that the probabilities of individual outcomes are equal. A probability of one for some event indicates that it is
guaranteedtooccur,whereasaprobabilityofzeroindicatesthatitisguaranteednottooccur.Anexampleofa
genetic event is a round seed produced by a pea plant.
Inoneexperiment,Mendeldemonstratedthattheprobabilityoftheevent“roundseed”occurringwasoneinthe
F1offspringoftrue-breedingparents,oneofwhichhasroundseedsandoneofwhichhaswrinkledseeds.When
theF1plantsweresubsequentlyself-crossed,theprobabilityofanygivenF2offspringhavingroundseedswas
now three out of four. In other words, in a large population of F2 offspring chosen at random, 75 percent were
expectedtohaveroundseeds,whereas25percentwereexpectedtohavewrinkledseeds.Usinglargenumbers
of crosses, Mendel was able to calculate probabilities and use these to predict the outcomes of other crosses.
The Product Rule and Sum Rule
Mendel demonstrated that pea plants transmit characteristics as discrete units from parent to offspring. As
will be discussed, Mendel also determined that different characteristics, like seed color and seed texture,
were transmitted independently of one another and could be considered in separate probability analyses. For
instance, performing a cross between a plant with green, wrinkled seeds and a plant with yellow, round seeds
still produced offspring that had a 3:1 ratio of green:yellow seeds (ignoring seed texture) and a 3:1 ratio of
round:wrinkledseeds(ignoringseedcolor).Thecharacteristicsofcolorandtexturedidnotinfluenceeachother.
The product rule of probability can be applied to this phenomenon of the independent transmission of
characteristics.Theproductrulestatesthattheprobabilityoftwoindependenteventsoccurringtogethercanbe
calculated by multiplying the individual probabilities of each event occurring alone. To demonstrate the product
rule,imaginethatyouarerollingasix-sideddie(D)andflippingapenny(P)atthesametime.Thediemayroll
anynumberfrom1–6(D#),whereasthepennymayturnupheads(PH)ortails(PT).Theoutcomeofrollingthe
die has no effect on the outcome of flipping the penny and vice versa. There are 12 possible outcomes of this
action (Table 12.2), and each event is expected to occur with equal probability.
Twelve Equally Likely Outcomes of Rolling a Die and Flipping a Penny
Rolling Die Flipping Penny
D1 PH
D1 PT
D2 PH
D2 PT
D3 PH
D3 PT
D4 PH
D4 PT
Table 12.2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 344
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 333
Twelve Equally Likely Outcomes of Rolling a Die and Flipping a Penny
Rolling Die Flipping Penny
D5 PH
D5 PT
D6 PH
D6 PT
Table 12.2
Of the 12 possible outcomes, the die has a 2/12 (or 1/6) probability of rolling a two, and the penny has a 6/12
(or 1/2) probability of coming up heads. By the product rule, the probability that you will obtain the combined
outcome2andheadsis:(D2)x(PH)=(1/6)x(1/2)or1/12(Table12.3).Noticetheword“and”inthedescription
oftheprobability.The“and”isasignaltoapplytheproductrule.Forexample,considerhowtheproductruleis
appliedtothedihybridcross:theprobabilityofhavingbothdominanttraitsintheF2progenyistheproductofthe
probabilities of having the dominant trait for each characteristic, as shown here:
3 3 9
× =
4 4 16
On the other hand, the sum rule of probability is applied when considering two mutually exclusive outcomes
that can come about by more than one pathway. The sum rule states that the probability of the occurrence of
oneeventortheotherevent,oftwomutuallyexclusiveevents,isthesumoftheirindividualprobabilities.Notice
the word “or” in the description of the probability. The “or” indicates that you should apply the sum rule. In this
case, let’s imagine you are flipping a penny (P) and a quarter (Q). What is the probability of one coin coming
upheadsandonecoincominguptails?Thisoutcomecanbeachievedbytwocases:thepennymaybeheads
(PH)andthequartermaybetails(QT),orthequartermaybeheads(QH)andthepennymaybetails(PT).Either
case fulfills the outcome. By the sum rule, we calculate the probability of obtaining one head and one tail as
[(PH)×(QT)]+[(QH)×(PT)]=[(1/2)×(1/2)]+[(1/2)×(1/2)]=1/2(Table12.3).Youshouldalsonoticethatwe
usedtheproductruletocalculatetheprobabilityofPHandQT,andalsotheprobabilityofPTandQH,beforewe
summedthem.Again,thesumrulecanbeappliedtoshowtheprobabilityofhavingjustonedominanttraitinthe
F2generation of a dihybrid cross:
3 3 15
+ =
16 4 16
The Product Rule and Sum Rule
Product Rule Sum Rule
For independent events A and B, the probability (P) For mutually exclusive events A and B, the probability
of them both occurring (AandB) is (PA× PB) (P) that at least one occurs (AorB) is (PA+ PB)
Table 12.3
Touseprobabilitylawsinpractice,wemustworkwithlargesamplesizesbecausesmallsamplesizesareprone
todeviationscausedbychance.ThelargequantitiesofpeaplantsthatMendelexaminedallowedhimcalculate
the probabilities of the traits appearing in his F2 generation. As you will learn, this discovery meant that when
parental traits were known, the offspring’s traits could be predicted accurately even before fertilization.
PAGE: 345
334 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
12.2 | Characteristics and Traits
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the relationship between genotypes and phenotypes in dominant and recessive gene systems
• Develop a Punnett square to calculate the expected proportions of genotypes and phenotypes in a
monohybrid cross
• Explain the purpose and methods of a test cross
• Identify non-Mendelian inheritance patterns such as incomplete dominance, codominance, recessive
lethals, multiple alleles, and sex linkage
Physical characteristics are expressed through genes carried on chromosomes. The genetic makeup of peas
consists of two similar, or homologous, copies of each chromosome, one from each parent. Each pair of
homologous chromosomes has the same linear order of genes. In other words, peas are diploid organisms in
that they have two copies of each chromosome. The same is true for many other plants and for virtually all
animals.Diploidorganismsproducehaploidgametes,whichcontainonecopyofeachhomologouschromosome
that unite at fertilization to create a diploid zygote.
Forcasesinwhichasinglegenecontrolsasinglecharacteristic,adiploidorganismhastwogeneticcopiesthat
mayormaynotencodethesameversionofthatcharacteristic.Genevariantsthatarisebymutationandexistat
the same relative locations on homologous chromosomes are called alleles. Mendel examined the inheritance
ofgeneswithjusttwoalleleforms,butitiscommontoencountermorethantwoallelesforanygivengeneina
natural population.
Phenotypes and Genotypes
Twoallelesforagivengeneinadiploidorganismareexpressedandinteracttoproducephysicalcharacteristics.
The observable traits expressed by an organism are referred to as its phenotype. An organism’s underlying
geneticmakeup,consistingofbothphysicallyvisibleandnon-expressedalleles,iscalleditsgenotype.Mendel’s
hybridization experiments demonstrate the difference between phenotype and genotype. When true-breeding
plants in which one parent had yellow pods and one had green pods were cross-fertilized, all of the F1 hybrid
offspringhadyellowpods.Thatis,thehybridoffspringwerephenotypicallyidenticaltothetrue-breedingparent
with yellow pods. However, we know that the allele donated by the parent with green pods was not simply
lost because it reappeared in some of the F2 offspring. Therefore, the F1 plants must have been genotypically
different from the parent with yellow pods.
The P1 plants that Mendel used in his experiments were each homozygous for the trait he was studying.
Diploid organisms that are homozygous at a given gene, or locus, have two identical alleles for that gene on
their homologous chromosomes. Mendel’s parental pea plants always bred true because both of the gametes
produced carried the same trait. When P1 plants with contrasting traits were cross-fertilized, all of the offspring
wereheterozygousforthecontrastingtrait,meaningthattheirgenotypereflectedthattheyhaddifferentalleles
for the gene being examined.
Dominant and Recessive Alleles
Our discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organisms brings us to why the F1 heterozygous offspring
were identical to one of the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In all seven pea-plant characteristics,
oneofthetwocontrastingalleleswasdominant,andtheotherwasrecessive.Mendelcalledthedominantallele
theexpressedunitfactor;therecessiveallelewasreferredtoasthelatentunitfactor.Wenowknowthatthese
so-called unit factors are actually genes on homologous chromosome pairs. For a gene that is expressed in
a dominant and recessive pattern, homozygous dominant and heterozygous organisms will look identical (that
is, they will have different genotypes but the same phenotype). The recessive allele will only be observed in
homozygous recessive individuals (Table 12.4).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 346
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 335
Human Inheritance in Dominant and Recessive Patterns
Dominant Traits Recessive Traits
Achondroplasia Albinism
Brachydactyly Cystic fibrosis
Huntington’s disease Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Marfan syndrome Galactosemia
Neurofibromatosis Phenylketonuria
Widow’s peak Sickle-cell anemia
Wooly hair Tay-Sachs disease
Table 12.4
Severalconventionsexistforreferringtogenesandalleles.Forthepurposesofthischapter,wewillabbreviate
genes using the first letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. For example, violet is the dominant trait
for a pea plant’s flower color, so the flower-color gene would be abbreviated as V (note that it is customary to
italicize gene designations). Furthermore, we will use uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominant
and recessive alleles, respectively. Therefore, we would refer to the genotype of a homozygous dominant pea
plantwithvioletflowersasVV,ahomozygousrecessivepeaplantwithwhiteflowersasvv,andaheterozygous
pea plant with violet flowers asVv.
The Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid Cross
Whenfertilizationoccursbetweentwotrue-breedingparentsthatdifferinonlyonecharacteristic,theprocessis
calledamonohybridcross,andtheresultingoffspringaremonohybrids.Mendelperformedsevenmonohybrid
crossesinvolvingcontrastingtraitsforeachcharacteristic.OnthebasisofhisresultsinF1andF2generations,
Mendel postulated that each parent in the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired unit factors to each
offspring, and every possible combination of unit factors was equally likely.
Todemonstrateamonohybridcross,considerthecaseoftrue-breedingpeaplantswithyellowversusgreenpea
seeds.Thedominantseedcolorisyellow;therefore,theparentalgenotypeswereYYfortheplantswithyellow
seedsandyyfortheplantswithgreenseeds,respectively.APunnettsquare,devisedbytheBritishgeneticist
ReginaldPunnett,canbedrawnthatappliestherulesofprobabilitytopredictthepossibleoutcomesofagenetic
cross or mating and their expected frequencies. To prepare a Punnett square, all possible combinations of the
parental alleles are listed along the top (for one parent) and side (for the other parent) of a grid, representing
theirmeioticsegregationintohaploidgametes.Thenthecombinationsofeggandspermaremadeintheboxes
inthetabletoshowwhichallelesarecombining.Eachboxthenrepresentsthediploidgenotypeofazygote,or
fertilizedegg,thatcouldresultfromthismating.Becauseeachpossibilityisequallylikely,genotypicratioscanbe
determinedfromaPunnettsquare.Ifthepatternofinheritance(dominantorrecessive)isknown,thephenotypic
ratioscanbeinferredaswell.Foramonohybridcrossoftwotrue-breedingparents,eachparentcontributesone
type of allele. In this case, only one genotype is possible. All offspring are Yy and have yellow seeds (Figure
12.4).
PAGE: 347
336 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Figure12.4InthePgeneration,peaplantsthataretrue-breedingforthedominantyellowphenotypearecrossedwith
plants with the recessive green phenotype. This cross produces F1 heterozygotes with a yellow phenotype. Punnett
square analysis can be used to predict the genotypes of the F2generation.
A self-cross of one of the Yy heterozygous offspring can be represented in a 2 × 2 Punnett square because
each parent can donate one of two different alleles. Therefore, the offspring can potentially have one of
four allele combinations: YY, Yy, yY, or yy (Figure 12.4). Notice that there are two ways to obtain the Yy
genotype: a Y from the egg and a y from the sperm, or a y from the egg and a Y from the sperm. Both
of these possibilities must be counted. Recall that Mendel’s pea-plant characteristics behaved in the same
way in reciprocal crosses. Therefore, the two possible heterozygous combinations produce offspring that are
genotypically and phenotypically identical despite their dominant and recessive alleles deriving from different
parents.Theyaregroupedtogether.Becausefertilizationisarandomevent,weexpecteachcombinationtobe
equallylikelyandfortheoffspringtoexhibitaratioofYY:Yy:yygenotypesof1:2:1(Figure 12.4).Furthermore,
because the YY and Yy offspring have yellow seeds and are phenotypically identical, applying the sum rule
of probability, we expect the offspring to exhibit a phenotypic ratio of 3 yellow:1 green. Indeed, working with
largesamplesizes, Mendel observedapproximately this ratio ineveryF2generation resulting from crossesfor
individual traits.
MendelvalidatedtheseresultsbyperforminganF3crossinwhichheself-crossedthedominant-andrecessive-
expressing F2 plants. When he self-crossed the plants expressing green seeds, all of the offspring had green
seeds, confirming that all green seeds had homozygous genotypes of yy. When he self-crossed the F2 plants
expressingyellowseeds,hefoundthatone-thirdoftheplantsbredtrue,andtwo-thirdsoftheplantssegregated
at a 3:1 ratio of yellow:green seeds. In this case, the true-breeding plants had homozygous (YY) genotypes,
whereas the segregating plants corresponded to the heterozygous (Yy) genotype. When these plants self-
fertilized, the outcome was just like the F1self-fertilizing cross.
The Test Cross Distinguishes the Dominant Phenotype
Beyond predicting the offspring of a cross between known homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 348
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 337
developed a way to determine whether an organism that expressed a dominant trait was a heterozygote or a
homozygote. Called the test cross, this technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross,
the dominant-expressing organism is crossed with an organism that is homozygous recessive for the same
characteristic.Ifthedominant-expressingorganismisahomozygote,thenallF1offspringwillbeheterozygotes
expressingthedominanttrait(Figure12.5).Alternatively,ifthedominantexpressingorganismisaheterozygote,
theF1offspringwillexhibita1:1ratioofheterozygotesandrecessivehomozygotes(Figure12.5).Thetestcross
further validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factors segregate equally.
Figure 12.5 A test cross can be performed to determine whether an organism expressing a dominant trait is a
homozygote or a heterozygote.
Inpeaplants,roundpeas(R)aredominanttowrinkledpeas(r).Youdoatestcrossbetweenapeaplantwith
wrinkled peas (genotype rr) and a plant of unknown genotype that has round peas. You end up with three
plants,allwhichhaveroundpeas.Fromthisdata,canyoutelliftheroundpeaparentplantishomozygous
dominant or heterozygous? If the round pea parent plant is heterozygous, what is the probability that a
random sample of 3 progeny peas will all be round?
Many human diseases are genetically inherited. A healthy person in a family in which some members suffer
from a recessive genetic disorder may want to know if he or she has the disease-causing gene and what risk
exists of passing the disorder on to his or her offspring. Of course, doing a test cross in humans is unethical
and impractical. Instead, geneticists use pedigree analysis to study the inheritance pattern of human genetic
diseases (Figure 12.6).
PAGE: 349
338 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Figure 12.6 Alkaptonuria is a recessive genetic disorder in which two amino acids, phenylalanine and tyrosine,
arenotproperlymetabolized.Affectedindividualsmayhavedarkenedskinandbrownurine,andmaysufferjoint
damageandothercomplications.Inthispedigree,individualswiththedisorderareindicatedinblueandhavethe
genotypeaa.UnaffectedindividualsareindicatedinyellowandhavethegenotypeAAorAa.Notethatitisoften
possibletodetermineaperson’sgenotypefromthegenotypeoftheiroffspring.Forexample,ifneitherparenthas
thedisorderbuttheirchilddoes,theymustbeheterozygous.Twoindividualsonthepedigreehaveanunaffected
phenotype but unknown genotype. Because they do not have the disorder, they must have at least one normal
allele, so their genotype gets the “A?” designation.
What are the genotypes of the individuals labeled 1, 2, and 3?
Alternatives to Dominance and Recessiveness
Mendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested that: (1) two “units” or alleles exist for every gene; (2) alleles
maintain their integrity in each generation (no blending); and (3) in the presence of the dominant allele,
the recessive allele is hidden and makes no contribution to the phenotype. Therefore, recessive alleles can
be “carried” and not expressed by individuals. Such heterozygous individuals are sometimes referred to as
“carriers.” Further genetic studies in other plants and animals have shown that much more complexity exists,
but that the fundamental principles of Mendelian genetics still hold true. In the sections to follow, we consider
someoftheextensionsofMendelism.IfMendelhadchosenanexperimentalsystemthatexhibitedthesegenetic
complexities, it’s possible that he would not have understood what his results meant.
Incomplete Dominance
Mendel’s results, that traits are inherited as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the view at that time
thatoffspringexhibitedablendoftheirparents’traits.However,theheterozygotephenotypeoccasionallydoes
appeartobeintermediatebetweenthetwoparents.Forexample,inthesnapdragon,Antirrhinummajus(Figure
W W
12.7), a cross between a homozygous parent with white flowers (C C ) and a homozygous parent with red
R R R W
flowers(C C )willproduceoffspringwithpinkflowers(C C ).(Notethatdifferentgenotypicabbreviationsare
used for Mendelian extensions to distinguish these patterns from simple dominance and recessiveness.) This
patternofinheritanceisdescribedasincompletedominance,denotingtheexpressionoftwocontrastingalleles
suchthattheindividualdisplaysanintermediatephenotype.Thealleleforredflowersisincompletelydominant
overthealleleforwhiteflowers.However,theresultsofaheterozygoteself-crosscanstillbepredicted,justas
R R R W
with Mendelian dominant and recessive crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1 C C :2 C C :1
W W
C C , and the phenotypic ratio would be 1:2:1 for red:pink:white.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 350
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 339
Figure 12.7 These pink flowers of a heterozygote snapdragon result from incomplete dominance. (credit:
“storebukkebruse”/Flickr)
Codominance
A variation on incomplete dominance is codominance, in which both alleles for the same characteristic are
simultaneouslyexpressedintheheterozygote.AnexampleofcodominanceistheMNbloodgroupsofhumans.
The M and N alleles are expressed in the form of an M or N antigen present on the surface of red blood
M M N N M N
cells. Homozygotes (L L and L L ) express either the M or the N allele, and heterozygotes (L L ) express
both alleles equally. In a self-cross between heterozygotes expressing a codominant trait, the three possible
offspringgenotypesarephenotypicallydistinct.However,the1:2:1genotypicratiocharacteristicofaMendelian
monohybrid cross still applies.
Multiple Alleles
Mendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now
knowthatthisisanoversimplification.Althoughindividualhumans(andalldiploidorganisms)canonlyhavetwo
alleles for a given gene, multiple alleles may exist at the population level such that many combinations of two
allelesareobserved.Notethatwhenmanyallelesexistforthesamegene,theconventionistodenotethemost
commonphenotypeorgenotypeamongwildanimalsasthewildtype(oftenabbreviated“+”);thisisconsidered
thestandardornorm.Allotherphenotypesorgenotypesareconsideredvariantsofthisstandard,meaningthat
they deviate from the wild type. The variant may be recessive or dominant to the wild-type allele.
An exampleof multiple alleles iscoat colorinrabbits (Figure 12.8).Here, four alleles exist for the cgene. The
+ + ch ch
wild-type version, C C , is expressed as brown fur. The chinchilla phenotype, c c , is expressed as black-
h h
tipped white fur. The Himalayan phenotype, c c , has black fur on the extremities and white fur elsewhere.
Finally,thealbino,or“colorless”phenotype,cc,isexpressedaswhitefur.Incasesofmultiplealleles,dominance
hierarchies canexist. In this case, the wild-type alleleisdominant overallthe others, chinchilla isincompletely
dominant over Himalayan and albino, and Himalayan is dominant over albino. This hierarchy, or allelic series,
was revealed by observing the phenotypes of each possible heterozygote offspring.
PAGE: 351
340 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Figure 12.8Four different alleles exist for the rabbit coat color (C) gene.
Thecompletedominanceofawild-typephenotypeoverallothermutantsoftenoccursasaneffectof“dosage”
of a specific gene product, such that the wild-type allele supplies the correct amount of gene product whereas
themutantallelescannot.Fortheallelicseriesinrabbits,thewild-typeallelemaysupplyagivendosageoffur
pigment, whereas the mutants supply a lesser dosage or none at all. Interestingly, the Himalayan phenotype
is the result of an allele that produces a temperature-sensitive gene product that only produces pigment in the
cooler extremities of the rabbit’s body.
Alternatively, one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotypes, including the wild type. This may
occur when the mutant allele somehow interferes with the genetic message so that even a heterozygote with
one wild-type allele copy expresses the mutant phenotype. One way in which the mutant allele can interfere is
by enhancing the function of the wild-type gene product or changing its distribution in the body. One example
of this is the Antennapedia mutation in Drosophila (Figure 12.9). In this case, the mutant allele expands the
distributionofthegeneproduct,andasaresult,theAntennapediaheterozygotedevelopslegsonitsheadwhere
its antennae should be.
Figure 12.9 As seen in comparing the wild-type Drosophila (left) and the Antennapedia mutant (right), the
Antennapediamutant has legs on its head in place of antennae.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 352
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 341
Multiple Alleles Confer Drug Resistance in the Malaria Parasite
Malaria is a parasitic disease in humans that is transmitted by infected female mosquitoes, including
Anopheles gambiae (Figure 12.10a), and is characterized by cyclic high fevers, chills, flu-like symptoms,
andsevereanemia.PlasmodiumfalciparumandP.vivaxarethemostcommoncausativeagentsofmalaria,
and P. falciparum is the most deadly (Figure 12.10b). When promptly and correctly treated, P. falciparum
malaria has a mortality rate of 0.1 percent. However, in some parts of the world, the parasite has evolved
resistance to commonly used malaria treatments, so the most effective malarial treatments can vary by
geographic region.
(a) (b)
Figure 12.10 The (a) Anopheles gambiae, or African malaria mosquito, acts as a vector in the transmission to
humansofthemalaria-causingparasite(b)Plasmodiumfalciparum,herevisualizedusingfalse-colortransmission
electronmicroscopy.(credita:JamesD.Gathany;creditb:UteFrevert;falsecolorbyMargaretShear;scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)
In Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America, P. falciparum has developed resistance to the anti-malarial
drugs chloroquine, mefloquine, and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine. P. falciparum, which is haploid during the
lifestageinwhichitisinfectioustohumans,hasevolvedmultipledrug-resistantmutantallelesofthedhps
gene.Varyingdegreesofsulfadoxineresistanceareassociatedwitheachofthesealleles.Beinghaploid,P.
falciparumneeds only one drug-resistant allele to express this trait.
In Southeast Asia, different sulfadoxine-resistant alleles of the dhps gene are localized to different
geographic regions. This is a common evolutionary phenomenon that occurs because drug-resistant
mutantsariseinapopulationandinterbreedwithotherP.falciparumisolatesincloseproximity.Sulfadoxine-
resistant parasites cause considerable human hardship in regions where this drug is widely used as an
over-the-counter malaria remedy. As is common with pathogens that multiply to large numbers within an
infection cycle, P. falciparum evolves relatively rapidly (over a decade or so) in response to the selective
pressureofcommonlyusedanti-malarialdrugs.Forthisreason,scientistsmustconstantlyworktodevelop
[2]
new drugs or drug combinations to combat the worldwide malaria burden.
X-Linked Traits
In humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex
chromosomes.Thesexchromosomesareonepairofnon-homologouschromosomes.Untilnow,wehaveonly
considered inheritance patterns among non-sex chromosomes, or autosomes. In addition to 22 homologous
pairs of autosomes, human females have a homologous pair of X chromosomes, whereas human males have
anXYchromosomepair.AlthoughtheYchromosomecontainsasmallregionofsimilaritytotheXchromosome
sothattheycanpairduringmeiosis,theYchromosomeismuchshorterandcontainsmanyfewergenes.When
agenebeingexaminedispresentontheXchromosome,butnotontheYchromosome,itissaidtobeX-linked.
2. Sumiti Vinayak, et al., “Origin and Evolution of Sulfadoxine ResistantPlasmodium falciparum,”Public Library of Science Pathogens6, no.
3 (2010): e1000830, doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1000830.
PAGE: 353
342 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
EyecolorinDrosophilawasoneofthefirstX-linkedtraitstobeidentified.ThomasHuntMorganmappedthistrait
totheXchromosomein1910.Likehumans,DrosophilamaleshaveanXYchromosomepair,andfemalesare
W w
XX.Inflies,thewild-typeeyecolorisred(X )anditisdominanttowhiteeyecolor(X )(Figure12.11).Because
of the location of the eye-color gene, reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offspring ratios. Males are
saidtobehemizygous,becausetheyhaveonlyonealleleforanyX-linkedcharacteristic.Hemizygositymakes
thedescriptionsofdominanceandrecessivenessirrelevantforXYmales.Drosophilamaleslackasecondallele
W w
copyontheYchromosome;thatis,theirgenotypecanonlybeX YorX Y.Incontrast,femaleshavetwoallele
W W W w w w
copies of this gene and can be X X , X X , or X X .
Figure 12.11 In Drosophila, several genes determine eye color. The genes for white and vermilion eye colors are
located on the X chromosome. Others are located on the autosomes. Clockwise from top left are brown, cinnabar,
sepia, vermilion, white, and red. Red eye color is wild-type and is dominant to white eye color.
InanX-linkedcross,thegenotypesofF1andF2offspringdependonwhethertherecessivetraitwasexpressed
bythemaleorthefemaleintheP1generation.WithregardtoDrosophilaeyecolor,whentheP1maleexpresses
thewhite-eyephenotypeandthefemaleishomozygousred-eyed,allmembersoftheF1generationexhibitred
W w W
eyes (Figure 12.12). The F1 females are heterozygous (X X ), and the males are all X Y, having received
their X chromosome from the homozygous dominant P1 female and their Y chromosome from the P1 male. A
W w W
subsequent cross between the X X female and the X Y male would produce only red-eyed females (with
W W W w W w
X X orX X genotypes)andbothred-andwhite-eyedmales(withX YorX Ygenotypes).Now,consider
a cross between a homozygous white-eyed female and a male with red eyes. The F1 generation would exhibit
W w w
onlyheterozygousred-eyedfemales(X X )andonlywhite-eyedmales(X Y).HalfoftheF2femaleswouldbe
W w w w W
red-eyed(X X )andhalfwouldbewhite-eyed(X X ).Similarly,halfoftheF2maleswouldbered-eyed(X Y)
w
and half would be white-eyed (X Y).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 354
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 343
Figure12.12Punnettsquareanalysisisusedtodeterminetheratioofoffspringfromacrossbetweenared-eyed
male fruit fly and a white-eyed female fruit fly.
What ratio of offspring would result from a cross between a white-eyed male and a female that is
heterozygous for red eye color?
Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics. When a female parent is homozygous for
a recessive X-linked trait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of her offspring. Her male offspring are,
therefore,destinedtoexpressthetrait,astheywillinherittheirfather'sYchromosome.Inhumans,theallelesfor
certain conditions (some forms of color blindness, hemophilia, and muscular dystrophy) are X-linked. Females
who are heterozygous for these diseases are said to be carriers and may not exhibit any phenotypic effects.
These females will pass the disease to half of their sons and will pass carrier status to half of their daughters;
therefore, recessive X-linked traits appear more frequently in males than females.
In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the sex with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is
thefemaleratherthanthemale.Thisisthecaseforallbirds.Inthiscase,sex-linkedtraitswillbemorelikelyto
appear in the female, in which they are hemizygous.
Human Sex-linked Disorders
Sex-linkage studies in Morgan’s laboratory provided the fundamentals for understanding X-linked recessive
disordersinhumans,whichincludered-greencolorblindness,andTypesAandBhemophilia.Becausehuman
malesneedtoinheritonlyonerecessivemutantXalleletobeaffected,X-linkeddisordersaredisproportionately
observedinmales.FemalesmustinheritrecessiveX-linkedallelesfrombothoftheirparentsinordertoexpress
thetrait.WhentheyinheritonerecessiveX-linkedmutantalleleandonedominantX-linkedwild-typeallele,they
are carriers of the trait and are typically unaffected. Carrier females can manifest mild forms of the trait due
to the inactivation of the dominant allele located on one of the X chromosomes. However, female carriers can
contributethetraittotheirsons,resultinginthesonexhibitingthetrait,ortheycancontributetherecessiveallele
to their daughters, resulting in the daughters being carriers of the trait (Figure 12.13). Although some Y-linked
PAGE: 355
344 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
recessivedisordersexist,typicallytheyareassociatedwithinfertilityinmalesandarethereforenottransmitted
to subsequent generations.
Figure12.13ThesonofawomanwhoisacarrierofarecessiveX-linkeddisorderwillhavea50percentchanceof
beingaffected.Adaughterwillnotbeaffected,butshewillhavea50percentchanceofbeingacarrierlikehermother.
Watch this video to learn more about sex-linked traits. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66487/1.4/#eip-id1170504131681)
Lethality
A large proportion of genes in an individual’s genome are essential for survival. Occasionally, a nonfunctional
allele for an essential gene can arise by mutation and be transmitted in a population as long as individuals
with this allele also have a wild-type, functional copy. The wild-type allele functions at a capacity sufficient to
sustain life and is therefore considered to be dominant over the nonfunctional allele. However, consider two
heterozygousparentsthathaveagenotypeofwild-type/nonfunctionalmutantforahypotheticalessentialgene.
Inonequarteroftheiroffspring,wewouldexpecttoobserveindividualsthatarehomozygousrecessiveforthe
nonfunctional allele. Because the gene is essential, these individuals might fail to develop past fertilization, die
in utero, or die later in life, depending on what life stage requires this gene. An inheritance pattern in which an
alleleisonlylethalinthehomozygousformandinwhichtheheterozygotemaybenormalorhavesomealtered
nonlethal phenotype is referred to asrecessive lethal.
Forcrossesbetweenheterozygousindividualswitharecessivelethalallelethatcausesdeathbeforebirthwhen
homozygous, only wild-type homozygotes and heterozygotes would be observed. The genotypic ratio would
therefore be 2:1. In other instances, the recessive lethal allele might also exhibit a dominant (but not lethal)
phenotype in the heterozygote. For instance, the recessive lethal Curly allele in Drosophila affects wing shape
in the heterozygote form but is lethal in the homozygote.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 356
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 345
Asinglecopyofthewild-typealleleisnotalwayssufficientfornormalfunctioningorevensurvival.Thedominant
lethal inheritance pattern is one in which an allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote; this
allelecanonlybetransmittedifthelethalityphenotypeoccursafterreproductiveage.Individualswithmutations
that result in dominant lethal alleles fail to survive even in the heterozygote form. Dominant lethal alleles are
very rare because, as you might expect, the allele only lasts one generation and is not transmitted. However,
justastherecessivelethalallelemightnotimmediatelymanifestthephenotypeofdeath,dominantlethalalleles
also might not be expressed until adulthood. Once the individual reaches reproductive age, the allele may be
unknowingly passed on, resulting in a delayed death in both generations. An example of this in humans is
Huntington’s disease, in which the nervous system gradually wastes away (Figure 12.14). People who are
heterozygous for the dominant Huntington allele (Hh) will inevitably develop the fatal disease. However, the
onsetofHuntington’sdiseasemaynotoccuruntilage40,atwhichpointtheafflictedpersonsmayhavealready
passed the allele to 50 percent of their offspring.
Figure12.14Theneuroninthecenterofthismicrograph(yellow)hasnuclearinclusionscharacteristicofHuntington’s
disease(orangeareainthecenteroftheneuron).Huntington’sdiseaseoccurswhenanabnormaldominantallelefor
theHuntingtongeneispresent.(credit:Dr.StevenFinkbeiner,GladstoneInstituteofNeurologicalDisease,TheTaube-
Koret Center for Huntington's Disease Research, and the University of California San Francisco/Wikimedia)
12.3 | Laws of Inheritance
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• ExplainMendel’slawofsegregationandindependentassortmentintermsofgeneticsandtheeventsof
meiosis
• Use the forked-line method and the probability rules to calculate the probability of genotypes and
phenotypes from multiple gene crosses
• Explain the effect of linkage and recombination on gamete genotypes
• Explain the phenotypic outcomes of epistatic effects between genes
Mendelgeneralizedtheresultsofhispea-plantexperimentsintofourpostulates,someofwhicharesometimes
called “laws,” that describe the basis of dominant and recessive inheritance in diploid organisms. As you have
learned, more complex extensions of Mendelism exist that do not exhibit the same F2 phenotypic ratios (3:1).
PAGE: 357
346 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Nevertheless, these laws summarize the basics of classical genetics.
Pairs of Unit Factors, or Genes
Mendelproposedfirstthatpairedunitfactorsofheredityweretransmittedfaithfullyfromgenerationtogeneration
bythedissociationandreassociationofpairedfactorsduringgametogenesisandfertilization,respectively.After
hecrossedpeaswithcontrastingtraitsandfoundthattherecessivetraitresurfacedintheF2generation,Mendel
deduced that hereditary factors must be inherited as discrete units. This finding contradicted the belief at that
time that parental traits were blended in the offspring.
Alleles Can Be Dominant or Recessive
Mendel’s law of dominance states that in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait
for the same characteristic. Rather than both alleles contributing to a phenotype, the dominant allele will be
expressed exclusively. The recessive allele will remain “latent” but will be transmitted to offspring by the same
manner in which the dominant allele is transmitted. The recessive trait will only be expressed by offspring that
have two copies of this allele (Figure 12.15), and these offspring will breed true when self-crossed.
SinceMendel’sexperimentswithpeaplants,researchershavefoundthatthelawofdominancedoesnotalways
hold true. Instead, several different patterns of inheritance have been found to exist.
Figure 12.15The child in the photo expresses albinism, a recessive trait.
Equal Segregation of Alleles
Observing that true-breeding pea plants with contrasting traits gave rise to F1 generations that all expressed
the dominant trait and F2 generations that expressed the dominant and recessive traits in a 3:1 ratio, Mendel
proposed the law of segregation. This law states that paired unit factors (genes) must segregate equally
into gametes such that offspring have an equal likelihood of inheriting either factor. For the F2 generation
of a monohybrid cross, the following three possible combinations of genotypes could result: homozygous
dominant, heterozygous, or homozygous recessive. Because heterozygotes could arise from two different
pathways (receiving one dominant and one recessive allele from either parent), and because heterozygotes
and homozygous dominant individuals are phenotypically identical, the law supports Mendel’s observed 3:1
phenotypic ratio. The equal segregation of alleles is the reason we can apply the Punnett square to accurately
predicttheoffspringofparentswithknowngenotypes.ThephysicalbasisofMendel’slawofsegregationisthe
first division of meiosis, in which the homologous chromosomes with their different versions of each gene are
segregatedintodaughternuclei.Theroleofthemeioticsegregationofchromosomesinsexualreproductionwas
not understood by the scientific community during Mendel’s lifetime.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 358
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 347
Independent Assortment
Mendel’s law of independent assortment states that genes do not influence each other with regard to the
sorting of alleles into gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to
occur.Theindependentassortmentofgenescanbeillustratedbythedihybridcross,acrossbetweentwotrue-
breeding parents that express different traits for two characteristics. Consider the characteristics of seed color
and seed texture for two pea plants, one that has green, wrinkled seeds (yyrr) and another that has yellow,
round seeds (YYRR). Because each parent is homozygous, the law of segregation indicates that the gametes
for the green/wrinkled plant all are yr, and the gametes for the yellow/round plant are all YR. Therefore, the F1
generation of offspring all areYyRr(Figure 12.16).
Figure 12.16This dihybrid cross of pea plants involves the genes for seed color and texture.
In pea plants, purple flowers (P) are dominant to white flowers (p) and yellow peas (Y) are dominant to
greenpeas(y).WhatarethepossiblegenotypesandphenotypesforacrossbetweenPpYYandppYypea
plants? How many squares do you need to do a Punnett square analysis of this cross?
For the F2 generation, the law of segregation requires that each gamete receive either an R allele or an r
allele along with either a Y allele or a y allele. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into
which an r allele sorted would be equally likely to contain either a Y allele or a y allele. Thus, there are four
equally likely gametes that can be formed when the YyRr heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows: YR, Yr, yR,
and yr. Arranging these gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett square (Figure 12.16) gives us 16
equally likely genotypic combinations. From these genotypes, we infer a phenotypic ratio of 9 round/yellow:3
round/green:3wrinkled/yellow:1wrinkled/green(Figure12.16).Thesearetheoffspringratioswewouldexpect,
assuming we performed the crosses with a large enough sample size.
Becauseofindependentassortmentanddominance,the9:3:3:1dihybridphenotypicratiocanbecollapsedinto
two 3:1 ratios, characteristic of any monohybrid cross that follows a dominant and recessive pattern. Ignoring
seed color and considering only seed texture in the above dihybrid cross, we would expect that three quarters
oftheF2generationoffspringwouldberound,andonequarterwouldbewrinkled.Similarly,isolatingonlyseed
color,wewouldassumethatthreequartersoftheF2offspringwouldbeyellowandonequarterwouldbegreen.
Thesortingofallelesfortextureandcolorareindependentevents,sowecanapplytheproductrule.Therefore,
PAGE: 359
348 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
the proportion of round and yellow F2 offspring is expected to be (3/4) × (3/4) = 9/16, and the proportion of
wrinkled and green offspring is expected to be (1/4) × (1/4) = 1/16. These proportions are identical to those
obtainedusingaPunnettsquare.Round,greenandwrinkled,yellowoffspringcanalsobecalculatedusingthe
product rule, as each of these genotypes includes one dominant and one recessive phenotype. Therefore, the
proportion of each is calculated as (3/4) × (1/4) = 3/16.
Thelawofindependentassortmentalsoindicatesthatacrossbetweenyellow,wrinkled(YYrr)andgreen,round
(yyRR) parents would yield the same F1and F2offspring as in theYYRRxyyrrcross.
ThephysicalbasisforthelawofindependentassortmentalsoliesinmeiosisI,inwhichthedifferenthomologous
pairs line up in random orientations. Each gamete can contain any combination of paternal and maternal
chromosomes(andthereforethegenesonthem)becausetheorientationoftetradsonthemetaphaseplaneis
random.
Forked-Line Method
Whenmorethantwogenesarebeingconsidered,thePunnett-squaremethodbecomesunwieldy.Forinstance,
examiningacrossinvolvingfourgeneswouldrequirea16×16gridcontaining256boxes.Itwouldbeextremely
cumbersome to manually enter each genotype. For more complex crosses, the forked-line and probability
methods are preferred.
Toprepareaforked-linediagramforacrossbetweenF1heterozygotesresultingfromacrossbetweenAABBCC
and aabbcc parents, we first create rows equal to the number of genes being considered, and then segregate
the alleles in each row on forked lines according to the probabilities for individual monohybrid crosses (Figure
12.17).WethenmultiplythevaluesalongeachforkedpathtoobtaintheF2offspringprobabilities.Notethatthis
processisadiagrammaticversionoftheproductrule.Thevaluesalongeachforkedpathwaycanbemultiplied
because each gene assorts independently. For a trihybrid cross, the F2phenotypic ratio is 27:9:9:9:3:3:3:1.
Figure 12.17 The forked-line method can be used to analyze a trihybrid cross. Here, the probability for color in the
F2 generation occupies the top row (3 yellow:1 green). The probability for shape occupies the second row (3 round:
1 wrinkled), and the probability for height occupies the third row (3 tall:1 dwarf). The probability for each possible
combination of traits is calculated by multiplying the probability for each individual trait. Thus, the probability of F2
offspring having yellow, round, and tall traits is 3 × 3 × 3, or 27.
Probability Method
While the forked-line method is a diagrammatic approach to keeping track of probabilities in a cross, the
probability method gives the proportions of offspring expected to exhibit each phenotype (or genotype) without
theaddedvisualassistance.Bothmethodsmakeuseoftheproductruleandconsidertheallelesforeachgene
separately. Earlier, we examined the phenotypic proportions for a trihybrid cross using the forked-line method;
now we will use the probability method to examine the genotypic proportions for a cross with even more genes.
For a trihybrid cross, writing out the forked-line method is tedious, albeit not as tedious as using the Punnett-
square method. To fully demonstrate the power of the probability method, however, we can consider specific
geneticcalculations.Forinstance,foratetrahybridcrossbetweenindividualsthatareheterozygotesforallfour
genes, and in which all four genes are sorting independently and in a dominant and recessive pattern, what
proportionoftheoffspringwillbeexpectedtobehomozygousrecessiveforallfouralleles?Ratherthanwriting
out every possible genotype, we can use the probability method. We know that for each gene, the fraction of
homozygousrecessiveoffspringwillbe1/4.Therefore,multiplyingthisfractionforeachofthefourgenes,(1/4)
× (1/4) × (1/4) × (1/4), we determine that 1/256 of the offspring will be quadruply homozygous recessive.
For the same tetrahybrid cross, what is the expected proportion of offspring that have the dominant phenotype
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 360
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 349
at all four loci? We can answer this question using phenotypic proportions, but let’s do it the hard way—using
genotypic proportions. The question asks for the proportion of offspring that are 1) homozygous dominant at A
or heterozygous at A, and 2) homozygous at B or heterozygous at B, and so on. Noting the “or” and “and” in
each circumstance makes clear where to apply the sum and product rules. The probability of a homozygous
dominant at A is1/4and the probability of aheterozygote at A is1/2. The probability of the homozygote orthe
heterozygote is 1/4 + 1/2 = 3/4 using the sum rule. The same probability can be obtained in the same way for
each of the other genes, so that the probability of a dominant phenotype at A and B and C and D is, using the
productrule,equalto3/4×3/4×3/4×3/4,or27/64.Ifyouareeverunsureabouthowtocombineprobabilities,
returning to the forked-line method should make it clear.
Rules for Multihybrid Fertilization
Predictingthegenotypesandphenotypesofoffspringfromgivencrossesisthebestwaytotestyourknowledge
of Mendelian genetics. Given a multihybrid cross that obeys independent assortment and follows a dominant
and recessive pattern, several generalized rules exist; you can use these rules to check your results as you
work through genetics calculations (Table 12.5). To apply these rules, first you must determine n, the number
ofheterozygousgenepairs(thenumberofgenessegregatingtwoalleleseach).Forexample,acrossbetween
AaBb and AaBb heterozygotes has an n of 2. In contrast, a cross between AABb and AABb has an n of 1
becauseAis not heterozygous.
General Rules for Multihybrid Crosses
Number of Heterozygous Gene
General Rule
Pairs
Number of different F1gametes 2 n
Number of different F2genotypes 3 n
Given dominant and recessive inheritance, the number of different F2
n
2
phenotypes
Table 12.5
Linked Genes Violate the Law of Independent Assortment
Although all of Mendel’s pea characteristics behaved according to the law of independent assortment, we now
know that some allele combinations are not inherited independently of each other. Genes that are located on
separate non-homologous chromosomes will always sort independently. However, each chromosome contains
hundreds or thousands of genes, organized linearly on chromosomes like beads on a string. The segregation
of alleles into gametes can be influenced by linkage, in which genes that are located physically close to each
other on the same chromosome are more likely to be inherited as a pair. However, because of the process of
recombination,or“crossover,”itispossiblefortwogenesonthesamechromosometobehaveindependently,or
asiftheyarenotlinked.Tounderstandthis,let’sconsiderthebiologicalbasisofgenelinkageandrecombination.
Homologous chromosomes possess the same genes in the same linear order. The alleles may differ on
homologous chromosome pairs, but the genes to which they correspond do not. In preparation for the first
division of meiosis, homologous chromosomes replicate and synapse. Like genes on the homologs align with
eachother.Atthisstage,segmentsofhomologouschromosomesexchangelinearsegmentsofgeneticmaterial
(Figure12.18).Thisprocessiscalledrecombination,orcrossover,anditisacommongeneticprocess.Because
the genes are aligned during recombination, the gene order is not altered. Instead, the result of recombination
is that maternal and paternal alleles are combined onto the same chromosome. Across a given chromosome,
several recombination events may occur, causing extensive shuffling of alleles.
PAGE: 361
350 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Figure 12.18 The process of crossover, or recombination, occurs when two homologous chromosomes align during
meiosisandexchangeasegmentofgeneticmaterial.Here,theallelesforgeneCwereexchanged.Theresultistwo
recombinant and two non-recombinant chromosomes.
Whentwogenesarelocatedincloseproximityonthesamechromosome,theyareconsideredlinked,andtheir
alleles tend to be transmitted through meiosis together. To exemplify this, imagine a dihybrid cross involving
flowercolorandplantheightinwhichthegenesarenexttoeachotheronthechromosome.Ifonehomologous
chromosome has alleles for tall plants and red flowers, and the other chromosome has genes for short plants
andyellowflowers,thenwhenthegametesareformed,thetallandredalleleswillgotogetherintoagameteand
the short and yellow alleles will go into other gametes. These are called the parental genotypes because they
havebeeninheritedintactfromtheparentsoftheindividualproducinggametes.Butunlikeifthegeneswereon
differentchromosomes,therewillbenogameteswithtallandyellowallelesandnogameteswithshortandred
alleles.IfyoucreatethePunnettsquarewiththesegametes,youwillseethattheclassicalMendelianprediction
of a 9:3:3:1 outcome of a dihybrid cross would not apply. As the distance between two genes increases, the
probability of one or more crossovers between them increases, and the genes behave more like they are
on separate chromosomes. Geneticists have used the proportion of recombinant gametes (the ones not like
the parents) as a measure of how far apart genes are on a chromosome. Using this information, they have
constructed elaborate maps of genes on chromosomes for well-studied organisms, including humans.
Mendel’s seminal publication makes no mention of linkage, and many researchers have questioned whether
he encountered linkage but chose not to publish those crosses out of concern that they would invalidate his
independent assortment postulate. The garden pea has seven chromosomes, and some have suggested that
his choice of seven characteristics was not a coincidence. However, even if the genes he examined were not
locatedonseparatechromosomes,itispossiblethathesimplydidnotobservelinkagebecauseoftheextensive
shuffling effects of recombination.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 362
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 351
Testing the Hypothesis of Independent Assortment
To better appreciate the amount of labor and ingenuity that went into Mendel’s experiments, proceed
through one of Mendel’s dihybrid crosses.
Question: What will be the offspring of a dihybrid cross?
Background: Consider that pea plants mature in one growing season, and you have access to a large
gardeninwhichyoucancultivatethousandsofpeaplants.Thereareseveraltrue-breedingplantswiththe
following pairs of traits: tall plants with inflated pods, and dwarf plants with constricted pods. Before the
plantshavematured,youremovethepollen-producingorgansfromthetall/inflatedplantsinyourcrossesto
preventself-fertilization.Uponplantmaturation,theplantsaremanuallycrossedbytransferringpollenfrom
the dwarf/constricted plants to the stigmata of the tall/inflated plants.
Hypothesis: Both trait pairs will sort independently according to Mendelian laws. When the true-breeding
parents are crossed, all of the F1 offspring are tall and have inflated pods, which indicates that the tall
and inflated traits are dominant over the dwarf and constricted traits, respectively. A self-cross of the F1
heterozygotes results in 2,000 F2progeny.
Test the hypothesis: Because each trait pair sorts independently, the ratios of tall:dwarf and
inflated:constricted are each expected to be 3:1. The tall/dwarf trait pair is called T/t, and the inflated/
constricted trait pair is designated I/i. Each member of the F1 generation therefore has a genotype of TtIi.
Construct a grid analogous to Figure 12.16, in which you cross two TtIi individuals. Each individual can
donate four combinations of two traits: TI, Ti, tI, or ti, meaning that there are 16 possibilities of offspring
genotypes. Because the T and I alleles are dominant, any individual having one or two of those alleles
will express the tall or inflated phenotypes, respectively, regardless if they also have a t or i allele. Only
individuals that are tt or ii will express the dwarf and constricted alleles, respectively. As shown in Figure
12.19,youpredictthatyouwillobservethefollowingoffspringproportions:tall/inflated:tall/constricted:dwarf/
inflated:dwarf/constricted in a 9:3:3:1 ratio. Notice from the grid that when considering the tall/dwarf and
inflated/constricted trait pairs in isolation, they are each inherited in 3:1 ratios.
Figure12.19Thisfigureshowsallpossiblecombinationsofoffspringresultingfromadihybridcrossofpeaplants
that are heterozygous for the tall/dwarf and inflated/constricted alleles.
Testthehypothesis:Youcrossthedwarfandtallplantsandthenself-crosstheoffspring.Forbestresults,
thisisrepeatedwithhundredsoreventhousandsofpeaplants.Whatspecialprecautionsshouldbetaken
in the crosses and in growing the plants?
PAGE: 363
352 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
Analyze your data: You observe the following plant phenotypes in the F2 generation: 2706 tall/inflated,
930 tall/constricted, 888 dwarf/inflated, and 300 dwarf/constricted. Reduce these findings to a ratio and
determine if they are consistent with Mendelian laws.
Formaconclusion:Weretheresultsclosetotheexpected9:3:3:1phenotypicratio?Dotheresultssupport
theprediction?Whatmightbeobservediffarfewerplantswereused,giventhatallelessegregaterandomly
into gametes? Try to imagine growing that many pea plants, and consider the potential for experimental
error. For instance, what would happen if it was extremely windy one day?
Epistasis
Mendel’sstudiesinpeaplantsimpliedthatthesumofanindividual’sphenotypewascontrolledbygenes(oras
he called them, unit factors), such that every characteristic was distinctly and completely controlled by a single
gene. In fact, single observable characteristics are almost always under the influence of multiple genes (each
with two or more alleles) acting in unison. For example, at least eight genes contribute to eye color in humans.
Eye color in humans is determined by multiple genes. Use the Eye Color Calculator
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/eye_color_calc)to predict the eye color of children from parental eye color.
In some cases, several genes can contribute to aspects of a common phenotype without their gene products
everdirectlyinteracting.Inthecaseoforgandevelopment,forinstance,genesmaybeexpressedsequentially,
witheachgeneaddingtothecomplexityandspecificityoftheorgan.Genesmayfunctionincomplementaryor
synergistic fashions, such that two or more genes need to be expressed simultaneously to affect a phenotype.
Genes may also oppose each other, with one gene modifying the expression of another.
In epistasis, the interaction between genes is antagonistic, such that one gene masks or interferes with the
expression of another. “Epistasis” is a word composed of Greek roots that mean “standing upon.” The alleles
that are being masked or silenced are said to be hypostatic to the epistatic alleles that are doing the masking.
Oftenthebiochemicalbasisofepistasisisagenepathwayinwhichtheexpressionofonegeneisdependenton
the function of a gene that precedes or follows it in the pathway.
An example of epistasis is pigmentation in mice. The wild-type coat color, agouti (AA), is dominant to solid-
coloredfur(aa).However,aseparategene(C)isnecessaryforpigmentproduction.Amousewitharecessivec
alleleatthislocusisunabletoproducepigmentandisalbinoregardlessoftheallelepresentatlocusA(Figure
12.20).Therefore,thegenotypesAAcc,Aacc,andaaccallproducethesamealbinophenotype.Acrossbetween
heterozygotesforbothgenes(AaCcxAaCc)wouldgenerateoffspringwithaphenotypicratioof9agouti:3solid
color:4 albino (Figure 12.20). In this case, theCgene is epistatic to theAgene.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 364
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 353
Figure12.20Inmice,themottledagouticoatcolor(A)isdominanttoasolidcoloration,suchasblackorgray.Agene
ataseparatelocus(C)isresponsibleforpigmentproduction.Therecessivecalleledoesnotproducepigment,anda
mousewiththehomozygousrecessiveccgenotypeisalbinoregardlessoftheallelepresentattheAlocus.Thus,the
Cgene is epistatic to theAgene.
Epistasis can also occur when a dominant allele masks expression at a separate gene. Fruit color in summer
squash is expressed in this way. Homozygous recessive expression of the W gene (ww) coupled with
homozygous dominant or heterozygous expression of the Y gene (YY or Yy) generates yellow fruit, and the
wwyygenotypeproducesgreenfruit.However,ifadominantcopyoftheWgeneispresentinthehomozygous
orheterozygous form, the summersquashwillproducewhite fruit regardlessof the Y alleles. A crossbetween
white heterozygotes for both genes (WwYy × WwYy) would produce offspring with a phenotypic ratio of 12
white:3 yellow:1 green.
Finally, epistasis can be reciprocal such that either gene, when present in the dominant (or recessive) form,
expresses the same phenotype. In the shepherd’s purse plant (Capsella bursa-pastoris), the characteristic of
seed shape is controlled by two genes in a dominant epistatic relationship. When the genes A and B are both
homozygous recessive (aabb), the seeds are ovoid. If the dominant allele for either of these genes is present,
theresultistriangularseeds.Thatis,everypossiblegenotypeotherthanaabbresultsintriangularseeds,anda
crossbetween heterozygotes for both genes (AaBb xAaBb)would yield offspring with aphenotypic ratio of 15
triangular:1 ovoid.
Asyouworkthroughgeneticsproblems,keepinmindthatanysinglecharacteristicthatresultsinaphenotypic
ratio that totals 16 is typical of a two-gene interaction. Recall the phenotypic inheritance pattern for Mendel’s
dihybridcross,whichconsideredtwononinteractinggenes—9:3:3:1.Similarly,wewouldexpectinteractinggene
pairstoalsoexhibitratiosexpressedas16parts.Notethatweareassumingtheinteractinggenesarenotlinked;
they are still assorting independently into gametes.
PAGE: 365
354 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
For an excellent review of Mendel’s experiments and to perform your own crosses and identify patterns of
inheritance, visit theMendel’s Peas (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/mendels_peas)web lab.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 366
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 355
KEY TERMS
allele gene variations that arise by mutation and exist at the same relative locations on homologous
chromosomes
autosomes any of the non-sex chromosomes
blending theory of inheritance hypotheticalinheritancepatterninwhichparentaltraitsareblendedtogetherin
the offspring to produce an intermediate physical appearance
codominance in a heterozygote, complete and simultaneous expression of both alleles for the same
characteristic
continuous variation inheritance pattern in which a character shows a range of trait values with small
gradations rather than large gaps between them
dihybrid result of a cross between two true-breeding parents that express different traits for two characteristics
discontinuous variation inheritance pattern in which traits are distinct and are transmitted independently of
one another
dominant traitwhichconfersthesamephysicalappearancewhetheranindividualhastwocopiesofthetraitor
one copy of the dominant trait and one copy of the recessive trait
dominant lethal inheritance pattern in which an allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote;
this allele can only be transmitted if the lethality phenotype occurs after reproductive age
epistasis antagonisticinteractionbetweengenessuchthatonegenemasksorinterfereswiththeexpressionof
another
F1 first filial generation in a cross; the offspring of the parental generation
F2 second filial generation produced when F1individuals are self-crossed or fertilized with each other
genotype underlying genetic makeup, consisting of both physically visible and non-expressed alleles, of an
organism
hemizygous presenceofonlyonealleleforacharacteristic,asinX-linkage;hemizygositymakesdescriptions
of dominance and recessiveness irrelevant
heterozygous having two different alleles for a given gene on the homologous chromosome
homozygous having two identical alleles for a given gene on the homologous chromosome
hybridization process of mating two individuals that differ with the goal of achieving a certain characteristic in
their offspring
incomplete dominance in a heterozygote, expression of two contrasting alleles such that the individual
displays an intermediate phenotype
law of dominance in a heterozygote, one trait will conceal the presence of another trait for the same
characteristic
law of independent assortment genes do not influence each other with regard to sorting of alleles into
gametes; every possible combination of alleles is equally likely to occur
law of segregation pairedunitfactors(i.e.,genes)segregateequallyintogametessuchthatoffspringhavean
equal likelihood of inheriting any combination of factors
linkage phenomenoninwhichallelesthatarelocatedincloseproximitytoeachotheronthesamechromosome
are more likely to be inherited together
PAGE: 367
356 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
model system species or biological system used to study a specific biological phenomenon to be applied to
other different species
monohybrid result of a cross between two true-breeding parents that express different traits for only one
characteristic
P0 parental generation in a cross
phenotype observable traits expressed by an organism
product rule probability of two independent events occurring simultaneously can be calculated by multiplying
the individual probabilities of each event occurring alone
Punnett square visual representation of a cross between two individuals in which the gametes of each
individualaredenotedalongthetopandsideofagrid,respectively,andthepossiblezygoticgenotypesare
recombined at each box in the grid
recessive traitthatappears“latent”ornon-expressedwhentheindividualalsocarriesadominanttraitforthat
same characteristic; when present as two identical copies, the recessive trait is expressed
recessive lethal inheritancepatterninwhichanalleleisonlylethalinthehomozygousform;theheterozygote
may be normal or have some altered, nonlethal phenotype
reciprocal cross paired cross in which the respective traits of the male and female in one cross become the
respective traits of the female and male in the other cross
sex-linked any gene on a sex chromosome
sum rule probability of the occurrence of at least one of two mutually exclusive events is the sum of their
individual probabilities
test cross cross between a dominant expressing individual with an unknown genotype and a homozygous
recessive individual; the offspring phenotypes indicate whether the unknown parent is heterozygous or
homozygous for the dominant trait
trait variation in the physical appearance of a heritable characteristic
X-linked gene present on the X, but not the Y chromosome
CHAPTER SUMMARY
12.1Mendel’s Experiments and the Laws of Probability
Working with garden pea plants, Mendel found that crosses between parents that differed by one trait produced
F1offspring that all expressed the traits of one parent. Observable traits are referred to as dominant, and non-
expressed traits are described as recessive. When the offspring in Mendel’s experiment were self-crossed, the
F2offspring exhibited the dominant trait or the recessive trait in a 3:1 ratio, confirming that the recessive trait
had been transmitted faithfully from the original P0parent. Reciprocal crosses generated identical F1and F2
offspring ratios. By examining sample sizes, Mendel showed that his crosses behaved reproducibly according
to the laws of probability, and that the traits were inherited as independent events.
Two rules in probability can be used to find the expected proportions of offspring of different traits from different
crosses. To find the probability of two or more independent events occurring together, apply the product rule
and multiply the probabilities of the individual events. The use of the word “and” suggests the appropriate
application of the product rule. To find the probability of two or more events occurring in combination, apply the
sum rule and add their individual probabilities together. The use of the word “or” suggests the appropriate
application of the sum rule.
12.2Characteristics and Traits
When true-breeding or homozygous individuals that differ for a certain trait are crossed, all of the offspring will
be heterozygotes for that trait. If the traits are inherited as dominant and recessive, the F1offspring will all
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 368
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 357
exhibit the same phenotype as the parent homozygous for the dominant trait. If these heterozygous offspring
are self-crossed, the resulting F2offspring will be equally likely to inherit gametes carrying the dominant or
recessive trait, giving rise to offspring of which one quarter are homozygous dominant, half are heterozygous,
and one quarter are homozygous recessive. Because homozygous dominant and heterozygous individuals are
phenotypically identical, the observed traits in the F2offspring will exhibit a ratio of three dominant to one
recessive.
Alleles do not always behave in dominant and recessive patterns. Incomplete dominance describes situations
in which the heterozygote exhibits a phenotype that is intermediate between the homozygous phenotypes.
Codominance describes the simultaneous expression of both of the alleles in the heterozygote. Although
diploid organisms can only have two alleles for any given gene, it is common for more than two alleles of a
gene to exist in a population. In humans, as in many animals and some plants, females have two X
chromosomes and males have one X and one Y chromosome. Genes that are present on the X but not the Y
chromosome are said to be X-linked, such that males only inherit one allele for the gene, and females inherit
two. Finally, some alleles can be lethal. Recessive lethal alleles are only lethal in homozygotes, but dominant
lethal alleles are fatal in heterozygotes as well.
12.3Laws of Inheritance
Mendel postulated that genes (characteristics) are inherited as pairs of alleles (traits) that behave in a dominant
and recessive pattern. Alleles segregate into gametes such that each gamete is equally likely to receive either
one of the two alleles present in a diploid individual. In addition, genes are assorted into gametes
independently of one another. That is, alleles are generally not more likely to segregate into a gamete with a
particular allele of another gene. A dihybrid cross demonstrates independent assortment when the genes in
question are on different chromosomes or distant from each other on the same chromosome. For crosses
involving more than two genes, use the forked line or probability methods to predict offspring genotypes and
phenotypes rather than a Punnett square.
Although chromosomes sort independently into gametes during meiosis, Mendel’s law of independent
assortment refers to genes, not chromosomes, and a single chromosome may carry more than 1,000 genes.
When genes are located in close proximity on the same chromosome, their alleles tend to be inherited together.
This results in offspring ratios that violate Mendel's law of independent assortment. However, recombination
serves to exchange genetic material on homologous chromosomes such that maternal and paternal alleles
may be recombined on the same chromosome. This is why alleles on a given chromosome are not always
inherited together. Recombination is a random event occurring anywhere on a chromosome. Therefore, genes
that are far apart on the same chromosome are likely to still assort independently because of recombination
events that occurred in the intervening chromosomal space.
Whether or not they are sorting independently, genes may interact at the level of gene products such that the
expression of an allele for one gene masks or modifies the expression of an allele for a different gene. This is
called epistasis.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 12.5In pea plants, round peas (R) are 3.Figure 12.12What ratio of offspring would result
dominant to wrinkled peas (r). You do a test cross from a cross between a white-eyed male and a
between a pea plant with wrinkled peas (genotyperr) female that is heterozygous for red eye color?
and a plant of unknown genotype that has round
4.Figure 12.16In pea plants, purple flowers (P) are
peas. You end up with three plants, all which have
dominant to white flowers (p) and yellow peas (Y) are
round peas. From this data, can you tell if the round
dominant to green peas (y). What are the possible
pea parent plant is homozygous dominant or
genotypes and phenotypes for a cross between
heterozygous? If the round pea parent plant is
PpYY and ppYy pea plants? How many squares do
heterozygous, what is the probability that a random
you need to do a Punnett square analysis of this
sample of 3 progeny peas will all be round?
cross?
2.Figure 12.6What are the genotypes of the
individuals labeled 1, 2, and 3?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
5.Mendel performed hybridizations by transferring pollen from the _______ of the male plant to the
PAGE: 369
358 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
female ova. a. dominance
a. anther b. codominance
b. pistil c. multiple alleles
c. stigma d. incomplete dominance
d. seed
13.The ABO blood groups in humans are expressed
6.Which is one of the seven characteristics that as theI A ,I B , andialleles. TheI A allele encodes the
Mendel observed in pea plants? B
A blood group antigen,I encodes B, andiencodes
a. flower size
O. Both A and B are dominant to O. If a
b. seed texture
A
heterozygous blood type A parent (I i) and a
c. leaf shape
B
d. stem color heterozygous blood type B parent (I i) mate, one
quarter of their offspring will have AB blood type
7.Imagine you are performing a cross involving seed
AB
color in garden pea plants. What F1offspring would (I I ) in which both antigens are expressed equally.
you expect if you cross true-breeding parents with Therefore, ABO blood groups are an example of:
green seeds and yellow seeds? Yellow seed color is
dominant over green. a. multiple alleles and incomplete dominance
a. 100 percent yellow-green seeds b. codominance and incomplete dominance
b. 100 percent yellow seeds c. incomplete dominance only
c. 50 percent yellow, 50 percent green seeds d. multiple alleles and codominance
d. 25 percent green, 75 percent yellow seeds 14.In a mating between two individuals that are
8.Consider a cross to investigate the pea pod texture heterozygous for a recessive lethal allele that is
trait, involving constricted or inflated pods. Mendel expressedin utero, what genotypic ratio
found that the traits behave according to a dominant/ (homozygous dominant:heterozygous:homozygous
recessive pattern in which inflated pods were recessive) would you expect to observe in the
dominant. If you performed this cross and obtained offspring?
650 inflated-pod plants in the F2generation, a. 1:2:1
b. 3:1:1
approximately how many constricted-pod plants
c. 1:2:0
would you expect to have?
d. 0:2:1
a. 600
b. 165 15.If the allele encoding polydactyly (six fingers) is
c. 217 dominant why do most people have five fingers?
d. 468
a. Genetic elements suppress the polydactyl
9.A scientist pollinates a true-breeding pea plant with
gene.
violet, terminal flowers with pollen from a true-
b. Polydactyly is embryonic lethal.
breeding pea plant with white, axial flowers. Which of
c. The sixth finger is removed at birth.
the following observations would most accurately
d. The polydactyl allele is very rare in the
describe the F2generation?
human population.
a. 75% violet flowers; 75% terminal flowers
b. 75% white flowers in a terminal position 16.A farmer raises black and white chickens. To his
c. 75% violet flowers; 75% axial flowers surprise, when the first generation of eggs hatch all
d. 75% violet flowers in an axial position the chickens are black with white speckles
throughout their feathers. What should the farmer
10.The observable traits expressed by an organism
expect when the eggs laid after interbreeding the
are described as its ________.
speckled chickens hatch?
a. phenotype
a. All the offspring will be speckled.
b. genotype
b. 75% of the offspring will be speckled, and
c. alleles
25% will be black.
d. zygote
c. 50% of the offspring will be speckled, 25%
11.A recessive trait will be observed in individuals will be black, and 25% will be white.
that are ________ for that trait. d. 50% of the offspring will be black and 50%
a. heterozygous of the offspring will be white.
b. homozygous or heterozygous
17.Assuming no gene linkage, in a dihybrid cross of
c. homozygous
d. diploid
AABBxaabbwithAaBbF1heterozygotes, what is
the ratio of the F1gametes (AB,aB,Ab,ab) that will
12.If black and white true-breeding mice are mated
give rise to the F2offspring?
and the result is all gray offspring, what inheritance
pattern would this be indicative of?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 370
Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity 359
a. 1:1:1:1 alleles, E and B. Any dog with the ee__ genotype
b. 1:3:3:1 develops into a yellow lab, while B_E_ dogs become
c. 1:2:2:1 black labs and bbE_ dogs become chocolate labs.
d. 4:3:2:1 This is an example of _____.
a. epistasis
18.The forked line and probability methods make
b. codominance
use of what probability rule?
c. incomplete dominance
a. test cross
d. linkage
b. product rule
c. monohybrid rule 21.Which of the following situations doesnotfollow
d. sum rule the Law of Independent Assortment?
a. A blond man and a brunette woman
19.How many different offspring genotypes are
produce three offspring over time, all of who
expected in a trihybrid cross between parents
have blond hair.
heterozygous for all three traits when the traits
b. A white cow crossed with a brown bull
behave in a dominant and recessive pattern? How
produces roan cattle.
many phenotypes?
c. Mating a hog with a sow produces six
a. 64 genotypes; 16 phenotypes
female piglets.
b. 16 genotypes; 64 phenotypes
d. Men are more likely to experience
c. 8 genotypes; 27 phenotypes
hemophilia than women.
d. 27 genotypes; 8 phenotypes
20.Labrador retriever’s fur color is controlled by two
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
22.Describe one of the reasons why the garden pea 29.Why is it more efficient to perform a test cross
was an excellent choice of model system for studying with a homozygous recessive donor than a
inheritance. homozygous dominant donor? How could the same
information still be found with a homozygous
23.How would you perform a reciprocal cross for the
dominant donor?
characteristic of stem height in the garden pea?
30.Use the probability method to calculate the
24.Mendel performs a cross using a true-breeding
genotypes and genotypic proportions of a cross
pea plant with round, yellow seeds and a true-
betweenAABBCcandAabbccparents.
breeding pea plant with green, wrinkled seeds. What
is the probability that offspring will have green, round 31.Explain epistatis in terms of its Greek-language
seeds? Calculate the probability for the F1and F2 roots “standing upon.”
generations.
32.In Section 12.3, “Laws of Inheritance,” an
25.Calculate the probability of selecting a heart or a example of epistasis was given for the summer
face card from a standard deck of cards. Is this squash. Cross whiteWwYyheterozygotes to prove
outcome more or less likely than selecting a heart the phenotypic ratio of 12 white:3 yellow:1 green that
suit face card? was given in the text.
26.The gene for flower position in pea plants exists 33.People with trisomy 21 develop Down’s
as axial or terminal alleles. Given that axial is syndrome. What law of Mendelian inheritance is
dominant to terminal, list all of the possible F1and F2 violated in this disease? What is the most likely way
genotypes and phenotypes from a cross involving this occurs?
parents that are homozygous for each trait. Express
34.A heterozygous pea plant produces violet flowers
genotypes with conventional genetic abbreviations.
and yellow, round seeds. Describe the expected
27.Use a Punnett square to predict the offspring in a genotypes of the gametes produced by Mendelian
cross between a dwarf pea plant (homozygous inheritance. If all three genes are found on the same
recessive) and a tall pea plant (heterozygous). What arm of one chromosome should a scientist predict
is the phenotypic ratio of the offspring? that inheritance patterns will follow Mendelian
genetics?
28.Can a human male be a carrier of red-green color
blindness?
PAGE: 371
360 Chapter 12 | Mendel's Experiments and Heredity
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 372
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 361
13 | MODERN
UNDERSTANDINGS OF
INHERITANCE
Figure 13.1 Chromosomes are threadlike nuclear structures consisting of DNA and proteins that serve as the
repositories for genetic information. The chromosomes depicted here were isolated from a fruit fly’s salivary gland,
stainedwithdye,andvisualizedunderamicroscope.Akintominiaturebarcodes,chromosomesabsorbdifferentdyes
toproducecharacteristicbandingpatterns,whichallowsfortheirroutineidentification.(credit:modificationofworkby
“LPLT”/Wikimedia Commons; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
13.1:Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage
13.2:Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders
Introduction
The gene is the physical unit of inheritance, and genes are arranged in a linear order on chromosomes.
Chromosome behavior and interaction during meiosis explain, at a cellular level, inheritance patterns that we
observe in populations. Genetic disorders involving alterations in chromosome number or structure may have
dramatic effects and can prevent a fertilized egg from developing.
PAGE: 373
362 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
13.1 | Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss Sutton’s Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
• Describe genetic linkage
• Explain the process of homologous recombination, or crossing over
• Describe chromosome creation
• Calculate the distances between three genes on a chromosome using a three-point test cross
Long before scientists visualized chromosomes under a microscope, the father of modern genetics, Gregor
Mendel, began studying heredity in 1843. With improved microscopic techniques during the late 1800s, cell
biologistscouldstainandvisualizesubcellularstructureswithdyesandobservetheiractionsduringcelldivision
and meiosis. With each mitotic division, chromosomes replicated, condensed from an amorphous (no constant
shape) nuclear mass into distinct X-shaped bodies (pairs of identical sister chromatids), and migrated to
separate cellular poles.
Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance
Thespeculationthatchromosomesmightbethekeytounderstandingheredityledseveralscientiststoexamine
Mendel’s publications and reevaluate his model in terms of chromosome behavior during mitosis and meiosis.
In 1902, Theodor Boveri observed that proper sea urchin embryonic development does not occur unless
chromosomesarepresent.Thatsameyear,WalterSuttonobservedchromosomeseparationintodaughtercells
during meiosis (Figure 13.2). Together, these observations led to the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance,
which identified chromosomes as the genetic material responsible for Mendelian inheritance.
Figure13.2(a)WalterSuttonand(b)TheodorBoveridevelopedtheChromosomalTheoryofInheritance,whichstates
that chromosomes carry the unit of heredity (genes).
The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance was consistent with Mendel’s laws, which the following observations
supported:
• Duringmeiosis,homologouschromosomepairsmigrateasdiscretestructuresthatareindependentofother
chromosome pairs.
• Chromosome sorting from each homologous pair into pre-gametes appears to be random.
• Each parent synthesizes gametes that contain only half their chromosomal complement.
• Eventhoughmaleandfemalegametes(spermandegg)differinsizeandmorphology,theyhavethesame
number of chromosomes, suggesting equal genetic contributions from each parent.
• The gametic chromosomes combine during fertilization to produce offspring with the same chromosome
number as their parents.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 374
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 363
Despite compelling correlations between chromosome behavior during meiosis and Mendel’s abstract laws,
scientists proposed the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance long before there was any direct evidence that
chromosomes carried traits. Critics pointed out that individuals had far more independently segregating traits
thantheyhadchromosomes.Itwasonlyafterseveralyearsofcarryingoutcrosseswiththefruitfly,Drosophila
melanogaster,thatThomasHuntMorganprovidedexperimentalevidencetosupporttheChromosomalTheory
of Inheritance.
Genetic Linkage and Distances
Mendel’s work suggested that traits are inherited independently of each other. Morgan identified a 1:1
correspondence between a segregating trait and the X chromosome, suggesting that random chromosome
segregation was the physical basis of Mendel’s model. This also demonstrated that linked genes disrupt
Mendel’s predicted outcomes. That each chromosome can carry many linked genes explains how individuals
can have many more traits than they have chromosomes. However, researchers in Morgan’s laboratory
suggestedthatallelespositionedonthesamechromosomewerenotalwaysinheritedtogether.Duringmeiosis,
linked genes somehow became unlinked.
Homologous Recombination
In1909,FransJanssenobservedchiasmata—thepointatwhichchromatidsareincontactwitheachotherand
may exchange segments—prior to the first meiosis division. He suggested that alleles become unlinked and
chromosomes physically exchange segments. As chromosomes condensed and paired with their homologs,
they appeared to interact at distinct points. Janssen suggested that these points corresponded to regions in
which chromosome segments exchanged. We now know that the pairing and interaction between homologous
chromosomes, or synapsis, does more than simply organize the homologs for migration to separate daughter
cells. When synapsed, homologous chromosomes undergo reciprocal physical exchanges at their arms in
homologous recombination, or more simply, “crossing over.”
To better understand the type of experimental results that researchers were obtaining at this time, consider a
heterozygousindividualthatinheriteddominantmaternalallelesfortwogenesonthesamechromosome(such
asAB)andtworecessivepaternalallelesforthosesamegenes(suchasab).Ifthegenesarelinked,onewould
expect this individual to produce gametes that are either AB or ab with a 1:1 ratio. If the genes are unlinked,
the individual should produce AB, Ab, aB, and ab gametes with equal frequencies, according to the Mendelian
concept of independent assortment. Because they correspond to new allele combinations, the genotypes Ab
andaBarenonparentaltypesthatresultfromhomologousrecombinationduringmeiosis.Parentaltypesare
progeny that exhibit the same allelic combination as their parents. Morgan and his colleagues, however, found
that when they test crossed such heterozygous individuals to a homozygous recessive parent (AaBb × aabb),
bothparentalandnonparentalcasesoccurred.Forexample,950offspringmightberecoveredthatwereeither
AaBb or aabb, but 50 offspring would also result that were either Aabb or aaBb. These results suggested that
linkage occurred most often, but a significant minority of offspring were the products of recombination.
PAGE: 375
364 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
Figure 13.3 This figure shows unlinked and linked gene inheritance patterns. In (a), two genes are located on
different chromosomes so independent assortment occurs during meiosis. The offspring have an equal chance
of being the parental type (inheriting the same combination of traits as the parents) or a nonparental type
(inheriting a different combination of traits than the parents). In (b), two genes are very close together on the
same chromosome so that no crossing over occurs between them. Therefore, the genes are always inherited
togetherandalltheoffspringaretheparentaltype.In(c),twogenesarefarapartonthechromosomesuchthat
crossing over occurs during every meiotic event. The recombination frequency will be the same as if the genes
were on separate chromosomes. (d) The actual recombination frequency of fruit fly wing length and body color
thatThomasMorganobservedin1912was17percent.Acrossoverfrequencybetween0percentand50percent
indicates that the genes are on the same chromosome and crossover sometimes occurs.
In a test cross for two characteristics such as the one here, can the recombinant offspring's predicted
frequency be 60 percent? Why or why not?
Genetic Maps
Janssen did not have the technology to demonstrate crossing over so it remained an abstract idea that
scientists did not widely believe. Scientists thought chiasmata were a variation on synapsis and could not
understandhowchromosomescouldbreakandrejoin.Yet,thedatawereclearthatlinkagedidnotalwaysoccur.
Ultimately, it took a young undergraduate student and an “all-nighter” to mathematically elucidate the linkage
and recombination problem.
In1913,AlfredSturtevant,astudentinMorgan’slaboratory,gatheredresultsfromresearchersinthelaboratory,
and took them home one night to mull them over. By the next morning, he had created the first “chromosome
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 376
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 365
map,” a linear representation of gene order and relative distance on a chromosome (Figure 13.4).
Figure 13.4This genetic map ordersDrosophilagenes on the basis of recombination frequency.
Which of the following statements is true?
a. Recombination of the body color and red/cinnabar eye alleles will occur more frequently than
recombination of the alleles for wing length and aristae length.
b. Recombination of the body color and aristae length alleles will occur more frequently than
recombination of red/brown eye alleles and the aristae length alleles.
c. Recombination of the gray/black body color and long/short aristae alleles will not occur.
d. Recombination of the red/brown eye and long/short aristae alleles will occur more frequently than
recombination of the alleles for wing length and body color.
As Figure 13.4 shows, by using recombination frequency to predict genetic distance, we can infer the relative
geneorderonchromosome2.Thevaluesrepresentmapdistancesincentimorgans(cM),whichcorrespondto
recombinationfrequencies(inpercent).Therefore,thegenesforbodycolorandwingsizewere65.5−48.5=17
cMapart,indicatingthatthematernalandpaternalallelesforthesegenesrecombinein17percentofoffspring,
on average.
To construct a chromosome map, Sturtevant assumed that genes were ordered serially on threadlike
chromosomes. He also assumed that the incidence of recombination between two homologous chromosomes
couldoccurwithequallikelihoodanywherealongthechromosome'slength.Operatingundertheseassumptions,
Sturtevant postulated that alleles that were far apart on a chromosome were more likely to dissociate during
meiosis simply because there was a larger region over which recombination could occur. Conversely, alleles
that were close to each other on the chromosome were likely to be inherited together. The average number of
crossoversbetweentwoalleles—thatis,theirrecombinationfrequency—correlatedwiththeirgeneticdistance
from each other, relative to the locations of other genes on that chromosome. Considering the example cross
between AaBb and aabb above, we could calculate the recombination's frequency as 50/1000 = 0.05. That
is, the likelihood of a crossover between genes A/a and B/b was 0.05, or 5 percent. Such a result would
indicatethatthegenesweredefinitivelylinked,butthattheywerefarenoughapartforcrossoverstooccasionally
occur.Sturtevantdividedhisgeneticmapintomapunits,orcentimorgans(cM),inwhicha0,01recombination
frequency corresponds to 1 cM.
By representing alleles in a linear map, Sturtevant suggested that genes can range from linking perfectly
(recombinationfrequency=0)tounlinkingperfectly(recombinationfrequency=0.5)whengenesareondifferent
chromosomesorgenesseparateveryfarapartonthesamechromosome.Perfectlyunlinkedgenescorrespond
tothefrequenciesMendelpredictedtoassortindependentlyinadihybridcross.A0.5recombinationfrequency
indicates that 50 percent of offspring are recombinants and the other 50 percent are parental types. That is,
every type of allele combination is represented with equal frequency. This representation allowed Sturtevant
to additively calculate distances between several genes on the same chromosome. However, as the genetic
distances approached 0.50, his predictions became less accurate because it was not clear whether the genes
PAGE: 377
366 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
were very far apart on the same or on different chromosomes.
In 1931, Barbara McClintock and Harriet Creighton demonstrated the crossover of homologous chromosomes
incornplants.Weekslater,CurtSterndemonstratedmicroscopicallyhomologousrecombinationinDrosophila.
Stern observed several X-linked phenotypes that were associated with a structurally unusual and dissimilar
X chromosome pair in which one X was missing a small terminal segment, and the other X was fused to a
piece of the Y chromosome. By crossing flies, observing their offspring, and then visualizing the offspring’s
chromosomes, Stern demonstrated that every time the offspring allele combination deviated from either of the
parentalcombinations,therewasacorrespondingexchangeofanXchromosomesegment.Usingmutantflies
withstructurallydistinctXchromosomeswasthekeytoobservingtheproductsofrecombinationbecauseDNA
sequencing and other molecular tools were not yet available. We now know that homologous chromosomes
regularly exchange segments in meiosis by reciprocally breaking and rejoining their DNA at precise locations.
Review Sturtevant’s process to create a genetic map on the basis of recombination frequencies here
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/gene_crossover).
Mendel’s Mapped Traits
Homologous recombination is a common genetic process, yet Mendel never observed it. Had he investigated
bothlinkedandunlinkedgenes,itwouldhavebeenmuchmoredifficultforhimtocreateaunifiedmodelofhis
dataonthebasisofprobabilisticcalculations.ResearcherswhohavesincemappedtheseventraitsthatMendel
investigatedontoapeaplantgenome'ssevenchromosomeshaveconfirmedthatallthegenesheexaminedare
eitheronseparatechromosomesoraresufficientlyfarapartastobestatisticallyunlinked.Somehavesuggested
that Mendel was enormously lucky to select only unlinked genes; whereas, others question whether Mendel
discarded any data suggesting linkage. In any case, Mendel consistently observed independent assortment
because he examined genes that were effectively unlinked.
13.2 | Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how a karyogram is created
• Explain how nondisjunction leads to disorders in chromosome number
• Compare disorders that aneuploidy causes
• Describe how errors in chromosome structure occur through inversions and translocations
Inherited disorders can arise when chromosomes behave abnormally during meiosis. We can divide
chromosome disorders into two categories: abnormalities in chromosome number and chromosomal structural
rearrangements. Because even small chromosome segments can span many genes, chromosomal disorders
are characteristically dramatic and often fatal.
Chromosome Identification
Chromosome isolation andmicroscopicobservation forms the basisof cytogenetics andisthe primarymethod
by which clinicians detect chromosomal abnormalities in humans. A karyotype is the number and appearance
of chromosomes, and includes their length, banding pattern, and centromere position. To obtain a view of an
individual’skaryotype,cytologistsphotographthechromosomesandthencutandpasteeachchromosomeinto
a chart, orkaryogram. Another name is an ideogram (Figure 13.5).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 378
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 367
Figure13.5Thiskaryotypeisofafemalehuman.Noticethathomologouschromosomesarethesamesize,andhave
thesamecentromerepositionsandbandingpatterns.AhumanmalewouldhaveanXYchromosomepairinsteadof
the XX pair. (credit: Andreas Blozer et al)
In a given species, we can identify chromosomes by their number, size, centromere position, and banding
pattern. In a human karyotype, autosomes or “body chromosomes” (all of the non–sex chromosomes) are
generally organized in approximate order of size from largest (chromosome 1) to smallest (chromosome 22).
TheXandYchromosomesarenotautosomes.However,chromosome21isactuallyshorterthanchromosome
22.ResearchersdiscoveredthisafternamingDownsyndromeastrisomy21,reflectinghowthisdiseaseresults
from possessing one extra chromosome 21 (three total). Not wanting to change the name of this important
disease, scientists retained the numbering of chromosome 21 despite describing it having the shortest set of
chromosomes.Wemaydesignatethechromosome“arms”projectingfromeitherendofthecentromereasshort
orlong,dependingontheirrelativelengths.Weabbreviatetheshortarmp(for“petite”);whereas,weabbreviate
the long arm q (because it follows “p” alphabetically). Numbers further subdivide and denote each arm. Using
this naming system, we can describe chromosome locations consistently in the scientific literature.
PAGE: 379
368 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
Geneticists Use Karyograms to Identify Chromosomal Aberrations
Although we refer to Mendel as the “father of modern genetics,” he performed his experiments with none
of the tools that the geneticists of today routinely employ. One such powerful cytological technique is
karyotyping, a method in which geneticists can identify traits characterized by chromosomal abnormalities
fromasinglecell.Toobserveanindividual’skaryotype,ageneticistfirstcollectsaperson’scells(likewhite
blood cells) from a blood sample or other tissue. In the laboratory, he or she stimulates the isolated cells
to begin actively dividing. The geneticist then applies the chemical colchicine to cells to arrest condensed
chromosomesinmetaphase.Thegeneticisttheninducesswellinginthecellsusingahypotonicsolutionso
thechromosomesspreadapart.Finally,thegeneticistpreservesthesampleinafixativeandappliesittoa
slide.
The geneticist then stains chromosomes with one of several dyes to better visualize each chromosome
pair'sdistinctandreproduciblebandingpatterns.Followingstaining,thegeneticistviewsthechromosomes
using bright-field microscopy. A common stain choice is the Giemsa stain. Giemsa staining results in
approximately 400–800 bands (of tightly coiled DNA and condensed proteins) arranged along all 23
chromosome pairs. An experienced geneticist can identify each band. In addition to the banding patterns,
geneticistsfurtheridentifychromosomesonthebasisofsizeandcentromerelocation.Toobtaintheclassic
depiction of the karyotype in which homologous chromosome pairs align in numerical order from longest
toshortest, thegeneticist obtains adigital image, identifies eachchromosome, andmanuallyarrangesthe
chromosomes into this pattern (Figure 13.5).
At its most basic, the karyogram may reveal genetic abnormalities in which an individual has too many
or too few chromosomes per cell. Examples of this are Down Syndrome, which one identifies by a third
copy of chromosome 21, and Turner Syndrome, which has the presence of only one X chromosome
in women instead of the normal two characterizes. Geneticists can also identify large DNA deletions or
insertions. For instance, geneticists can identify Jacobsen Syndrome—which involves distinctive facial
featuresaswellasheartandbleedingdefects—byadeletiononchromosome11.Finally,thekaryotypecan
pinpoint translocations, which occur when a segment of genetic material breaks from one chromosome
andreattachestoanotherchromosomeortoadifferentpartofthesamechromosome.Translocationsare
implicated in certain cancers, including chronic myelogenous leukemia.
During Mendel’s lifetime, inheritance was an abstract concept that one could only infer by performing
crosses and observing the traits that offspring expressed. By observing a karyogram, today’s geneticists
can actually visualize an individual's chromosomal composition to confirm or predict genetic abnormalities
in offspring, even before birth.
Chromosome Number Disorders
Of all of the chromosomal disorders, chromosome number abnormalities are the most obviously identifiable
from a karyogram. Chromosome number disorders include duplicating or losing entire chromosomes, as well
as changes in the number of complete sets of chromosomes. They are caused by nondisjunction, which
occurs when homologous chromosome pairs or sister chromatids fail to separate during meiosis. Misaligned
or incomplete synapsis, or a spindle apparatus dysfunction that facilitates chromosome migration, can cause
nondisjunction. The risk of nondisjunction occurring increases with the parents' age.
Nondisjunction can occur during either meiosis I or II, with differing results (Figure 13.6). If homologous
chromosomes fail to separate during meiosis I, the result is two gametes that lack that particular chromosome
andtwogameteswithtwochromosomecopies.IfsisterchromatidsfailtoseparateduringmeiosisII,theresult
is one gamete that lacks that chromosome, two normal gametes with one chromosome copy, and one gamete
with two chromosome copies.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 380
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 369
Figure 13.6Nondisjunction occurswhenhomologouschromosomesorsisterchromatidsfailtoseparateduring
meiosis, resulting in an abnormal chromosome number. Nondisjunction may occur during meiosis I or meiosis II.
Which of the following statements about nondisjunction is true?
a. Nondisjunction only results in gametes with n+1 or n–1 chromosomes.
b. Nondisjunction occurring during meiosis II results in 50 percent normal gametes.
c. Nondisjunction during meiosis I results in 50 percent normal gametes.
d. Nondisjunction always results in four different kinds of gametes.
Aneuploidy
Scientistscallanindividualwiththeappropriatenumberofchromosomesfortheirspecieseuploid.Inhumans,
euploidy corresponds to 22 pairs of autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. An individual with an error
inchromosomenumberisdescribedasaneuploid,atermthatincludesmonosomy(losingonechromosome)
or trisomy (gaining an extraneous chromosome). Monosomic human zygotes missing any one copy of an
autosomeinvariablyfailtodeveloptobirthbecausetheylackessentialgenes.Thisunderscorestheimportance
of “gene dosage” in humans. Most autosomal trisomies also fail to develop to birth; however, duplications of
somesmallerchromosomes(13,15,18,21,or22)canresultinoffspringthatsurviveforseveralweekstomany
years.Trisomicindividualssufferfromadifferenttypeofgeneticimbalance:anexcessingenedose.Individuals
with an extra chromosome may synthesize an abundance of the gene products, which that chromosome
encodes. This extra dose (150 percent) of specific genes can lead to a number of functional challenges and
oftenprecludesdevelopment.Themostcommontrisomyamongviablebirthsisthatofchromosome21,which
corresponds to Down Syndrome. Short stature and stunted digits, facial distinctions that include a broad skull
andlargetongue,andsignificantdevelopmentaldelayscharacterizeindividualswiththisinheriteddisorder.We
can correlate the incidence of Down syndrome with maternal age. Older women are more likely to become
pregnant with fetuses carrying the trisomy 21 genotype (Figure 13.7).
PAGE: 381
370 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
Figure 13.7The incidence of having a fetus with trisomy 21 increases dramatically with maternal age.
Visualize adding a chromosome that leads to Down syndrome in this video simulation
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/down_syndrome).
Polyploidy
Wecallanindividualwithmorethanthecorrectnumberofchromosomesets(twofordiploidspecies)polyploid.
For instance, fertilizing an abnormal diploid egg with a normal haploid sperm would yield a triploid zygote.
Polyploidanimalsareextremelyrare,withonlyafewexamplesamongtheflatworms,crustaceans,amphibians,
fish, andlizards. Polyploid animalsaresterile becausemeiosiscannot proceednormallyandinstead produces
mostly aneuploid daughter cells that cannot yield viable zygotes. Rarely, polyploid animals can reproduce
asexually by haplodiploidy, in which an unfertilized egg divides mitotically to produce offspring. In contrast,
polyploidy is very common in the plant kingdom, and polyploid plants tend to be larger and more robust than
euploids of their species (Figure 13.8).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 382
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 371
Figure 13.8 As with many polyploid plants, this triploid orange daylily (Hemerocallis fulva) is particularly large and
robust, and grows flowers with triple the number of petals of its diploid counterparts. (credit: Steve Karg)
Sex Chromosome Nondisjunction in Humans
Humansdisplaydramaticdeleteriouseffectswithautosomaltrisomiesandmonosomies.Therefore,itmayseem
counterintuitive thathumanfemalesandmalescanfunctionnormally,despitecarryingdifferentnumbersofthe
X chromosome. Rather than a gain or loss of autosomes, variations in the number of sex chromosomes occur
with relatively mild effects. In part, this happens because of the molecular process X inactivation. Early in
development, when female mammalian embryos consist of just a few thousand cells (relative to trillions in the
newborn),oneXchromosomeineachcellinactivatesbytightlycondensingintoaquiescent(dormant)structure,
or a Barr body. The chance that an X chromosome (maternally or paternally derived) inactivates in each cell
is random, but once this occurs, all cells derived from that one will have the same inactive X chromosome or
Barr body. By this process, females compensate for their double genetic dose of X chromosome. In so-called
“tortoiseshell” cats, we observe embryonic X inactivation as color variegation (Figure 13.9). Females that are
heterozygousforanX-linkedcoatcolorgenewillexpressoneoftwodifferentcoatcolorsoverdifferentregions
of their body, corresponding to whichever X chromosome inactivates in that region's embryonic cell progenitor.
Figure13.9Incats,thegeneforcoatcolorislocatedontheXchromosome.Infemalecats'embryonicdevelopment,
one of the two X chromosomes randomly inactivates in each cell, resulting in a tortoiseshell pattern if the cat has
twodifferentallelesforcoatcolor.Malecats,havingonlyoneXchromosome,neverexhibitatortoiseshellcoatcolor.
(credit: Michael Bodega)
AnindividualcarryinganabnormalnumberofXchromosomeswillinactivateallbutoneXchromosomeineach
ofhercells.However,eveninactivatedXchromosomescontinuetoexpressafewgenes,andXchromosomes
mustreactivateforthepropermaturationoffemaleovaries.Asaresult,X-chromosomalabnormalitiestypically
occur with mild mental and physical defects, as well as sterility. If the X chromosome is absent altogether, the
PAGE: 383
372 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
individual will not develop in utero.
Scientists have identified and characterized several errors in sex chromosome number. Individuals with three
X chromosomes, triplo-X, are phenotypically female but express developmental delays and reduced fertility.
The XXY genotype, corresponding to one type of Klinefelter syndrome, corresponds to phenotypically male
individuals with small testes, enlarged breasts, and reduced body hair. More complex types of Klinefelter
syndromeexistinwhichtheindividualhasasmanyasfiveXchromosomes.Inalltypes,everyXchromosome
except one undergoes inactivation to compensate for the excess genetic dosage. We see this as several
Barr bodies in each cell nucleus. Turner syndrome, characterized as an X0 genotype (i.e., only a single sex
chromosome), corresponds to a phenotypically female individual with short stature, webbed skin in the neck
region, hearing and cardiac impairments, and sterility.
Duplications and Deletions
In addition to losing or gaining an entire chromosome, a chromosomal segment may duplicate or lose itself.
Duplications and deletions often produce offspring that survive but exhibit physical and mental abnormalities.
Duplicated chromosomal segments may fuse to existing chromosomes or may be free in the nucleus. Cri-du-
chat (from the French for “cry of the cat”) is a syndrome that occurs with nervous system abnormalities and
identifiable physical features that result from a deletion of most 5p (the small arm of chromosome 5) (Figure
13.10). Infants with this genotype emit a characteristic high-pitched cry on which the disorder’s name is based.
Figure13.10Thisfigureshowsanindividualwithcri-du-chatsyndromeattwo,four,nine,and12yearsofage.(credit:
Paola Cerruti Mainardi)
Chromosomal Structural Rearrangements
Cytologists have characterized numerous structural rearrangements in chromosomes, but chromosome
inversions and translocations are the most common. We can identify both during meiosis by the adaptive
pairing of rearranged chromosomes with their former homologs to maintain appropriate gene alignment. If the
genesontwohomologsarenotorientedcorrectly,arecombinationeventcouldresultinlosinggenesfromone
chromosome and gaining genes on the other. This would produce aneuploid gametes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 384
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 373
Chromosome Inversions
Achromosomeinversionisthedetachment,180°rotation,andreinsertionofpartofachromosome.Inversions
may occur in nature as a result of mechanical shear, or from transposable elements' action (special DNA
sequences capable of facilitating rearranging chromosome segments with the help of enzymes that cut and
pasteDNAsequences).Unlesstheydisruptagenesequence,inversionsonlychangegeneorientationandare
likelytohavemoremildeffectsthananeuploiderrors.However,alteredgeneorientationcanresultinfunctional
changesbecauseregulatorsofgeneexpressioncouldmoveoutofpositionwithrespecttotheirtargets,causing
aberrant levels of gene products.
Aninversioncanbepericentricandincludethecentromere,orparacentricandoccuroutsidethecentromere
(Figure 13.11). A pericentric inversion that is asymmetric about the centromere can change the chromosome
arms' relative lengths, making these inversions easily identifiable.
Figure13.11Pericentricinversionsincludethecentromere,andparacentricinversionsdonot.Apericentricinversion
can change the chromosome arms' relative lengths. A paracentric inversion cannot.
When one homologous chromosome undergoes an inversion but the other does not, the individual is an
inversionheterozygote.Tomaintainpoint-for-pointsynapsisduringmeiosis,onehomologmustformaloop,and
theotherhomologmustmoldaroundit.Althoughthistopologycanensurethatthegenescorrectlyalign,italso
forces the homologs to stretch and can occur with imprecise synapsis regions (Figure 13.12).
Figure13.12Whenonechromosomeundergoesaninversionbuttheotherdoesnot,onechromosomemustforman
invertedlooptoretainpoint-for-pointinteractionduringsynapsis.Thisinversionpairingisessentialtomaintaininggene
alignment during meiosis and to allow for recombination.
PAGE: 385
374 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
The Chromosome 18 Inversion
Notallchromosomes'structuralrearrangementsproducenonviable,impaired,orinfertileindividuals.Inrare
instances,suchachangecanresultinnewspeciesevolving.Infact,apericentricinversioninchromosome
18 appears to have contributed to human evolution. This inversion is not present in our closest genetic
relatives, the chimpanzees. Humans and chimpanzees differ cytogenetically by pericentric inversions on
severalchromosomesandbythefusionoftwoseparatechromosomesinchimpanzeesthatcorrespondto
chromosome two in humans.
Scientists believe the pericentric chromosome 18 inversion occurred in early humans following their
divergence from a common ancestor with chimpanzees approximately five million years ago. Researchers
characterizing this inversion have suggested that approximately 19,000 nucleotide bases were duplicated
on 18p, and the duplicated region inverted and reinserted on chromosome 18 of an ancestral human.
A comparison of human and chimpanzee genes in the region of this inversion indicates that two
genes—ROCK1 and USP14—that are adjacent on chimpanzee chromosome 17 (which corresponds to
human chromosome 18) are more distantly positioned on human chromosome 18. This suggests that one
of the inversion breakpoints occurred between these two genes. Interestingly, humans and chimpanzees
express USP14 at distinct levels in specific cell types, including cortical cells and fibroblasts. Perhaps the
chromosome 18 inversion in an ancestral human repositioned specific genes and reset their expression
levels in a useful way. Because both ROCK1 and USP14 encode cellular enzymes, a change in their
expressioncouldaltercellularfunction.Wedonotknowhowthisinversioncontributedtohominidevolution,
[1]
but it appears to be a significant factor in the divergence of humans from other primates.
Translocations
Atranslocationoccurswhenachromosomesegmentdissociatesandreattachestoadifferent,nonhomologous
chromosome. Translocations can be benign or have devastating effects depending on how the positions
of genes are altered with respect to regulatory sequences. Notably, specific translocations have occurred
with several cancers and with schizophrenia. Reciprocal translocations result from exchanging chromosome
segments between two nonhomologous chromosomes such that there is no genetic information gain or loss
(Figure 13.13).
Figure 13.13 A reciprocal translocation occurs when a DNA segment transfers from one chromosome to another,
nonhomologous chromosome. (credit: modification of work by National Human Genome Research/USA)
1. Violaine Goidts et al., “Segmental duplication associated with the human-specific inversion of chromosome 18: a further example of the
impact of segmental duplications on karyotype and genome evolution in primates,”Human Genetics. 115 (2004):116-122
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 386
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 375
KEY TERMS
aneuploid individual with an error in chromosome number; includes chromosome segment deletions and
duplications
autosome any of the non-sex chromosomes
centimorgan (cM) (also, map unit) relative distance that corresponds to a 0,01 recombination frequency
Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance theory proposing that chromosomes are the genes' vehicles and that
their behavior during meiosis is the physical basis of the inheritance patterns that Mendel observed
chromosome inversion detachment, 180° rotation, and chromosome arm reinsertion
euploid individual with the appropriate number of chromosomes for their species
homologous recombination process by which homologous chromosomes undergo reciprocal physical
exchanges at their arms, also crossing over
karyogram a karyotype's photographic image
karyotype an individual's chromosome number and appearance; includes the size, banding patterns, and
centromere position
monosomy otherwise diploid genotype in which one chromosome is missing
nondisjunction failureofsynapsedhomologstocompletelyseparateandmigratetoseparatepolesduringthe
meiosis' first cell division
nonparental (recombinant) type progeny resulting from homologous recombination that exhibits a different
allele combination compared with its parents
paracentric inversion that occurs outside the centromere
parental types progeny that exhibits the same allelic combination as its parents
pericentric inversion that involves the centromere
polyploid individual with an incorrect number of chromosome sets
recombination frequency average number of crossovers between two alleles; observed as the number of
nonparental types in a progeny's population
translocation process by which one chromosome segment dissociates and reattaches to a different,
nonhomologous chromosome
trisomy otherwise diploid genotype in which one entire chromosome duplicates
X inactivation condensing X chromosomes into Barr bodies during embryonic development in females to
compensate for the double genetic dose
CHAPTER SUMMARY
13.1Chromosomal Theory and Genetic Linkage
Sutton and Boveri's Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance states that chromosomes are the vehicles of genetic
heredity. Neither Mendelian genetics nor gene linkage is perfectly accurate. Instead, chromosome behavior
involves segregation, independent assortment, and occasionally, linkage. Sturtevant devised a method to
assess recombination frequency and infer linked genes' relative positions and distances on a chromosome on
the basis of the average number of crossovers in the intervening region between the genes. Sturtevant
correctly presumed that genes are arranged in serial order on chromosomes and that recombination between
homologs can occur anywhere on a chromosome with equal likelihood. Whereas linkage causes alleles on the
PAGE: 387
376 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
same chromosome to be inherited together, homologous recombination biases alleles toward an independent
inheritance pattern.
13.2Chromosomal Basis of Inherited Disorders
The number, size, shape, and banding pattern of chromosomes make them easily identifiable in a karyogram
and allows for the assessment of many chromosomal abnormalities. Disorders in chromosome number, or
aneuploidies, are typically lethal to the embryo, although a few trisomic genotypes are viable. Because of X
inactivation, aberrations in sex chromosomes typically have milder phenotypic effects. Aneuploidies also
include instances in which a chromosome's segments duplicate or delete themselves. Inversion or
translocation also may rearrange chromosome structures. Both of these aberrations can result in problematic
phenotypic effects. Because they force chromosomes to assume unnatural topologies during meiosis,
inversions and translocations often occur with reduced fertility because of the likelihood of nondisjunction.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 13.3In a test cross for two characteristics 3.Figure 13.6Which of the following statements
such as the one shown here, can the predicted about nondisjunction is true?
frequency of recombinant offspring be 60 percent? a. Nondisjunction only results in gametes with
Why or why not? n+1 or n–1 chromosomes.
b. Nondisjunction occurring during meiosis II
2.Figure 13.4Which of the following statements is
results in 50 percent normal gametes.
true?
c. Nondisjunction during meiosis I results in 50
a. Recombination of the body color and red/
percent normal gametes.
cinnabar eye alleles will occur more
d. Nondisjunction always results in four
frequently than recombination of the alleles
different kinds of gametes.
for wing length and aristae length.
b. Recombination of the body color and aristae
length alleles will occur more frequently than
recombination of red/brown eye alleles and
the aristae length alleles.
c. Recombination of the gray/black body color
and long/short aristae alleles will not occur.
d. Recombination of the red/brown eye and
long/short aristae alleles will occur more
frequently than recombination of the alleles
for wing length and body color.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.X-linked recessive traits in humans (or in a. 0
Drosophila) are observed ________. b. 0.25
a. in more males than females c. 0.50
b. in more females than males d. 0.75
c. in males and females equally
7.Which recombination frequency corresponds to
d. in different distributions depending on the
perfect linkage and violates the law of independent
trait
assortment?
5.The first suggestion that chromosomes may a. 0
physically exchange segments came from the b. 0.25
microscopic identification of ________. c. 0.50
a. synapsis d. 0.75
b. sister chromatids
8.Which of the following codes describes position 12
c. chiasmata
on the long arm of chromosome 13?
d. alleles
a. 13p12
6.Which recombination frequency corresponds to b. 13q12
independent assortment and the absence of linkage? c. 12p13
d. 12q13
9.In agriculture, polyploid crops (like coffee,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 388
Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance 377
strawberries, or bananas) tend to produce ________. a. Klinefelter syndrome
b. Turner syndrome
a. more uniformity c. Triplo-X
b. more variety d. Jacob syndrome
c. larger yields
12.Abnormalities in the number of X chromosomes
d. smaller yields
tends to have milder phenotypic effects than the
10.Assume a pericentric inversion occurred in one of same abnormalities in autosomes because of
two homologs prior to meiosis. The other homolog ________.
remains normal. During meiosis, what structure—if a. deletions
any—would these homologs assume in order to pair b. nonhomologous recombination
accurately along their lengths? c. synapsis
a. V formation d. X inactivation
b. cruciform
13.By definition, a pericentric inversion includes the
c. loop
________.
d. pairing would not be possible
a. centromere
11.The genotype XXY corresponds to b. chiasma
c. telomere
d. synapse
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
14.Explain how the Chromosomal Theory of 15.Using diagrams, illustrate how nondisjunction can
Inheritance helped to advance our understanding of result in an aneuploid zygote.
genetics.
PAGE: 389
378 Chapter 13 | Modern Understandings of Inheritance
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 390
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 379
14 | DNA STRUCTURE
AND FUNCTION
Figure 14.1Dolly the sheep was the first large mammal to be cloned.
Chapter Outline
14.1:Historical Basis of Modern Understanding
14.2:DNA Structure and Sequencing
14.3:Basics of DNA Replication
14.4:DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
14.5:DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
14.6:DNA Repair
Introduction
The three letters “DNA” have now become synonymous with crime solving and genetic testing. DNA can be
retrieved from hair, blood, or saliva. Each person’s DNA is unique, and it is possible to detect differences
between individuals within a species on the basis of these unique features.
DNAanalysishasmanypracticalapplicationsbeyondforensics.Inhumans,DNAtestingisappliedtonumerous
uses: determining paternity, tracing genealogy, identifying pathogens, archeological research, tracing disease
outbreaks,andstudyinghumanmigrationpatterns.Inthemedicalfield,DNAisusedindiagnostics,newvaccine
development,andcancertherapy.Itisnowpossibletodeterminepredispositiontodiseasesbylookingatgenes.
Each human cell has 23 pairs of chromosomes: one set of chromosomes is inherited from the mother and the
othersetisinheritedfromthefather.Thereisalsoamitochondrialgenome,inheritedexclusivelyfromthemother,
whichcanbeinvolvedininheritedgeneticdisorders.Oneachchromosome,therearethousandsofgenesthat
areresponsiblefordeterminingthegenotypeandphenotypeoftheindividual.Ageneisdefinedasasequence
of DNA that codes for a functional product. The human haploid genome contains 3 billion base pairs and has
between 20,000 and 25,000 functional genes.
PAGE: 391
380 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
14.1 | Historical Basis of Modern Understanding
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain transformation of DNA
• Describe the key experiments that helped identify that DNA is the genetic material
• State and explain Chargaff’s rules
Our current understanding of DNA began with the discovery of nucleic acids followed by the development of
the double-helix model. In the 1860s, Friedrich Miescher (Figure 14.2), a physician by profession, isolated
phosphate-rich chemicals from white blood cells (leukocytes). He named these chemicals (which would
eventually be known as DNA)nucleinbecause they were isolated from the nuclei of the cells.
Figure 14.2Friedrich Miescher (1844–1895) discovered nucleic acids.
To see Miescher conduct his experiment that led to his discovery of DNA and associated proteins in the
nucleus, click throughthis review (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/miescher_levene).
A half century later, in 1928, British bacteriologist Frederick Griffith reported the first demonstration of bacterial
transformation—a process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell, thereby changing its morphology
and physiology. Griffith conducted his experiments with Streptococcus pneumoniae, a bacterium that causes
pneumonia. Griffith worked with two strains of this bacterium called rough (R) and smooth (S). (The two cell
types were called “rough” and “smooth” after the appearance of their colonies grown on a nutrient agar plate.)
TheRstrainisnon-pathogenic(doesnotcausedisease).TheSstrainispathogenic(disease-causing),andhas
a capsule outside its cell wall. The capsule allows the cell to escape the immune responses of the host mouse.
WhenGriffithinjectedthelivingSstrainintomice,theydiedfrompneumonia.Incontrast,whenGriffithinjected
the live R strain into mice, they survived. In another experiment, when he injected mice with the heat-killed S
strain, they also survived. This experiment showed that the capsule alone was not the cause of death. In a
third set of experiments, a mixture of live R strain and heat-killed S strain were injected into mice, and—to his
surprise—the mice died. Upon isolating the live bacteria from the dead mouse, only the S strain of bacteria
was recovered. When this isolated S strain was injected into fresh mice, the mice died. Griffith concluded that
somethinghadpassedfromtheheat-killedSstrainintotheliveRstrainandtransformeditintothepathogenic
Sstrain.Hecalledthisthetransformingprinciple(Figure14.3).TheseexperimentsarenowknownasGriffith's
transformation experiments.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 392
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 381
Figure 14.3 Two strains of S. pneumoniae were used in Griffith’s transformation experiments. The R strain is non-
pathogenic,whereastheSstrainispathogenicandcausesdeath.WhenGriffithinjectedamousewiththeheat-killed
S strain and a live R strain, the mouse died. The S strain was recovered from the dead mouse. Griffith concluded
that something had passed from the heat-killed S strain to the R strain, transforming the R strain into the S strain in
the process. (credit "living mouse": modification of work by NIH; credit "dead mouse": modification of work by Sarah
Marriage)
Scientists Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty (1944) were interested in exploring this
transformingprinciplefurther.TheyisolatedtheSstrainfromthedeadmiceandisolatedtheproteinsandnucleic
acids(RNAandDNA)asthesewerepossiblecandidatesforthemoleculeofheredity.Theyusedenzymesthat
specifically degraded each component and then used each mixture separately to transform the R strain. They
foundthatwhenDNAwasdegraded,theresultingmixturewasnolongerabletotransformthebacteria,whereas
all of the other combinations were able to transform the bacteria. This led them to conclude that DNA was the
transforming principle.
Forensic Scientists used DNA analysis evidence for the first time to solve an immigration case. The story
started with a teenage boy returning to London from Ghana to be with his mother. Immigration authorities
at the airport were suspicious of him, thinking that he was traveling on a forged passport. After much
persuasion,hewasallowedtogolivewithhismother,buttheimmigrationauthoritiesdidnotdropthecase
againsthim.Alltypesofevidence,includingphotographs,wereprovidedtotheauthorities,butdeportation
proceedings were started nevertheless. Around the same time, Dr. Alec Jeffreys of Leicester University in
the United Kingdom had invented a technique known as DNA fingerprinting. The immigration authorities
approachedDr.Jeffreysforhelp.HetookDNAsamplesfromthemotherandthreeofherchildren,aswell
asanunrelatedmother,andcomparedthesampleswiththeboy’sDNA.Becausethebiologicalfatherwas
notinthepicture,DNAfromthethreechildrenwascomparedwiththeboy’sDNA.Hefoundamatchinthe
boy’s DNA for both the mother and his three siblings. He concluded that the boy was indeed the mother’s
son.
Forensic scientists analyze many items, including documents, handwriting, firearms, and biological
samples.TheyanalyzetheDNAcontentofhair,semen,saliva,andblood,andcompareitwithadatabase
of DNA profiles of known criminals. Analysis includes DNA isolation, sequencing, and sequence analysis.
Forensic scientists are expected to appear at court hearings to present their findings. They are usually
employed in crime labs of city and state government agencies. Geneticists experimenting with DNA
techniques also work for scientific and research organizations, pharmaceutical industries, and college and
universitylabs.Studentswishingtopursueacareerasaforensicscientistshouldhaveatleastabachelor's
degree in chemistry, biology, or physics, and preferably some experience working in a laboratory.
Although the experiments of Avery, McCarty and McLeod had demonstrated that DNA was the informational
component transferred during transformation, DNA was still considered to be too simple a molecule to carry
biological information. Proteins, with their 20 different amino acids, were regarded as more likely candidates.
The decisive experiment, conducted by Martha Chase and Alfred Hershey in 1952, provided confirmatory
evidence that DNA was indeed the genetic material and not proteins. Chase and Hershey were studying a
PAGE: 393
382 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
bacteriophage—a virus that infects bacteria. Viruses typically have a simple structure: a protein coat, called
the capsid, and a nucleic acid core that contains the genetic material (either DNA or RNA). The bacteriophage
infects the host bacterial cell by attaching to its surface, and then it injects its nucleic acids inside the
cell. The phage DNA makes multiple copies of itself using the host machinery, and eventually the host cell
bursts, releasing a large number of bacteriophages. Hershey and Chase selected radioactive elements that
would specifically distinguish the protein from the DNA in infected cells. They labeled one batch of phage
35
with radioactive sulfur, S, to label the protein coat. Another batch of phage were labeled with radioactive
32
phosphorus, P. Because phosphorous is found in DNA, but not protein, the DNA and not the protein would
betaggedwithradioactivephosphorus.Likewise,sulfurisabsentfromDNA,butpresentinseveralaminoacids
such as methionine and cysteine.
Each batch of phage was allowed to infect the cells separately. After infection, the phage bacterial suspension
was put in a blender, which caused the phage coat to detach from the host cell. Cells exposed long enough
for infection to occur were then examined to see which of the two radioactive molecules had entered the cell.
The phage and bacterial suspension was spun down in a centrifuge. The heavier bacterial cells settled down
and formed a pellet, whereas the lighter phage particles stayed in the supernatant. In the tube that contained
35
phagelabeledwith S,thesupernatantcontainedtheradioactivelylabeledphage,whereasnoradioactivitywas
32
detectedinthepellet.Inthetubethatcontainedthephagelabeledwith P,theradioactivitywasdetectedinthe
pellet that contained the heavier bacterial cells, and no radioactivity was detected in the supernatant. Hershey
andChaseconcludedthatitwasthephageDNAthatwasinjectedintothecellandcarriedinformationtoproduce
morephageparticles,thusprovidingevidencethatDNAwasthegeneticmaterialandnotproteins(Figure14.4).
Figure 14.4 In Hershey and Chase's experiments, bacteria were infected with phage radiolabeled with either 35S,
whichlabelsprotein,or32P,whichlabelsDNA.Only32Penteredthebacterialcells,indicatingthatDNAisthegenetic
material.
Around this same time, Austrian biochemist Erwin Chargaff examined the content of DNA in different species
andfoundthattheamountsofadenine,thymine,guanine,andcytosinewerenotfoundinequalquantities,and
that relative concentrations of the four nucleotide bases varied from species to species, but not within tissues
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 394
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 383
of the same individual or between individuals of the same species. He also discovered something unexpected:
That the amount of adenine equaled the amount of thymine, and the amount of cytosine equaled the amount
of guanine (that is, A = T and G = C). Different species had equal amounts of purines (A+G) and pyrimidines
(T+C),butdifferentratiosofA+TtoG+C.TheseobservationsbecameknownasChargaff’srules.Chargaff's
findingsprovedimmenselyusefulwhenWatsonandCrickweregettingreadytoproposetheirDNAdoublehelix
model!Youcanseeafterreadingthepastfewpageshowsciencebuildsuponpreviousdiscoveries,sometimes
in a slow and laborious process.
14.2 | DNA Structure and Sequencing
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the structure of DNA
• Explain the Sanger method of DNA sequencing
• Discuss the similarities and differences between eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA
The building blocks of DNA are nucleotides. The important components of the nucleotide are a nitrogenous
(nitrogen-bearing) base, a 5-carbon sugar (pentose), and a phosphate group (Figure 14.5). The nucleotide is
named depending on the nitrogenous base. The nitrogenous base can be a purine such as adenine (A) and
guanine (G), or a pyrimidine such as cytosine (C) and thymine (T).
Figure 14.5 The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring.
Pyrimidines are smaller in size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.
The images above illustrate the five bases of DNA and RNA. Examine the images and explain why these
are called “nitrogenous bases.” How are the purines different from the pyrimidines? How is one purine
or pyrimidine different from another, e.g., adenine from guanine? How is a nucleoside different from a
nucleotide?
The purines have a double ring structure with a six-membered ring fused to a five-membered ring.
Pyrimidines are smaller in size; they have a single six-membered ring structure.
The sugar is deoxyribose in DNA and ribose in RNA. The carbon atoms of the five-carbon sugar are
numbered1',2',3',4',and5'(1'isreadas“oneprime”).Thephosphate,whichmakesDNAandRNAacidic,
is connected to the 5' carbon of the sugar by the formation of an ester linkage between phosphoric acid
and the 5'-OH group (an ester is an acid + an alcohol). In DNA nucleotides, the 3' carbon of the sugar
deoxyribose is attached to a hydroxyl (OH) group. In RNA nucleotides, the 2' carbon of the sugar ribose
also contains a hydroxyl group. The base is attached to the 1'carbon of the sugar.
PAGE: 395
384 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
The nucleotides combine with each other to produce phosphodiester bonds. The phosphate residue attached
to the 5' carbon of the sugar of one nucleotide forms a second ester linkage with the hydroxyl group of the 3'
carbonofthesugarofthenextnucleotide,therebyforminga5'-3'phosphodiesterbond.Inapolynucleotide,one
endofthechainhasafree5'phosphate,andtheotherendhasafree3'-OH.Thesearecalledthe5'and3'ends
of the chain.
In the 1950s, Francis Crick and James Watson worked together to determine the structure of DNA at the
University of Cambridge, England. Other scientists like Linus Pauling and Maurice Wilkins were also actively
exploring this field. Pauling previously had discovered the secondary structure of proteins using X-ray
crystallography.InWilkins’lab,researcherRosalindFranklinwasusingX-raydiffractionmethodstounderstand
the structure of DNA. Watson and Crick were able to piece together the puzzle of the DNA molecule on the
basisofFranklin'sdatabecauseCrickhadalsostudiedX-raydiffraction(Figure14.6).In1962,JamesWatson,
Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin
had died, and Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.
Figure14.6Theworkofpioneeringscientists(a)JamesWatson,FrancisCrick,andMaclynMcCartyledtoourpresent
day understanding of DNA. Scientist Rosalind Franklin discovered (b) the X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA, which
helped to elucidate its double-helix structure. (credit a: modification of work by Marjorie McCarty, Public Library of
Science)
Watson and Crick proposed that DNA is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a
right-handed helix. Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine on opposite strands, so that A
pairswithT,andGpairswithC(suggestedbyChargaff'sRules).Thus,adenineandthyminearecomplementary
base pairs, and cytosine and guanine are also complementary base pairs. The base pairs are stabilized by
hydrogenbonds:adenineandthymineformtwohydrogenbondsandcytosineandguanineformthreehydrogen
bonds.Thetwostrandsareanti-parallelinnature;thatis,the3'endofonestrandfacesthe5'endoftheother
strand.Thesugarandphosphateofthenucleotidesformthebackboneofthestructure,whereasthenitrogenous
bases are stacked inside, like the rungs of a ladder. Each base pair is separated from the next base pair by a
distanceof0.34nm,andeachturnofthehelixmeasures3.4nm.Therefore,10basepairsarepresentperturn
ofthehelix.ThediameteroftheDNAdouble-helixis2nm,anditisuniformthroughout.Onlythepairingbetween
apurineandpyrimidineandtheantiparallelorientationofthetwoDNAstrandscanexplaintheuniformdiameter.
Thetwistingofthetwostrandsaroundeachotherresultsintheformationofuniformlyspacedmajorandminor
grooves (Figure 14.7).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 396
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 385
Figure 14.7 DNA has (a) a double helix structure and (b) phosphodiester bonds; the dotted lines between Thymine
andAdenineandGuanineandCytosinerepresenthydrogenbonds.The(c)majorandminorgroovesarebindingsites
for DNA binding proteins during processes such as transcription (the copying of RNA from DNA) and replication.
DNA Sequencing Techniques
Until the 1990s, the sequencing of DNA (reading the sequence of DNA) was a relatively expensive and long
process.Usingradiolabelednucleotidesalsocompoundedtheproblemthroughsafetyconcerns.Withcurrently
availabletechnologyandautomatedmachines,theprocessischeaper,safer,andcanbecompletedinamatter
ofhours.FredSangerdevelopedthesequencingmethodusedforthehumangenomesequencingproject,which
is widely used today (Figure 14.8).
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/DNA_sequencing) to watch a video explaining the DNA
sequence-reading technique that resulted from Sanger’s work.
The sequencing method is known as the dideoxy chain termination method. The method is based on the use
of chain terminators, the dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPSs differ from the deoxynucleotides by the
lack of a free 3' OH group on the five-carbon sugar. If a ddNTP is added to a growing DNA strand, the chain
cannotbeextendedanyfurtherbecausethefree3'OHgroupneededtoaddanothernucleotideisnotavailable.
By using a predetermined ratio of deoxyribonucleotides to dideoxynucleotides, it is possible to generate DNA
fragments of different sizes.
Figure 14.8 In Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method, dye-labeled dideoxynucleotides are used to
generate DNA fragments that terminate at different points. The DNA is separated by capillary electrophoresis (not
defined) on the basis of size, and from the order of fragments formed, the DNA sequence can be read. The DNA
sequence readout is shown on an electropherogram (not defined) that is generated by a laser scanner.
TheDNAsampletobesequencedisdenatured(separatedintotwostrandsbyheatingittohightemperatures).
The DNA is divided into four tubes in which a primer, DNA polymerase, and all four nucleoside triphosphates
(A, T, G, and C) are added. In addition, limited quantities of one of the four dideoxynucleoside triphosphates
PAGE: 397
386 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
(ddCTP,ddATP,ddGTP,andddTTP)areaddedtoeachtuberespectively.ThetubesarelabeledasA,T,G,and
CaccordingtotheddNTPadded.Fordetectionpurposes,eachofthefourdideoxynucleotidescarriesadifferent
fluorescentlabel.Chainelongationcontinuesuntilafluorescentdideoxynucleotideisincorporated,afterwhich
no further elongation takes place. After the reaction is over, electrophoresis is performed. Even a difference in
lengthofasinglebasecanbedetected.Thesequenceisreadfromalaserscannerthatdetectsthefluorescent
markerofeachfragment.ForhisworkonDNAsequencing,SangerreceivedaNobelPrizeinChemistryin1980.
Sanger’s genome sequencing has led to a race to sequence human genomes at rapid speed and low cost,
often referred to as the $1000-in-one-day sequence. Learn more by selecting the Sequencing at Speed
animationhere (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/DNA_and_genomes).
Gel electrophoresis is a technique used to separate DNA fragments of different sizes. Usually the gel is
madeofachemicalcalledagarose(apolysaccharidepolymerextractedfromseaweedthatishighingalactose
residues).Agarosepowderisaddedtoabufferandheated.Aftercooling,thegelsolutionispouredintoacasting
tray. Once the gel has solidified, the DNA is loaded on the gel and electric current is applied. The DNA has a
netnegativechargeandmovesfromthenegativeelectrodetowardthepositiveelectrode.Theelectriccurrentis
appliedforsufficienttimetolettheDNAseparateaccordingtosize;thesmallestfragmentswillbefarthestfrom
the well (where the DNA was loaded), and the heavier molecular weight fragments will be closest to the well.
Once the DNA is separated, the gel is stained with a DNA-specific dye for viewing it (Figure 14.9).
Figure 14.9 DNA can be separated on the basis of size using gel electrophoresis. (credit: James Jacob, Tompkins
Cortland Community College)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 398
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 387
Neanderthal Genome: How Are We Related?
The first draft sequence of the Neanderthal genome was recently published by Richard E. Green et al. in
[1]
2010. Neanderthals are the closest ancestors of present-day humans. They were known to have lived
in Europe and Western Asia (and now, perhaps, in Northern Africa) before they disappeared from fossil
records approximately 30,000 years ago. Green’s team studied almost 40,000-year-old fossil remains that
wereselectedfromsitesacrosstheworld.ExtremelysophisticatedmeansofsamplepreparationandDNA
sequencingwereemployedbecauseofthefragilenatureofthebonesandheavymicrobialcontamination.
Intheirstudy,thescientistswereabletosequencesomefourbillionbasepairs.TheNeanderthalsequence
wascomparedwiththatofpresent-dayhumansfromacrosstheworld.Aftercomparingthesequences,the
researchersfoundthattheNeanderthalgenomehad2to3percentgreatersimilaritytopeoplelivingoutside
Africa than to people in Africa. While current theories have suggested that all present-day humans can
be traced to a small ancestral population in Africa, the data from the Neanderthal genome suggest some
interbreeding between Neanderthals and early modern humans.
Green and his colleagues also discovered DNA segments among people in Europe and Asia that are
moresimilartoNeanderthalsequencesthantoothercontemporaryhumansequences.Anotherinteresting
observation was that Neanderthals are as closely related to people from Papua New Guinea as to those
from China or France. This is surprising because Neanderthal fossil remains have been located only
in Europe and West Asia. Most likely, genetic exchange took place between Neanderthals and modern
humansasmodernhumansemergedoutofAfrica,beforethedivergenceofEuropeans,EastAsians,and
Papua New Guineans.
Several genes seem to have undergone changes from Neanderthals during the evolution of present-
day humans. These genes are involved in cranial structure, metabolism, skin morphology, and cognitive
development. One of the genes that is of particular interest is RUNX2, which is different in modern day
humans and Neanderthals. This gene is responsible for the prominent frontal bone, bell-shaped rib cage,
and dental differences seen in Neanderthals. It is speculated that an evolutionary change in RUNX2 was
important in the origin of modern-day humans, and this affected the cranium and the upper body.
WatchSvantePääbo’stalk(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/neanderthal)explainingtheNeanderthalgenome
research at the 2011 annual TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) conference.
DNA Packaging in Cells
Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features (Figure 14.10). Most prokaryotes
contain a single, circular chromosome that is found in an area of the cytoplasm called thenucleoid region.
1. Richard E. Green et al., “A Draft Sequence of the Neandertal Genome,”Science328 (2010): 710-22.
PAGE: 399
388 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
Figure 14.10 A eukaryote contains a well-defined nucleus, whereas in prokaryotes, the chromosome lies in the
cytoplasm in an area called the nucleoid.
In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA synthesis occur in a separate compartment from protein synthesis.
In prokaryotic cells, both processes occur together. What advantages might there be to separating the
processes? What advantages might there be to having them occur together?
The size of the genome in one of the most well-studied prokaryotes, E.coli, is 4.6 million base pairs
(approximately 1.1 mm, if cut and stretched out). So how does this fit inside a small bacterial cell? The DNA
istwistedbywhatisknownassupercoiling.SupercoilingsuggeststhatDNAiseither“under-wound”(lessthan
one turn of the helix per 10 base pairs) or “over-wound” (more than 1 turn per 10 base pairs) from its normal
relaxedstate.Someproteinsareknowntobeinvolvedinthesupercoiling;otherproteinsandenzymessuchas
DNA gyrase help in maintaining the supercoiled structure.
Eukaryotes, whose chromosomes each consist of a linear DNA molecule, employ a different type of packing
strategy to fit their DNA inside the nucleus (Figure 14.11). At the most basic level, DNA is wrapped around
proteins known as histones to form structures called nucleosomes. The histones are evolutionarily conserved
proteins that are rich in basic amino acids and form an octamer composed of two molecules of each of four
different histones. The DNA (remember, it is negatively charged because of the phosphate groups) is wrapped
tightlyaroundthehistonecore.ThisnucleosomeislinkedtothenextonewiththehelpofalinkerDNA.Thisis
alsoknownasthe“beadsonastring”structure.Withthehelpofafifthhistone,astringofnucleosomesisfurther
compactedintoa30-nmfiber,whichisthediameterofthestructure.Metaphasechromosomesareevenfurther
condensedbyassociationwithscaffoldingproteins.Atthemetaphasestage,thechromosomesareattheirmost
compact, approximately 700 nm in width.
In interphase, eukaryotic chromosomes have two distinct regions that can be distinguished by staining. The
tightly packaged region is known as heterochromatin, and the less dense region is known as euchromatin.
Heterochromatin usually contains genes that are not expressed, and is found in the regions of the centromere
and telomeres. The euchromatin usually contains genes that are transcribed, with DNA packaged around
nucleosomes but not further compacted.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 400
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 389
Figure 14.11These figures illustrate the compaction of the eukaryotic chromosome.
14.3 | Basics of DNA Replication
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how the structure of DNA reveals the replication process
• Describe the Meselson and Stahl experiments
TheelucidationofthestructureofthedoublehelixprovidedahintastohowDNAdividesandmakescopiesof
itself.Intheir1953paper,WatsonandCrickpennedanincredibleunderstatement:"Ithasnotescapedournotice
thatthespecificpairingwehavepostulatedimmediatelysuggestsapossiblecopyingmechanismforthegenetic
material." With specific base pairs, the sequence of one DNA strand can be predicted from its complement.
Thedouble-helixmodelsuggeststhatthetwostrandsofthedoublehelixseparateduringreplication,andeach
strandservesasatemplatefromwhichthenewcomplementarystrandiscopied.Whatwasnotclearwashow
thereplicationtookplace.Therewerethreemodelssuggested(Figure14.12):conservative,semi-conservative,
and dispersive.
PAGE: 401
390 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
Figure 14.12 The three suggested models of DNA replication. Gray indicates the original DNA strands, and blue
indicates newly synthesized DNA.
In conservative replication, the parental DNA remains together, and the newly formed daughter strands are
together.Thesemi-conservativemethodsuggeststhateachofthetwoparentalDNAstrandsactsasatemplate
for new DNA to be synthesized; after replication, each double-stranded DNA includes one parental or “old”
strand and one “new” strand. In the dispersive model, both copies of DNA have double-stranded segments of
parental DNA and newly synthesized DNA interspersed.
Meselson and Stahl were interested in understanding how DNA replicates. They grew E. coli for several
15
generationsinamediumcontaininga“heavy”isotopeofnitrogen( N),whichgetsincorporatedintonitrogenous
bases, and eventually into the DNA (Figure 14.13).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 402
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 391
Figure14.13MeselsonandStahlexperimentedwithE.coligrownfirstinheavynitrogen(15N)thenin14N.DNAgrown
in15N(redband)isheavierthanDNAgrownin14N(orangeband),andsedimentstoalowerlevelincesiumchloride
solution in an ultracentrifuge. When DNA grown in 15N is switched to media containing 14N, after one round of cell
divisiontheDNAsedimentshalfwaybetweenthe15Nand14Nlevels,indicatingthatitnowcontainsfiftypercent14N.In
subsequentcelldivisions,anincreasingamountofDNAcontains14Nonly.Thesedatasupportthesemi-conservative
replication model. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
14
The E. coli culture was then placed into medium containing N and allowed to grow for several generations.
After each of the first few generations, the cells were harvested and the DNA was isolated, then centrifuged
at high speeds in an ultracentrifuge. During the centrifugation, the DNA was loaded into a gradient (typically a
solution of salt such as cesium chloride or sucrose) and spun at high speeds of 50,000 to 60,000 rpm. Under
thesecircumstances,theDNAwillformabandaccordingtoitsbuoyantdensity:thedensitywithinthegradient
15
atwhichitfloats.DNAgrownin Nwillformabandatahigherdensityposition(i.e.,fartherdownthecentrifuge
14 14
tube) than that grown in N. Meselson and Stahl noted that after one generation of growth in N after they
15
had been shifted from N, the single band observed was intermediate in position in between DNA of cells
15 14
grownexclusivelyin Nand N.Thissuggestedeitherasemi-conservativeordispersivemodeofreplication.
14
The DNA harvested from cells grown for two generations in N formed two bands: one DNA band was at the
15 14 14
intermediatepositionbetween Nand N,andtheothercorrespondedtothebandof NDNA.Theseresults
could only be explained if DNA replicates in a semi-conservative manner. And for this reason, therefore, the
other two models were ruled out.
DuringDNAreplication,eachofthetwostrandsthatmakeupthedoublehelixservesasatemplatefromwhich
new strands are copied. The new strands will be complementary to the parental or “old” strands. When two
daughterDNAcopiesareformed,theyhavethesamesequenceandaredividedequallyintothetwodaughter
cells.
Click throughthis tutorial (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/DNA_replicatio2)on DNA replication.
PAGE: 403
392 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
14.4 | DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the process of DNA replication in prokaryotes
• Discuss the role of different enzymes and proteins in supporting this process
DNA replication has been well studied in prokaryotes primarily because of the small size of the genome
and because of the large variety of mutants that are available. E. coli has 4.6 million base pairs in a single
circular chromosome and all of it gets replicated in approximately 42 minutes, starting from a single site along
the chromosome and proceeding around the circle in both directions. This means that approximately 1000
nucleotides are added per second. Thus, the process is quite rapid and occurs without many mistakes.
DNAreplicationemploysalargenumberofstructuralproteinsandenzymes,eachofwhichplaysacriticalrole
duringtheprocess.OneofthekeyplayersistheenzymeDNApolymerase,alsoknownasDNApol,whichadds
nucleotides one-by-one to the growing DNA chain that is complementary to the template strand. The addition
of nucleotides requires energy; this energy is obtained from the nucleoside triphosphates ATP, GTP, TTP and
CTP. Like ATP, the other NTPs (nucleoside triphosphates) are high-energy molecules that can serve both as
the source of DNA nucleotides and the source of energy to drive the polymerization. When the bond between
thephosphatesis“broken,”theenergyreleasedisusedtoformthephosphodiesterbondbetweentheincoming
nucleotideandthegrowingchain.Inprokaryotes,threemaintypesofpolymerasesareknown:DNApolI,DNA
polII,andDNApolIII.ItisnowknownthatDNApolIIIistheenzymerequiredforDNAsynthesis;DNApolIis
an important accessory enzyme in DNA replication, and along with DNA pol II, is primarily required for repair.
How does the replication machinery know where to begin? It turns out that there are specific nucleotide
sequencescalledoriginsofreplicationwherereplicationbegins.InE.coli,whichhasasingleoriginofreplication
onitsonechromosome(asdomostprokaryotes),thisoriginofreplicationisapproximately245basepairslong
and is rich in AT sequences. The origin of replication is recognized by certain proteins that bind to this site. An
enzymecalledhelicaseunwindstheDNAbybreakingthehydrogenbondsbetweenthenitrogenousbasepairs.
ATP hydrolysis is required for this process. As the DNA opens up, Y-shaped structures called replication forks
areformed.Tworeplicationforksareformedattheoriginofreplicationandthesegetextendedbi-directionallyas
replication proceeds. Single-strand binding proteins coat the single strands of DNA near the replication fork
to prevent the single-stranded DNA from winding back into a double helix.
DNA polymerase has two important restrictions: it is able to add nucleotides only in the 5' to 3' direction (a
new DNA strand can be only extended in this direction). It also requires a free 3'-OH group to which it can
add nucleotides by forming a phosphodiester bond between the 3'-OH end and the 5' phosphate of the next
nucleotide.Thisessentiallymeansthatitcannotaddnucleotidesifafree3'-OHgroupisnotavailable.Thenhow
does it add the first nucleotide? The problem is solved with the help of a primer that provides the free 3'-OH
end. Another enzyme, RNA primase, synthesizes an RNA segment that is about five to ten nucleotides long
andcomplementarytothetemplateDNA.BecausethissequenceprimestheDNAsynthesis,itisappropriately
called the primer. DNA polymerase can now extend this RNA primer, adding nucleotides one-by-one that are
complementary to the template strand (Figure 14.14).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 404
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 393
Figure 14.14 A replication fork is formed when helicase separates the DNA strands at the origin of replication.
The DNA tends to become more highly coiled ahead of the replication fork. Topoisomerase breaks and reforms
DNA’s phosphate backbone ahead of the replication fork, thereby relieving the pressure that results from this
“supercoiling.”Single-strandbindingproteinsbindtothesingle-strandedDNAtopreventthehelixfromre-forming.
PrimasesynthesizesanRNAprimer.DNApolymeraseIIIusesthisprimertosynthesizethedaughterDNAstrand.
On the leading strand, DNA is synthesized continuously, whereas on the lagging strand, DNA is synthesized in
shortstretchescalledOkazakifragments.DNApolymeraseIreplacestheRNAprimerwithDNA.DNAligaseseals
thegapsbetweentheOkazakifragments,joiningthefragmentsintoasingleDNAmolecule.(credit:modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Question: You isolate a cell strain in which the joining of Okazaki fragments is impaired and suspect that
a mutation has occurred in an enzyme found at the replication fork. Which enzyme is most likely to be
mutated?
Thereplicationforkmovesattherateof1000nucleotidespersecond.Topoisomerasepreventstheover-winding
oftheDNAdoublehelixaheadofthereplicationforkastheDNAisopeningup;itdoessobycausingtemporary
nicksintheDNAhelixandthenresealingit.BecauseDNApolymerasecanonlyextendinthe5'to3'direction,
and because the DNA double helix is antiparallel, there is a slight problem at the replication fork. The two
templateDNAstrandshaveopposingorientations:onestrandisinthe5'to3'directionandtheotherisoriented
in the 3' to 5' direction. Only one new DNA strand, the one that is complementary to the 3' to 5' parental DNA
strand, can be synthesized continuously towards the replication fork. This continuously synthesized strand is
knownastheleadingstrand.Theotherstrand,complementarytothe5'to3'parentalDNA,isextendedaway
from the replication fork, insmallfragments knownasOkazaki fragments, eachrequiring aprimerto start the
synthesis. New primer segments are laid down in the direction of the replication fork, but each pointing away
from it. (Okazaki fragments are named after the Japanese scientist who first discovered them. The strand with
the Okazaki fragments is known as thelagging strand.)
The leading strand can be extended from a single primer, whereas the lagging strand needs a new primer for
each of the short Okazaki fragments. The overall direction of the lagging strand will be 3' to 5', and that of the
leading strand 5' to 3'. A protein called the sliding clamp holds the DNA polymerase in place as it continues
toaddnucleotides.Theslidingclampisaring-shapedproteinthatbindstotheDNAandholdsthepolymerase
in place. As synthesis proceeds, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA. The primers are removed by the
exonucleaseactivityofDNApolI,whichusesDNAbehindtheRNAasitsownprimerandfillsinthegapsleftby
removal of the RNA nucleotides by the addition of DNA nucleotides. The nicks that remain between the newly
synthesizedDNA(thatreplacedtheRNAprimer)andthepreviouslysynthesizedDNAaresealedbytheenzyme
DNAligase,whichcatalyzestheformationofphosphodiesterlinkagesbetweenthe3'-OHendofonenucleotide
and the 5' phosphate end of the other fragment.
Oncethechromosomehasbeencompletelyreplicated,thetwoDNAcopiesmoveintotwodifferentcellsduring
cell division.
The process of DNA replication can be summarized as follows:
1. DNA unwinds at the origin of replication.
PAGE: 405
394 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
2. Helicase opens up the DNA-forming replication forks; these are extended bidirectionally.
3. Single-strand binding proteins coat the DNA around the replication fork to prevent rewinding of the DNA.
4. Topoisomerase binds at the region ahead of the replication fork to prevent supercoiling.
5. Primase synthesizes RNA primers complementary to the DNA strand.
6. DNA polymerase III starts adding nucleotides to the 3'-OH end of the primer.
7. Elongation of both the lagging and the leading strand continues.
8. RNA primers are removed by exonuclease activity.
9. Gaps are filled by DNA pol I by adding dNTPs.
10. The gap between the two DNA fragments is sealed by DNA ligase, which helps in the formation of
phosphodiester bonds.
Table 14.1summarizes the enzymes involved in prokaryotic DNA replication and the functions of each.
Prokaryotic DNA Replication: Enzymes and Their Function
Enzyme/protein Specific Function
DNA pol I Removes RNA primer and replaces it with newly synthesized DNA
DNA pol III Main enzyme that adds nucleotides in the 5'-3' direction
Opens the DNA helix by breaking hydrogen bonds between the nitrogenous
Helicase
bases
Seals the gaps between the Okazaki fragments to create one continuous DNA
Ligase
strand
Primase Synthesizes RNA primers needed to start replication
Sliding Clamp Helps to hold the DNA polymerase in place when nucleotides are being added
Helps relieve the strain on DNA when unwinding by causing breaks, and then
Topoisomerase
resealing the DNA
Single-strand binding
Binds to single-stranded DNA to prevent DNA from rewinding back.
proteins (SSB)
Table 14.1
Review the full process of DNA replicationhere (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/replication_DNA).
14.5 | DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the similarities and differences between DNA replication in eukaryotes and prokaryotes
• State the role of telomerase in DNA replication
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 406
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 395
Eukaryotic genomes are much more complex and larger in size than prokaryotic genomes. Eukaryotes also
haveanumberofdifferentlinearchromosomes.Thehumangenomehas3billionbasepairsperhaploidsetof
chromosomes, and 6 billion base pairs are replicated during the S phase of the cell cycle. There are multiple
origins of replication on each eukaryotic chromosome; humans can have up to 100,000 origins of replication
across the genome. The rate of replication is approximately 100 nucleotides per second, much slower than
prokaryotic replication. In yeast, which is a eukaryote, special sequences known as autonomously replicating
sequences (ARS) are found on the chromosomes. These are equivalent to the origin of replication inE. coli.
ThenumberofDNApolymerasesineukaryotesismuchmorethaninprokaryotes:14areknown,ofwhichfive
are known to have major roles during replication and have been well studied. They are known as pol α, pol β,
polγ, polδ, and polε.
Theessentialstepsofreplicationarethesameasinprokaryotes.Beforereplicationcanstart,theDNAhastobe
madeavailableasatemplate.EukaryoticDNAisboundtobasicproteinsknownashistonestoformstructures
called nucleosomes. Histones must be removed and then replaced during the replication process, which helps
toaccountforthelowerreplicationrateineukaryotes.Thechromatin(thecomplexbetweenDNAandproteins)
mayundergosomechemicalmodifications,sothattheDNAmaybeabletoslideofftheproteinsorbeaccessible
totheenzymesoftheDNAreplicationmachinery.Attheoriginofreplication,apre-replicationcomplexismade
withotherinitiatorproteins.Helicaseandotherproteinsarethenrecruitedtostartthereplicationprocess(Table
14.2).
Difference between Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Replication
Property Prokaryotes Eukaryotes
Origin of replication Single Multiple
Rate of replication 1000 nucleotides/s 50 to 100 nucleotides/s
DNA polymerase types 5 14
Telomerase Not present Present
RNA primer removal DNA pol I RNase H
Strand elongation DNA pol III Pol α, pol δ, pol ε
Sliding clamp Sliding clamp PCNA
Table 14.2
AhelicaseusingtheenergyfromATPhydrolysisopensuptheDNAhelix.Replicationforksareformedateach
replicationoriginastheDNAunwinds.Theopeningofthedoublehelixcausesover-winding,orsupercoiling,in
theDNAaheadofthereplicationfork.Theseareresolvedwiththeactionoftopoisomerases.Primersareformed
bytheenzymeprimase,andusingtheprimer,DNApolcanstartsynthesis.ThreemajorDNApolymerasesare
theninvolved:α,δandε.DNApolαaddsashort(20to30nucleotides)DNAfragmenttotheRNAprimeronboth
strands,andthenhandsofftoasecondpolymerase.Whiletheleadingstrandiscontinuouslysynthesizedbythe
enzymepolδ,thelaggingstrandissynthesizedbypolε.AslidingclampproteinknownasPCNA(proliferating
cellnuclearantigen)holdstheDNApolinplacesothatitdoesnotslideofftheDNA.Aspolδrunsintotheprimer
RNAonthelaggingstrand,itdisplacesitfromtheDNAtemplate.ThedisplacedprimerRNAisthenremovedby
RNase H (AKA flap endonuclease) and replaced with DNA nucleotides. The Okazaki fragments in the lagging
strandarejoinedafterthereplacementoftheRNAprimerswithDNA.ThegapsthatremainaresealedbyDNA
ligase, which forms the phosphodiester bond.
Telomere replication
Unlikeprokaryoticchromosomes,eukaryoticchromosomesarelinear.Asyou’velearned,theenzymeDNApol
can add nucleotides only in the 5' to 3' direction. In the leading strand, synthesis continues until the end of the
chromosomeisreached.Onthelaggingstrand,DNAissynthesizedinshortstretches,eachofwhichisinitiated
by a separate primer. When the replication fork reaches the end of the linear chromosome, there is no way to
replace the primer on the 5’ end of the lagging strand. The DNA at the ends of the chromosome thus remains
unpaired,andovertimetheseends,calledtelomeres,maygetprogressivelyshorterascellscontinuetodivide.
PAGE: 407
396 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
Telomerescompriserepetitivesequencesthatcodefornoparticulargene.Inhumans,asix-base-pairsequence,
TTAGGG, is repeated 100 to 1000 times in the telomere regions. In a way, these telomeres protect the genes
from getting deleted as cells continue to divide. The telomeres are added to the ends of chromosomes by
a separate enzyme, telomerase (Figure 14.16), whose discovery helped in the understanding of how these
repetitive chromosome ends are maintained. The telomerase enzyme contains a catalytic part and a built-in
RNA template. It attaches to the end of the chromosome, and DNA nucleotides complementary to the RNA
templateareaddedonthe3'endoftheDNAstrand.Oncethe3'endofthelaggingstrandtemplateissufficiently
elongated, DNA polymerase can add the nucleotides complementary to the ends of the chromosomes. Thus,
the ends of the chromosomes are replicated.
Figure 14.15The ends of linear chromosomes are maintained by the action of the telomerase enzyme.
Telomerase is typically active in germ cells and adult stem cells. It is not active in adult somatic cells. For their
discovery of telomerase and its action, Elizabeth Blackburn, Carol W. Greider, and Jack W. Szostak (Figure
14.16) received the Nobel Prize for Medicine and Physiology in 2009.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 408
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 397
Figure 14.16 Elizabeth Blackburn, 2009 Nobel Laureate, is one of the scientists who discovered how telomerase
works. (credit: US Embassy Sweden)
Telomerase and Aging
Cells that undergo cell division continue to have their telomeres shortened because most somatic cells do not
make telomerase. This essentially means that telomere shortening is associated with aging. With the advent
of modern medicine, preventative health care, and healthier lifestyles, the human life span has increased, and
there is an increasing demand for people to look younger and have a better quality of life as they grow older.
In 2010, scientists found that telomerase can reverse some age-related conditions in mice. This may have
[2]
potential in regenerative medicine. Telomerase-deficient mice were used in these studies; these mice have
tissue atrophy, stem cell depletion, organ system failure, and impaired tissue injury responses. Telomerase
reactivationinthesemicecausedextensionoftelomeres,reducedDNAdamage,reversedneurodegeneration,
andimprovedthefunctionofthetestes,spleen,andintestines.Thus,telomerereactivationmayhavepotential
for treating age-related diseases in humans.
Cancer is characterized by uncontrolled cell division of abnormal cells. The cells accumulate mutations,
proliferate uncontrollably, and can migrate to different parts of the body through a process called metastasis.
Scientists have observed that cancerous cells have considerably shortened telomeres and that telomerase is
activeinthesecells.Interestingly,onlyafterthetelomereswereshortenedinthecancercellsdidthetelomerase
become active. If the action of telomerase in these cells can be inhibited by drugs during cancer therapy, then
the cancerous cells could potentially be stopped from further division.
14.6 | DNA Repair
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the different types of mutations in DNA
• Explain DNA repair mechanisms
DNAreplication isahighlyaccurateprocess,butmistakescanoccasionallyoccur,suchasaDNApolymerase
inserting a wrong base. Uncorrected mistakes may sometimes lead to serious consequences, such as cancer.
Repair mechanisms correct the mistakes. In rare cases, mistakes are not corrected, leading to mutations; in
other cases, repair enzymes are themselves mutated or defective.
Most of the mistakes during DNA replication are promptly corrected by the proofreading ability of DNA
polymerase itself. (Figure 14.17). In proofreading, the DNA pol reads the newly added base before adding
the next one, soacorrection can be made. The polymerase checks whether the newly added base has paired
correctlywiththebaseinthetemplatestrand.Ifitistherightbase,thenextnucleotideisadded.Ifanincorrect
basehasbeenadded,theenzymemakesacutatthephosphodiesterbondandreleasesthewrongnucleotide.
Thisisperformedbythe3'exonucleaseactionofDNApol.Oncetheincorrectnucleotidehasbeenremoved,it
2. Jaskelioff et al., “Telomerase reactivation reverses tissue degeneration in aged telomerase-deficient mice,”Nature469 (2011): 102-7.
PAGE: 409
398 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
can be replaced by the correct one.
Figure 14.17Proofreading by DNA polymerase corrects errors during replication.
Some errors are not corrected during replication, but are instead corrected after replication is completed; this
type of repair is known as mismatch repair (Figure 14.18). Specific repair enzymes recognize the mispaired
nucleotideandexcisepartofthestrandthatcontainsit;theexcisedregionisthenresynthesized.Ifthemismatch
remainsuncorrected,itmayleadtomorepermanentdamagewhenthemismatchedDNAisreplicated.Howdo
mismatchrepairenzymesrecognizewhichofthetwobasesistheincorrectone?InE.coli,afterreplication,the
nitrogenousbaseadenineacquiresamethylgroup;theparentalDNAstrandwillhavemethylgroups,whereas
the newly synthesized strand lacks them. Thus, DNA polymerase is able to remove the wrongly incorporated
bases from the newly synthesized, non-methylated strand. In eukaryotes, the mechanism is not very well
understood, but it is believed to involve recognition of unsealed nicks in the new strand, as well as a short-
termcontinuingassociationofsomeofthereplicationproteinswiththenewdaughterstrandafterreplicationhas
completed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 410
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 399
Figure14.18Inmismatchrepair,theincorrectlyaddedbaseisdetectedafterreplication.Themismatchrepairproteins
detect this base and remove it from the newly synthesized strand by nuclease action. The gap is now filled with the
correctly paired base.
Another type of repair mechanism, nucleotide excision repair, is similar to mismatch repair, except that it is
usedtoremovedamagedbasesratherthanmismatchedones.Therepairenzymesreplaceabnormalbasesby
makingacutonboththe3'and5'endsofthedamagedbase(Figure14.19).ThesegmentofDNAisremoved
and replaced with the correctly paired nucleotides by the action of DNA pol. Once the bases are filled in, the
remaininggapissealedwithaphosphodiesterlinkagecatalyzedbyDNAligase.Thisrepairmechanismisoften
employed when UV exposure causes the formation of pyrimidine dimers.
PAGE: 411
400 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
Figure14.19Nucleotideexcisionrepairsthyminedimers.WhenexposedtoUVlight,thymineslyingadjacenttoeach
other can form thymine dimers. In normal cells, they are excised and replaced.
Awell-studiedexampleofmistakesnotbeingcorrectedisseeninpeoplesufferingfromxerodermapigmentosa
(Figure14.20).AffectedindividualshaveskinthatishighlysensitivetoUVraysfromthesun.Whenindividuals
are exposed to UV light, pyrimidine dimers, especially those of thymine, are formed; people with xeroderma
pigmentosa are not able to repair the damage. These are not repaired because of a defect in the nucleotide
excision repair enzymes, whereas in normal individuals, the thymine dimers are excised and the defect is
corrected.ThethyminedimersdistortthestructureoftheDNAdoublehelix,andthismaycauseproblemsduring
DNA replication. People with xeroderma pigmentosa may have a higher risk of contracting skin cancer than
those who don't have the condition.
Figure 14.20 Xeroderma pigmentosa is a condition in which thymine dimerization from exposure to UV light is not
repaired. Exposure to sunlight results in skin lesions. (credit: James Halpern et al.)
ErrorsduringDNAreplicationarenottheonlyreasonwhymutationsariseinDNA.Mutations,variationsinthe
nucleotide sequence of a genome, can also occur because of damage to DNA. Such mutations may be of two
types: induced or spontaneous. Induced mutations are those that result from an exposure to chemicals, UV
rays, x-rays, or some other environmental agent. Spontaneous mutations occur without any exposure to any
environmental agent; they are a result of natural reactions taking place within the body.
Mutationsmayhaveawiderangeofeffects.Pointmutationsarethosemutationsthataffectasinglebasepair.
The most common nucleotide mutations are substitutions, in which one base is replaced by another. These
substitutionscanbeoftwotypes,eithertransitionsortransversions.Transitionsubstitutionreferstoapurine
orpyrimidinebeingreplacedbyabaseofthesamekind;forexample,apurinesuchasadeninemaybereplaced
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 412
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 401
by the purine guanine. Transversion substitution refers to a purine being replaced by a pyrimidine, or vice
versa; for example, cytosine, a pyrimidine, is replaced by adenine, a purine. Some point mutations are not
expressed; these are known as silent mutations. Silent mutations are usually due to a substitution in the third
base of a codon, which often represents the same amino acid as the original codon. Other point mutations
can result in the replacement of one amino acid by another, which may alter the function of the protein. Point
mutations that generate a stop codon can terminate a protein early.
Somemutationscanresultinanincreasednumberofcopiesofthesamecodon.Thesearecalledtrinucleotide
repeat expansions and result in repeated regions of the same amino acid. Mutations can also be the result of
theadditionofabase,knownasaninsertion,ortheremovalofabase,alsoknownasdeletion.Ifaninsertionor
deletion results in the alteration of the translational reading frame (a frameshift mutation), the resultant protein
is usually nonfunctional. Sometimes a piece of DNA from one chromosome may get translocated to another
chromosomeortoanotherregionofthesamechromosome;thisisalsoknownastranslocation.Thesemutation
types are shown inFigure 14.21.
Figure 14.21Mutations can lead to changes in the protein sequence encoded by the DNA.
A frameshift mutation that results in the insertion of three nucleotides is often less deleterious than a
mutation that results in the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?
Mutationsinrepairgeneshavebeenknowntocausecancer.Manymutatedrepairgeneshavebeenimplicated
in certain forms of pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, and colorectal cancer. Mutations can affect either somatic
cells or germ cells. If many mutations accumulate in a somatic cell, they may lead to problems such as the
uncontrolledcelldivisionobservedincancer.Ifamutationtakesplaceingermcells,themutationwillbepassed
on to the next generation, as in the case of hemophilia and xeroderma pigmentosa.
PAGE: 413
402 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
KEY TERMS
electrophoresis technique used to separate DNA fragments according to size
helicase during replication, this enzyme helps to open up the DNA helix by breaking the hydrogen bonds
induced mutation mutation that results from exposure to chemicals or environmental agents
lagging strand duringreplication,thestrandthatisreplicatedinshortfragmentsandawayfromthereplication
fork
leading strand strandthatissynthesizedcontinuouslyinthe5'-3'direction,whichissynthesizedinthedirection
of the replication fork
ligase enzyme that catalyzes the formation of a phosphodiester linkage between the 3' OH and 5' phosphate
ends of the DNA
mismatch repair type of repair mechanism in which mismatched bases are removed after replication
mutation variation in the nucleotide sequence of a genome
nucleotide excision repair type of DNA repair mechanism in which the wrong base, along with a few
nucleotides upstream or downstream, are removed
Okazaki fragment DNA fragment that is synthesized in short stretches on the lagging strand
point mutation mutation that affects a single base
primase enzymethatsynthesizestheRNAprimer;theprimerisneededforDNApoltostartsynthesisofanew
DNA strand
primer shortstretchofnucleotidesthatisrequiredtoinitiatereplication;inthecaseofreplication,theprimerhas
RNA nucleotides
proofreading function of DNA pol in which it reads the newly added base before adding the next one
replication fork Y-shaped structure formed during initiation of replication
silent mutation mutation that is not expressed
single-strand binding protein during replication, protein that binds to the single-stranded DNA; this helps in
keeping the two strands of DNA apart so that they may serve as templates
sliding clamp ring-shaped protein that holds the DNA pol on the DNA strand
spontaneous mutation mutation that takes place in the cells as a result of chemical reactions taking place
naturally without exposure to any external agent
telomerase enzymethatcontainsacatalyticpartandaninbuiltRNAtemplate;itfunctionstomaintaintelomeres
at chromosome ends
telomere DNA at the end of linear chromosomes
topoisomerase enzymethatcausesunderwindingoroverwindingofDNAwhenDNAreplicationistakingplace
transformation process in which external DNA is taken up by a cell
transition substitution when a purine is replaced with a purine or a pyrimidine is replaced with another
pyrimidine
transversion substitution when a purine is replaced by a pyrimidine or a pyrimidine is replaced by a purine
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 414
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 403
CHAPTER SUMMARY
14.1Historical Basis of Modern Understanding
DNA was first isolated from white blood cells by Friedrich Miescher, who called it nuclein because it was
isolated from nuclei. Frederick Griffith's experiments with strains ofStreptococcus pneumoniaeprovided the
first hint that DNA may be the transforming principle. Avery, MacLeod, and McCarty showed that DNA is
required for the transformation of bacteria. Later experiments by Hershey and Chase using bacteriophage T2
proved that DNA is the genetic material. Chargaff found that the ratio of A = T and C = G, and that the
percentage content of A, T, G, and C is different for different species.
14.2DNA Structure and Sequencing
The currently accepted model of the double-helix structure of DNA was proposed by Watson and Crick. Some
of the salient features are that the two strands that make up the double helix have complementary base
sequences and anti-parallel orientations. Alternating deoxyribose sugars and phosphates form the backbone of
the structure, and the nitrogenous bases are stacked like rungs inside. The diameter of the double helix, 2 nm,
is uniform throughout. A purine always pairs with a pyrimidine; A pairs with T, and G pairs with C. One turn of
the helix has 10 base pairs. Prokaryotes are much simpler than eukaryotes in many of their features. Most
prokaryotes contain a single, circular chromosome. In general, eukaryotic chromosomes contain a linear DNA
molecule packaged into nucleosomes, and have two distinct regions that can be distinguished by staining,
reflecting different states of packaging and compaction.
14.3Basics of DNA Replication
During cell division, each daughter cell receives a copy of each molecule of DNA by a process known as DNA
replication. The single chromosome of a prokaryote or each chromosome of a eukaryote consists of a single
continuous double helix. The model for DNA replication suggests that the two strands of the double helix
separate during replication, and each strand serves as a template from which the new complementary strand is
copied. In the conservative model of replication, the parental DNA is conserved, and the daughter DNA is
newly synthesized. The semi-conservative model suggests that each of the two parental DNA strands acts as
template for new DNA to be synthesized; after replication, each double-stranded DNA retains the parental or
“old” strand and one “new” strand. The dispersive model suggested that the two copies of the DNA would have
segments of parental DNA and newly synthesized DNA. The Meselson and Stahl experiment supported the
semi-conservative model of replication, in which an entire replicated chromosome consists of one parental
strand and one newly synthesized strand of DNA.
14.4DNA Replication in Prokaryotes
Replication in prokaryotes starts from a sequence found on the chromosome called the origin of
replication—the point at which the DNA opens up. Helicase opens up the DNA double helix, resulting in the
formation of the replication fork. Single-strand binding proteins bind to the single-stranded DNA near the
replication fork to keep the fork open. Primase synthesizes an RNA primer to initiate synthesis by DNA
polymerase, which can add nucleotides only to the 3' end of a previously synthesized primer strand. Both new
DNA strands grow according to their respective 5'-3' directions. One strand is synthesized continuously in the
direction of the replication fork; this is called the leading strand. The other strand is synthesized in a direction
away from the replication fork, in short stretches of DNA known as Okazaki fragments. This strand is known as
the lagging strand. Once replication is completed, the RNA primers are replaced by DNA nucleotides and the
DNA is sealed with DNA ligase, which creates phosphodiester bonds between the 3'-OH of one end and the 5'
phosphate of the other strand.
14.5DNA Replication in Eukaryotes
Replication in eukaryotes starts at multiple origins of replication. The mechanism is quite similar to that in
prokaryotes. A primer is required to initiate synthesis, which is then extended by DNA polymerase as it adds
nucleotides one by one to the growing chain. The leading strand is synthesized continuously, whereas the
lagging strand is synthesized in short stretches called Okazaki fragments. The RNA primers are replaced with
DNA nucleotides; the DNA Okazaki fragments are linked into one continuous strand by DNA ligase. The ends
of the chromosomes pose a problem as the primer RNA at the 5’ ends of the DNA cannot be replaced with
DNA, and the chromosome is progressively shortened. Telomerase, an enzyme with an inbuilt RNA template,
PAGE: 415
404 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
extends the ends by copying the RNA template and extending one strand of the chromosome. DNA
polymerase can then fill in the complementary DNA strand using the regular replication enzymes. In this way,
the ends of the chromosomes are protected.
14.6DNA Repair
DNA polymerase can make mistakes while adding nucleotides. It edits the DNA by proofreading every newly
added base. Incorrect bases are removed and replaced by the correct base before proceeding with elongation.
Most mistakes are corrected during replication, although when this does not happen, the mismatch repair
mechanism is employed. Mismatch repair enzymes recognize the wrongly incorporated base and excise it from
the DNA, replacing it with the correct base. In yet another type of repair, nucleotide excision repair, a damaged
base is removed along with a few bases on the 5' and 3' end, and these are replaced by copying the template
with the help of DNA polymerase. The ends of the newly synthesized fragment are attached to the rest of the
DNA using DNA ligase, which creates a phosphodiester bond.
Most mistakes are corrected, and if they are not, they may result in a mutation, defined as a permanent change
in the DNA sequence. Mutations can be of many types, such as substitution, deletion, insertion, and
trinucleotide repeat expansions. Mutations in repair genes may lead to serious consequences such as cancer.
Mutations can be induced or may occur spontaneously.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 14.10In eukaryotic cells, DNA and RNA that a mutation has occurred in an enzyme found at
synthesis occur in a separate compartment from the replication fork. Which enzyme is most likely to
protein synthesis. In prokaryotic cells, both processes be mutated?
occur together. What advantages might there be to
3.Figure 14.21A frameshift mutation that results in
separating the processes? What advantages might
the insertion of three nucleotides is often less
there be to having them occur together?
deleterious than a mutation that results in the
2.Figure 14.14You isolate a cell strain in which the insertion of one nucleotide. Why?
joining of Okazaki fragments is impaired and suspect
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.If DNA of a particular species was analyzed and it a. Pathogenic bacteria could introduce
was found that it contains 27 percent A, what would disease-causing genes in non-pathogenic
be the percentage of C? bacteria.
a. 27 percent b. Antibiotic resistance genes could be
b. 30 percent introduced to new bacteria to create
c. 23 percent “superbugs.”
d. 54 percent c. Bacteriophages could spread DNA encoding
toxins to new bacteria.
5.The experiments by Hershey and Chase helped
d. All of the above.
confirm that DNA was the hereditary material on the
basis of the finding that: 7.DNA double helix does not have which of the
a. radioactive phage were found in the pellet following?
b. radioactive cells were found in the a. antiparallel configuration
supernatant b. complementary base pairing
c. radioactive sulfur was found inside the cell c. major and minor grooves
d. radioactive phosphorus was found in the cell d. uracil
6.Bacterial transformation is a major concern in 8.In eukaryotes, what is the DNA wrapped around?
many medical settings. Why might health care
providers be concerned? a. single-stranded binding proteins
b. sliding clamp
c. polymerase
d. histones
9.Meselson and Stahl's experiments proved that
DNA replicates by which mode?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 416
Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function 405
a. conservative a. DNA ligase
b. semi-conservative b. DNA pol II
c. dispersive c. Primase
d. none of the above d. DNA pol I
10.If the sequence of the 5'-3' strand is AATGCTAC, 16.The ends of the linear chromosomes are
then the complementary sequence has the following maintained by
sequence: a. helicase
a. 3'-AATGCTAC-5' b. primase
b. 3'-CATCGTAA-5' c. DNA pol
c. 3'-TTACGATG-5' d. telomerase
d. 3'-GTAGCATT-5'
17.Which of the following is not a true statement
11.How did Meselson and Stahl support Watson and comparing prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA
Crick’s double-helix model? replication?
a. They demonstrated that each strand serves a. Both eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA
as a template for synthesizing a new strand polymerases build off RNA primers made by
of DNA. primase.
b. They showed that the DNA strands break b. Eukaryotic DNA replication requires multiple
and recombine without losing genetic replication forks, while prokaryotic
material. replication uses a single origin to rapidly
c. They proved that DNA maintains a double- replicate the entire genome.
helix structure while undergoing semi- c. DNA replication always occurs in the
conservative replication. nucleus.
d. They demonstrated that conservative d. Eukaryotic DNA replication involves more
replication maintains the complementary polymerases than prokaryotic replication.
base pairing of each DNA helix.
18.During proofreading, which of the following
12.Which of the following components is not enzymes reads the DNA?
involved during the formation of the replication fork? a. primase
b. topoisomerase
a. single-strand binding proteins c. DNA pol
b. helicase d. helicase
c. origin of replication
19.The initial mechanism for repairing nucleotide
d. ligase
errors in DNA is ________.
13.Which of the following does the enzyme primase a. mismatch repair
synthesize? b. DNA polymerase proofreading
a. DNA primer c. nucleotide excision repair
b. RNA primer d. thymine dimers
c. Okazaki fragments
20.A scientist creates fruit fly larvae with a mutation
d. phosphodiester linkage
that eliminates the exonuclease function of DNA pol
14.In which direction does DNA replication take III. Which prediction about the mutational load in the
place? adult fruit flies is most likely to be correct?
a. 5'-3' a. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will
b. 3'-5' have significantly more mutations than
c. 5' average.
d. 3' b. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will
have slightly more mutations than average.
15.A scientist randomly mutates the DNA of a
c. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will
bacterium. She then sequences the bacterium’s
have the same number of mutations as
daughter cells, and finds that the daughters have
average.
many errors in their replicated DNA. The parent
d. The adults with the DNA pol III mutation will
bacterium likely acquired a mutation in which
have fewer mutations than average.
enzyme?
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
21.Explain Griffith's transformation experiments. used to label bacteriophage in Hershey and Chase's
What did he conclude from them? experiments?
22.Why were radioactive sulfur and phosphorous 23.When Chargaff was performing his experiments,
PAGE: 417
406 Chapter 14 | DNA Structure and Function
the tetranucleotide hypothesis, which stated that formed?
DNA was composed of GACT nucleotide repeats,
31.If the rate of replication in a particular prokaryote
was the most widely accepted view of DNA’s
is 900 nucleotides per second, how long would it take
composition. How did Chargaff disprove this
1.2 million base pair genomes to make two copies?
hypothesis?
32.Explain the events taking place at the replication
24.Provide a brief summary of the Sanger
fork. If the gene for helicase is mutated, what part of
sequencing method.
replication will be affected?
25.Describe the structure and complementary base
33.What is the role of a primer in DNA replication?
pairing of DNA.
What would happen if you forgot to add a primer in a
26.Prokaryotes have a single circular chromosome tube containing the reaction mix for a DNA
while eukaryotes have linear chromosomes. Describe sequencing reaction?
one advantage and one disadvantage to the
34.Quinolone antibiotics treat bacterial infections by
eukaryotic genome packaging compared to the
blocking the activity of topoisomerase. Why does this
prokaryotes.
treatment work? Explain what occurs at the
27.How did the scientific community learn that DNA molecular level.
replication takes place in a semi-conservative
35.How do the linear chromosomes in eukaryotes
fashion?
ensure that its ends are replicated completely?
28.Imagine the Meselson and Stahl experiments had
36.What is the consequence of mutation of a
supported conservative replication instead of semi-
mismatch repair enzyme? How will this affect the
conservative replication. What results would you
function of a gene?
predict to observe after two rounds of replication? Be
specific regarding percent distributions of DNA 37.An adult with a history of tanning has his genome
15 14 sequenced. The beginning of a protein-coding region
incorporating N and N in the gradient.
of his DNA reads ATGGGGATATGGCAT. If the
29.DNA replication is bidirectional and protein-coding region of a healthy adult reads
discontinuous; explain your understanding of those ATGGGGATATGAGCAT, identify the site and type of
concepts. mutation.
30.What are Okazaki fragments and how they are
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 418
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 407
15 | GENES AND
PROTEINS
Figure 15.1 Genes, which are carried on (a) chromosomes, are linearly organized instructions for making the RNA
andproteinmoleculesthatarenecessaryforalloftheprocessesoflife.The(b)interleukin-2proteinand(c)alpha-2u-
globulinproteinarejusttwoexamplesofthearrayofdifferentmolecularstructuresthatareencodedbygenes.(credit
“chromosome: National Human Genome Research Institute; credit “interleukin-2”: Ramin Herati/Created from PDB
1M47 and rendered with Pymol; credit “alpha-2u-globulin”: Darren Logan/rendered with AISMIG)
Chapter Outline
15.1:The Genetic Code
15.2:Prokaryotic Transcription
15.3:Eukaryotic Transcription
15.4:RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
15.5:Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
Introduction
SincetherediscoveryofMendel’sworkin1900,thedefinitionofthegenehasprogressedfromanabstractunit
ofhereditytoatangiblemolecularentitycapableofreplication,expression,andmutation(Figure15.1).Genes
arecomposedofDNAandarelinearlyarrangedonchromosomes.Genesspecifythesequencesofaminoacids,
whicharethebuildingblocksofproteins.Inturn,proteinsareresponsiblefororchestratingnearlyeveryfunction
of the cell. Both genes and the proteins they encode are absolutely essential to life as we know it.
15.1 | The Genetic Code
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the “central dogma” of DNA-protein synthesis
• Describethegeneticcodeandhowthenucleotidesequenceprescribestheaminoacidandtheprotein
sequence
The cellular process of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a mobile molecular copy of one or
moregeneswithanalphabetofA,C,G,anduracil(U).TranslationofthemRNAtemplateonribosomesconverts
nucleotide-basedgeneticinformationintoaproteinproduct.ThatisthecentraldogmaofDNA-proteinsynthesis.
PAGE: 419
408 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
Protein sequences consist of 20 commonly occurring amino acids; therefore, it can be said that the protein
alphabet consists of 20 “letters” (Figure 15.2). Different amino acids have different chemistries (such as acidic
versus basic, or polar and nonpolar) and different structural constraints. Variation in amino acid sequence is
responsible for the enormous variation in protein structure and function.
Figure15.2Structuresofthe20aminoacidsfoundinproteinsareshown.Eachaminoacidiscomposedofanamino
group(NH + ),acarboxylgroup(COO-),andasidechain(blue).Thesidechainmaybenonpolar,polar,orcharged,
3
aswellaslargeorsmall.Itisthevarietyofaminoacidsidechainsthatgivesrisetotheincrediblevariationofprotein
structure and function.
The Central Dogma: DNA Encodes RNA; RNA Encodes Protein
TheflowofgeneticinformationincellsfromDNAtomRNAtoproteinisdescribedbythecentraldogma(Figure
15.3), which states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, which in turn specify the sequence of amino
acids making up all proteins. The decoding of one molecule to another is performed by specific proteins and
RNAs. Because the information stored in DNA is so central to cellular function, it makes intuitive sense that
the cell would make mRNA copies of this information for protein synthesis, while keeping the DNA itself intact
and protected. The copying of DNA to RNA is relatively straightforward, with one nucleotide being added to
the mRNA strand for every nucleotide read in the DNA strand. The translation to protein is a bit more complex
because three mRNA nucleotides correspond to one amino acid in the polypeptide sequence. However, the
translation to protein is still systematic and colinear, such that nucleotides 1 to 3 correspond to amino acid 1,
nucleotides 4 to 6 correspond to amino acid 2, and so on.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 420
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 409
Figure 15.3 Instructions on DNA are transcribed onto messenger RNA. Ribosomes are able to read the genetic
information inscribed on a strand of messenger RNA and use this information to string amino acids together into a
protein.
The Genetic Code Is Degenerate and Universal
Eachaminoacidisdefinedbyathree-nucleotidesequencecalledthetripletcodon.Giventhedifferentnumbers
of“letters”inthemRNAandprotein“alphabets,”scientiststheorizedthatsingleaminoacidsmustberepresented
bycombinationsofnucleotides.Nucleotidedoubletswouldnotbesufficienttospecifyeveryaminoacidbecause
2
thereareonly16possibletwo-nucleotidecombinations(4 ).Incontrast,thereare64possiblenucleotidetriplets
PAGE: 421
410 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
3
(4 ),whichisfarmorethanthenumberofaminoacids.Scientiststheorizedthataminoacidswereencodedby
nucleotide triplets and that the genetic code was “degenerate.” In other words, a given amino acid could be
encodedbymorethanonenucleotidetriplet.Thiswaslaterconfirmedexperimentally:FrancisCrickandSydney
Brenner used the chemical mutagen proflavin to insert one, two, or three nucleotides into the gene of a virus.
When one or two nucleotides were inserted, the normal proteins were not produced. When three nucleotides
were inserted, the protein was synthesized and functional. This demonstrated that the amino acids must be
specifiedbygroupsofthreenucleotides.Thesenucleotidetripletsarecalledcodons.Theinsertionofoneortwo
nucleotides completely changed the triplet reading frame, thereby altering the message for every subsequent
aminoacid(Figure15.5).Thoughinsertionofthreenucleotidescausedanextraaminoacidtobeinsertedduring
translation, the integrity of the rest of the protein was maintained.
Scientists painstakingly solved the genetic code by translating synthetic mRNAs in vitro and sequencing the
proteins they specified (Figure 15.4).
Figure15.4ThisfigureshowsthegeneticcodefortranslatingeachnucleotidetripletinmRNAintoanaminoacidora
termination signal in a protein. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
In addition to codons that instruct the addition of a specific amino acid to a polypeptide chain, three of the 64
codons terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These triplets
are called nonsense codons, or stop codons. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to
specifyingtheaminoacidmethionine,italsoservesasthestartcodontoinitiatetranslation.Thereadingframe
fortranslationissetbytheAUGstartcodonnearthe5'endofthemRNA.Followingthestartcodon,themRNA
is read in groups of three until a stop codon is encountered.
The arrangement of the coding table reveals the structure of the code. There are sixteen "blocks" of codons,
each specified by the first and second nucleotides of the codons within the block, e.g., the "AC*" block that
correspondstotheaminoacidthreonine(Thr).Someblocksaredividedintoapyrimidinehalf,inwhichthecodon
endswithUorC,andapurinehalf,inwhichthecodonendswithAorG.Someaminoacidsgetawholeblock
offourcodons,likealanine(Ala),threonine(Thr)andproline(Pro).Somegetthepyrimidinehalfoftheirblock,
likehistidine(His)andasparagine(Asn).Othersgetthepurinehalfoftheirblock,likeglutamate(Glu)andlysine
(Lys). Note that some amino acids get a block and a half-block for a total of six codons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 422
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 411
The specification of a single amino acid by multiple similar codons is called "degeneracy." Degeneracy is
believed to be a cellular mechanism to reduce the negative impact of random mutations. Codons that specify
thesameaminoacidtypicallyonlydifferbyonenucleotide.Inaddition,aminoacidswithchemicallysimilarside
chainsareencodedbysimilarcodons.Forexample,aspartate(Asp)andglutamate(Glu),whichoccupytheGA*
block,arebothnegativelycharged.Thisnuanceofthegeneticcodeensuresthatasingle-nucleotidesubstitution
mutation might specify the same amino acid but have no effect or specify a similar amino acid, preventing the
protein from being rendered completely nonfunctional.
The genetic code is nearly universal. With a few minor exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic
code for protein synthesis. Conservation of codons means that a purified mRNA encoding the globin protein in
horses could be transferred to a tulip cell, and the tulip would synthesize horse globin. That there is only one
genetic code is powerful evidence that all of life on Earth shares a common origin, especially considering that
84
there are about 10 possible combinations of 20 amino acids and 64 triplet codons.
Transcribe a gene and translate it to protein using complementary pairing and the genetic code at this site
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/create_protein).
Figure 15.5 The deletion of two nucleotides shifts the reading frame of an mRNA and changes the entire protein
message, creating a nonfunctional protein or terminating protein synthesis altogether.
PAGE: 423
412 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
Which Has More DNA: A Kiwi or a Strawberry?
Figure15.6DoyouthinkthatakiwiorastrawberryhasmoreDNAperfruit?(credit“kiwi”:"Kelbv"/Flickr;credit:
“strawberry”: Alisdair McDiarmid)
Question: Would a kiwi and strawberry that are approximately the same size (Figure 15.6) also have
approximately the same amount of DNA?
Background:GenesarecarriedonchromosomesandaremadeofDNA.Allmammalsarediploid,meaning
they have two copies of each chromosome. However, not all plants are diploid. The common strawberry
is octoploid (8n) and the cultivated kiwi is hexaploid (6n). Research the total number of chromosomes in
the cells of each of these fruits and think about how this might correspond to the amount of DNA in these
fruits’ cell nuclei. What other factors might contribute to the total amount of DNA in a single fruit? Read
about the technique of DNA isolation to understand how each step in the isolation protocol helps liberate
and precipitate DNA.
Hypothesis: Hypothesize whether you would be able to detect a difference in DNA quantity from similarly
sized strawberries and kiwis. Which fruit do you think would yield more DNA?
Test your hypothesis: Isolate the DNA from a strawberry and a kiwi that are similarly sized. Perform the
experiment in at least triplicate for each fruit
1. PrepareabottleofDNAextractionbufferfrom900mLwater,50mLdishdetergent,andtwoteaspoons
of table salt. Mix by inversion (cap it and turn it upside down a few times).
2. Grind a strawberry and a kiwi by hand in a plastic bag, or using a mortar and pestle, or with a metal
bowl and the end of a blunt instrument. Grind for at least two minutes per fruit.
3. Add 10 mL of the DNA extraction buffer to each fruit, and mix well for at least one minute.
4. Remove cellular debris by filtering each fruit mixture through cheesecloth or porous cloth and into a
funnel placed in a test tube or an appropriate container.
5. Pour ice-cold ethanol or isopropanol (rubbing alcohol) into the test tube. You should observe white,
precipitated DNA.
6. Gather the DNA from each fruit by winding it around separate glass rods.
Recordyourobservations:BecauseyouarenotquantitativelymeasuringDNAvolume,youcanrecordfor
eachtrialwhetherthetwofruitsproducedthesameordifferentamountsofDNAasobservedbyeye.Ifone
ortheotherfruitproducednoticeablymoreDNA,recordthisaswell.Determinewhetheryourobservations
are consistent with several pieces of each fruit.
Analyze your data: Did you notice an obvious difference in the amount of DNA produced by each fruit?
Were your results reproducible?
Draw a conclusion: Given what you know about the number of chromosomes in each fruit, can you
concludethatchromosomenumbernecessarilycorrelatestoDNAamount?Canyouidentifyanydrawbacks
tothisprocedure?Ifyouhadaccesstoalaboratory,howcouldyoustandardizeyourcomparisonandmake
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 424
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 413
it more quantitative?
15.2 | Prokaryotic Transcription
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the different steps in prokaryotic transcription
• Discuss the role of promoters in prokaryotic transcription
• Describe how and when transcription is terminated
Theprokaryotes,whichincludeBacteriaandArchaea,aremostlysingle-celledorganismsthat,bydefinition,lack
membrane-boundnucleiandotherorganelles.Abacterialchromosomeisaclosedcirclethat,unlikeeukaryotic
chromosomes,isnotorganizedaroundhistoneproteins.ThecentralregionofthecellinwhichprokaryoticDNA
residesiscalledthenucleoidregion.Inaddition,prokaryotesoftenhaveabundantplasmids,whichareshorter,
circular DNA molecules that may only contain one or a few genes. Plasmids can be transferred independently
of the bacterial chromosome during cell division and often carry traits such as those involved with antibiotic
resistance.
Transcriptioninprokaryotes(andineukaryotes)requirestheDNAdoublehelixtopartiallyunwindintheregionof
mRNAsynthesis.Theregionofunwindingiscalledatranscriptionbubble.Transcriptionalwaysproceedsfrom
thesameDNAstrandforeachgene,whichiscalledthetemplatestrand.ThemRNAproductiscomplementary
to the template strand and is almost identical to the other DNA strand, called the nontemplate strand, or the
coding strand. The only nucleotide difference is that in mRNA, all of the T nucleotides are replaced with U
nucleotides(Figure15.7).InanRNAdoublehelix,AcanbindUviatwohydrogenbonds,justasinA–Tpairing
in a DNA double helix.
Figure15.7MessengerRNAisacopyofprotein-codinginformationinthecodingstrandofDNA,withthesubstitution
of U in the RNA for T in the coding sequence. However, new RNA nucleotides base pair with the nucleotides of the
templatestrand.RNAissynthesizedinits5'-3'direction,usingtheenzymeRNApolymerase.Asthetemplateisread,
the DNA unwinds ahead of the polymerase and then rewinds behind it.
ThenucleotidepairintheDNAdoublehelixthatcorrespondstothesitefromwhichthefirst5'mRNAnucleotide
istranscribediscalledthe+1site,ortheinitiationsite.Nucleotidesprecedingtheinitiationsitearedenotedwith
a“-”andaredesignatedupstreamnucleotides.Conversely,nucleotidesfollowingtheinitiationsitearedenoted
with “+” numbering and are calleddownstream nucleotides.
Initiation of Transcription in Prokaryotes
Prokaryotesdonothavemembrane-enclosednuclei.Therefore,theprocessesoftranscription,translation,and
PAGE: 425
414 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
mRNA degradation can all occur simultaneously. The intracellular level of a bacterial protein can quickly be
amplified by multiple transcription and translation events that occur concurrently on the same DNA template.
Prokaryoticgenomesareverycompact,andprokaryotictranscriptsoftencovermorethanonegeneorcistron(a
codingsequenceforasingleprotein).PolycistronicmRNAsarethentranslatedtoproducemorethanonekind
of protein.
Our discussion here will exemplify transcription by describing this process in Escherichia coli, a well-studied
eubacterial species. Although some differences exist between transcription in E. coli and transcription in
archaea, an understanding ofE. colitranscription can be applied to virtually all bacterial species.
Prokaryotic RNA Polymerase
Prokaryotes use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. In E. coli, the polymerase is
composedoffivepolypeptidesubunits,twoofwhichareidentical. Fourofthesesubunits,denotedα,α,β,and
β',comprisethepolymerasecoreenzyme.Thesesubunitsassembleeverytimeageneistranscribed,andthey
disassembleoncetranscriptioniscomplete.Eachsubunithasauniquerole;thetwoα-subunitsarenecessaryto
assemble the polymerase on the DNA; the β-subunit binds to the ribonucleoside triphosphate that will become
part of the nascent mRNA molecule; and the β' subunit binds the DNA template strand. The fifth subunit, σ, is
involved only in transcription initiation. It confers transcriptional specificity such that the polymerase begins to
synthesizemRNAfromanappropriateinitiationsite.Withoutσ,thecoreenzymewouldtranscribefromrandom
sitesandwouldproducemRNAmoleculesthatspecifiedproteingibberish.Thepolymerasecomprisedofallfive
subunits is called theholoenzyme.
Prokaryotic Promoters
A promoter is a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery, including RNA polymerase, binds
and initiates transcription. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes they regulate. The specific
sequenceofapromoterisveryimportantbecauseitdetermineswhetherthecorrespondinggeneistranscribed
all the time, some of the time, or infrequently. Although promoters vary among prokaryotic genomes, a few
elements are evolutionarily conserved in many species. At the -10 and -35 regions upstream of the initiation
site, there are two promoter consensus sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters and
across various bacterial species (Figure 15.8). The -10 sequence, called the -10 region, has the consensus
sequence TATAAT. The -35 sequence has the consensus sequence TTGACA. These consensus sequences
are recognized and bound by σ. Once this interaction is made, the subunits of the core enzyme bind to the
site. The A–T-rich -10 region facilitates unwinding of the DNA template, and several phosphodiester bonds are
made. The transcription initiation phase ends with the production of abortive transcripts, which are polymers of
approximately 10 nucleotides that are made and released.
Figure 15.8 The σ subunit of prokaryotic RNA polymerase recognizes consensus sequences found in the promoter
region upstream of the transcription start site. The σ subunit dissociates from the polymerase after transcription has
been initiated.
View this MolecularMovies animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/transcription) to see the first part of
transcription and the base sequence repetition of the TATA box.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 426
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 415
Elongation and Termination in Prokaryotes
The transcription elongation phase begins with the release of the σ subunit from the polymerase. The
dissociationofσallowsthecoreenzymetoproceedalongtheDNAtemplate,synthesizingmRNAinthe5'to3'
directionatarateofapproximately40nucleotidespersecond.Aselongationproceeds,theDNAiscontinuously
unwound ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind it. The base pairing between DNA and RNA is not
stable enough to maintain the stability of the mRNA synthesis components. Instead, the RNA polymerase acts
as a stable linker between the DNA template and the nascent RNA strands to ensure that elongation is not
interrupted prematurely.
Prokaryotic Termination Signals
Once a gene is transcribed, the prokaryotic polymerase needs to be instructed to dissociate from the DNA
template and liberate the newly made mRNA. Depending on the gene being transcribed, there are two kinds
of termination signals. One is protein-based and the other is RNA-based. Rho-dependent termination is
controlledbytherhoprotein,whichtracksalongbehindthepolymeraseonthegrowingmRNAchain.Nearthe
endofthegene,thepolymeraseencountersarunofGnucleotidesontheDNAtemplateanditstalls.Asaresult,
therhoproteincollideswiththepolymerase.TheinteractionwithrhoreleasesthemRNAfromthetranscription
bubble.
Rho-independent termination is controlled by specific sequences in the DNA template strand. As the
polymerase nears the end of the gene being transcribed, it encounters a region rich in C–G nucleotides. The
mRNAfoldsbackonitself,andthecomplementaryC–Gnucleotidesbindtogether.Theresultisastablehairpin
that causes the polymerase to stall as soon as it begins to transcribe a region rich in A–T nucleotides. The
complementary U–AregionofthemRNAtranscript formsonlyaweakinteraction withthetemplate DNA. This,
coupledwiththestalledpolymerase,inducesenoughinstabilityforthecoreenzymetobreakawayandliberate
the new mRNA transcript.
Upon termination, the process of transcription is complete. By the time termination occurs, the prokaryotic
transcript would already have been used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded protein
because these processes can occur concurrently. The unification of transcription, translation, and even mRNA
degradation is possible because all of these processes occur in the same 5' to 3' direction, and because there
is no membranous compartmentalization in the prokaryotic cell (Figure 15.9). In contrast, the presence of a
nucleus in eukaryotic cells precludes simultaneous transcription and translation.
Figure 15.9 Multiple polymerases can transcribe a single bacterial gene while numerous ribosomes concurrently
translatethemRNAtranscriptsintopolypeptides.Inthisway,aspecificproteincanrapidlyreachahighconcentration
in the bacterial cell.
Visit this BioStudio animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/transcription2) to see the process of
prokaryotic transcription.
PAGE: 427
416 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
15.3 | Eukaryotic Transcription
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the steps in eukaryotic transcription
• Discuss the role of RNA polymerases in transcription
• Compare and contrast the three RNA polymerases
• Explain the significance of transcription factors
Prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with a few key
differences.Themostimportantdifferencebetweenprokaryoteandeukaryotetranscriptionisduetothelatter’s
membrane-bound nucleus and organelles. With the genes bound in a nucleus, the eukaryotic cell must be
able to transport its mRNA to the cytoplasm and must protect its mRNA from degrading before it is translated.
Eukaryotesalsoemploythreedifferentpolymerasesthateachtranscribeadifferentsubsetofgenes.Eukaryotic
mRNAs are usuallymonogenic, meaning that they specify a single protein.
Initiation of Transcription in Eukaryotes
UnliketheprokaryoticpolymerasethatcanbindtoaDNAtemplateonitsown,eukaryotesrequireseveralother
proteins,calledtranscriptionfactors,tofirstbindtothepromoterregionandthentohelprecruittheappropriate
polymerase.
The Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
ThefeaturesofeukaryoticmRNAsynthesisaremarkedlymorecomplexthanthoseofprokaryotes.Insteadofa
single polymerase comprising five subunits, the eukaryotes have three polymerases that are each made up of
10subunitsormore.Eacheukaryoticpolymerasealsorequiresadistinctsetoftranscriptionfactorstobringitto
the DNA template.
RNApolymeraseIislocatedinthenucleolus,aspecializednuclearsubstructureinwhichribosomalRNA(rRNA)
is transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes (Table 15.1). The rRNA molecules are considered
structuralRNAsbecausetheyhaveacellularrolebutarenottranslatedintoprotein.TherRNAsarecomponents
oftheribosomeandareessentialtotheprocessoftranslation.RNApolymeraseIsynthesizesalloftherRNAs
fromthetandemlyduplicatedsetof18S,5.8S,and28Sribosomalgenes.(Notethatthe“S”designationapplies
to “Svedberg” units, a nonadditive value that characterizes the speed at which a particle sediments during
centrifugation.)
Locations, Products, and Sensitivities of the Three Eukaryotic RNA Polymerases
RNA Cellular α-Amanitin
Product of Transcription
Polymerase Compartment Sensitivity
I Nucleolus All rRNAs except 5S rRNA Insensitive
All protein-coding nuclear pre-
II Nucleus Extremely sensitive
mRNAs
5S rRNA, tRNAs, and small nuclear
III Nucleus Moderately sensitive
RNAs
Table 15.1
RNApolymeraseIIislocatedinthenucleusandsynthesizesallprotein-codingnuclearpre-mRNAs.Eukaryotic
pre-mRNAs undergo extensive processing after transcription but before translation. For clarity, this module’s
discussionoftranscriptionandtranslationineukaryoteswillusetheterm“mRNAs”todescribeonlythemature,
processed molecules that are ready to be translated. RNA polymerase II is responsible for transcribing the
overwhelming majority of eukaryotic genes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 428
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 417
RNA polymerase III is also located in the nucleus. This polymerase transcribes a variety of structural RNAs
that includes the 5S pre-rRNA, transfer pre-RNAs (pre-tRNAs), and small nuclear pre- RNAs. The tRNAs
have a critical role in translation; they serve as the “adaptor molecules” between the mRNA template and the
growingpolypeptidechain.SmallnuclearRNAshaveavarietyoffunctions,including“splicing”pre-mRNAsand
regulating transcription factors.
Ascientistcharacterizinganewgenecandeterminewhichpolymerasetranscribesitbytestingwhetherthegene
isexpressedinthepresenceofα-amanitin,anoligopeptidetoxinproducedbytheflyagarictoadstoolmushroom
andotherspeciesofAmanita.Interestingly,theα-amanitinaffectsthethreepolymerasesverydifferently(Table
15.1). RNA polymerase I is completely insensitive to α-amanitin, meaning that the polymerase can transcribe
DNAinvitrointhepresenceofthispoison.RNApolymeraseIIIismoderatelysensitivetothetoxin.Incontrast,
RNApolymeraseIIisextremelysensitivetoα-amanitin.Thetoxinpreventstheenzymefromprogressingdown
the DNA, and thus inhibits transcription. Knowing the transcribing polymerase can provide clues as to the
generalfunctionofthegenebeingstudied.BecauseRNApolymeraseIItranscribesthevastmajorityofgenes,
we will focus on this polymerase in our subsequent discussions about eukaryotic transcription factors and
promoters.
RNA Polymerase II Promoters and Transcription Factors
Eukaryotic promoters are much larger and more intricate than prokaryotic promoters. However, both have a
sequencesimilartothe-10sequenceofprokaryotes.Ineukaryotes,thissequenceiscalledtheTATAbox,and
has the consensus sequence TATAAA on the coding strand. It is located at -25 to -35 bases relative to the
initiation (+1) site (Figure 15.10). This sequence is not identical to the E. coli -10 box, but it conserves the
A–Trichelement.ThethermostabilityofA–TbondsislowandthishelpstheDNAtemplatetolocallyunwindin
preparation for transcription.
Instead of the simple σ factor that helps bind the prokaryotic RNA polymerase to its promoter, eukaryotes
assemble a complex of transcription factors required to recruit RNA polymerase II to a protein coding gene.
Transcriptionfactorsthatbindtothepromoterarecalledbasaltranscriptionfactors.Thesebasalfactorsareall
called TFII (for Transcription Factor/polymerase II) plus an additional letter (A-J). The core complex is TFIID,
whichincludesaTATA-bindingprotein(TBP).Theothertranscriptionfactorssystematicallyfallintoplaceonthe
DNAtemplate,witheachonefurtherstabilizingthepre-initiationcomplexandcontributingtotherecruitmentof
RNA polymerase II.
PAGE: 429
418 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
Figure15.10AgeneralizedpromoterofagenetranscribedbyRNApolymeraseIIisshown.Transcriptionfactors
recognizethepromoter.RNApolymeraseIIthenbindsandformsthetranscriptioninitiationcomplex.Ascientist
splicesaeukaryoticpromoterinfrontofabacterialgeneandinsertsthegeneinabacterialchromosome.Would
you expect the bacteria to transcribe the gene?
Some eukaryotic promoters also have a conserved CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) at approximately -80. Further
upstream of the TATA box, eukaryotic promoters may also contain one or more GC-rich boxes (GGCG) or
octamer boxes (ATTTGCAT). These elements bind cellular factors that increase the efficiency of transcription
initiation and are often identified in more “active” genes that are constantly being expressed by the cell.
Basal transcription factors are crucial in the formation of a preinitiation complex on the DNA template that
subsequently recruits RNA polymerase II for transcription initiation. The complexity of eukaryotic transcription
doesnotendwiththepolymerasesandpromoters.Anarmyofothertranscriptionfactors,whichbindtoupstream
enhancersandsilencers,alsohelptoregulatethefrequencywithwhichpre-mRNAissynthesizedfromagene.
Enhancers and silencers affect the efficiency of transcription but are not necessary for transcription to proceed.
Promoter Structures for RNA Polymerases I and III
The processes of bringing RNA polymerases I and III to the DNA template involve slightly less complex
collections of transcription factors, but the general theme is the same.
The conserved promoter elements for genes transcribed by polymerases I and III differ from those transcribed
by RNA polymerase II. RNA polymerase I transcribes genes that have two GC-rich promoter sequences in the
-45 to +20 region. These sequences alone are sufficient for transcription initiation to occur, but promoters with
additionalsequencesintheregionfrom-180to-105upstreamoftheinitiationsitewillfurtherenhanceinitiation.
GenesthataretranscribedbyRNApolymeraseIIIhaveupstreampromotersorpromotersthatoccurwithinthe
genes themselves.
Eukaryotic transcription is a tightly regulated process that requires a variety of proteins to interact with each
otherandwiththeDNAstrand.Althoughtheprocessoftranscriptionineukaryotesinvolvesagreatermetabolic
investment than in prokaryotes, it ensures that the cell transcribes precisely the pre-mRNAs that it needs for
protein synthesis.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 430
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 419
The Evolution of Promoters
Theevolutionofgenesmaybeafamiliarconcept.MutationscanoccuringenesduringDNAreplication,and
theresultmayormaynotbebeneficialtothecell.Byalteringanenzyme,structuralprotein,orsomeother
factor,theprocessofmutationcantransformfunctionsorphysicalfeatures.However,eukaryoticpromoters
and other gene regulatory sequences may evolve as well. For instance, consider a gene that, over many
generations, becomesmorevaluabletothecell.Maybethegeneencodesastructuralproteinthatthecell
needstosynthesizeinabundanceforacertainfunction.Ifthisisthecase,itwouldbebeneficialtothecell
for that gene’s promoter to recruit transcription factors more efficiently and increase gene expression.
Scientists examining the evolution of promoter sequences have reported varying results. In part, this is
becauseitisdifficulttoinferexactlywhereaeukaryoticpromoterbeginsandends.Somepromotersoccur
withingenes;othersarelocatedveryfarupstream, orevendownstream, ofthegenestheyareregulating.
However,whenresearcherslimitedtheirexaminationtohumancorepromotersequencesthatweredefined
experimentally as sequences that bind the preinitiation complex, they found that promoters evolve even
faster than protein-coding genes.
It is still unclear how promoter evolution might correspond to the evolution of humans or other complex
organisms. However, the evolution of a promoter to effectively make more or less of a given gene product
[1]
is an intriguing alternative to the evolution of the genes themselves.
Eukaryotic Elongation and Termination
Following the formation of the preinitiation complex, the polymerase is released from the other transcription
factors, and elongation is allowed to proceed as it does in prokaryotes with the polymerase synthesizing
pre-mRNA in the 5' to 3' direction. As discussed previously, RNA polymerase II transcribes the major share
of eukaryotic genes, so in this section we will focus on how this polymerase accomplishes elongation and
termination.
Although the enzymatic process of elongation is essentially the same in eukaryotes and prokaryotes, the DNA
template is considerably more complex. When eukaryotic cells are not dividing, their genes exist as a diffuse
mass of DNA and proteins called chromatin. The DNA is tightly packaged around charged histone proteins at
repeated intervals. These DNA–histone complexes, collectively called nucleosomes, are regularly spaced and
include 146 nucleotides of DNA wound around eight histones like thread around a spool.
For polynucleotide synthesis to occur, the transcription machinery needs to move histones out of the way
everytimeitencountersanucleosome.ThisisaccomplishedbyaspecialproteincomplexcalledFACT,which
standsfor“facilitates chromatintranscription.”ThiscomplexpullshistonesawayfromtheDNAtemplateasthe
polymerase moves along it. Once the pre-mRNA is synthesized, the FACT complex replaces the histones to
recreate the nucleosomes.
The termination of transcription is different for the different polymerases. Unlike in prokaryotes, elongation by
RNA polymerase II in eukaryotes takes place 1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides beyond the end of the gene being
transcribed. This pre-mRNA tail is subsequently removed by cleavage during mRNA processing. On the other
hand,RNApolymerasesIandIIIrequireterminationsignals.GenestranscribedbyRNApolymeraseIcontaina
specific18-nucleotidesequencethatisrecognizedbyaterminationprotein.TheprocessofterminationinRNA
polymerase III involves an mRNA hairpin similar to rho-independent termination of transcription in prokaryotes.
1. H Liang et al., “Fast evolution of core promoters in primate genomes,”Molecular Biology and Evolution25 (2008): 1239–44.
PAGE: 431
420 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
15.4 | RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the different steps in RNA processing
• Understand the significance of exons, introns, and splicing for mRNAs
• Explain how tRNAs and rRNAs are processed
Aftertranscription,eukaryoticpre-mRNAsmustundergoseveralprocessingstepsbeforetheycanbetranslated.
Eukaryotic (and prokaryotic) tRNAs and rRNAs also undergo processing before they can function as
components in the protein-synthesis machinery.
mRNA Processing
The eukaryotic pre-mRNA undergoes extensive processing before it is ready to be translated. Eukaryotic
protein-coding sequences are not continuous, as they are in prokaryotes. The coding sequences (exons) are
interrupted by noncoding introns, which must be removed to make a translatable mRNA. The additional steps
involved in eukaryotic mRNA maturation also create a molecule with a much longer half-life than a prokaryotic
mRNA. Eukaryotic mRNAs last for several hours, whereas the typical E. coli mRNA lasts no more than five
seconds.
Pre-mRNAs are first coated in RNA-stabilizing proteins; these protect the pre-mRNA from degradation while it
isprocessedandexportedoutofthenucleus.Thethreemostimportantstepsofpre-mRNAprocessingarethe
additionofstabilizingandsignalingfactorsatthe5'and3'endsofthemolecule,andtheremovaloftheintrons
(Figure 15.11). In rare cases, the mRNA transcript can be “edited” after it is transcribed.
Figure 15.11Eukaryotic mRNA contains introns that must be spliced out. A 5' cap and 3' poly-A tail are also added.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 432
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 421
RNA Editing in Trypanosomes
The trypanosomes are a group of protozoa that include the pathogen Trypanosoma brucei, which causes
nagana in cattle and sleeping sickness in humans throughout great areas of Africa (Figure 15.12). The
trypanosomeiscarriedbybitingfliesinthegenusGlossina(commonlycalledtsetseflies).Trypanosomes,
and virtually all other eukaryotes, have organelles called mitochondria that supply the cell with chemical
energy. Mitochondria are organelles that express their own DNA and are believed to be the remnants
of a symbiotic relationship between a eukaryote and an engulfed prokaryote. The mitochondrial DNA of
trypanosomes exhibit an interesting exception to the central dogma: their pre-mRNAs do not have the
correct information to specify a functional protein. Usually, this is because the mRNA is missing several U
nucleotides. The cell performs an additional RNA processing step calledRNA editingto remedy this.
Figure 15.12 Trypanosoma brucei is the causative agent of sleeping sickness in humans. The mRNAs of this
pathogenmustbemodifiedbytheadditionofnucleotidesbeforeproteinsynthesiscanoccur.(credit:modification
of work by Torsten Ochsenreiter)
Other genes in the mitochondrial genome encode 40- to 80-nucleotide guide RNAs. One or more of
these molecules interacts by complementary base pairing with some of the nucleotides in the pre-mRNA
transcript. However, the guide RNA has more A nucleotides than the pre-mRNA has U nucleotides with
whichtobind.Intheseregions,theguideRNAloopsout.The3'endsofguideRNAshavealongpoly-Utail,
andtheseUbasesareinsertedinregionsofthepre-mRNAtranscriptatwhichtheguideRNAsarelooped.
ThisprocessisentirelymediatedbyRNAmolecules.Thatis,guideRNAs—ratherthanproteins—serveas
the catalysts in RNA editing.
RNA editing is not just a phenomenon of trypanosomes. In the mitochondria of some plants, almost all
pre-mRNAs are edited. RNA editing has also been identified in mammals such as rats, rabbits, and even
humans. What could be the evolutionary reason for this additional step in pre-mRNA processing? One
possibility is that the mitochondria, being remnants of ancient prokaryotes, have an equally ancient RNA-
basedmethodforregulatinggeneexpression.Insupportofthishypothesis,editsmadetopre-mRNAsdiffer
dependingoncellularconditions.Althoughspeculative,theprocessofRNAeditingmaybeaholdoverfrom
a primordial time when RNA molecules, instead of proteins, were responsible for catalyzing reactions.
5' Capping
Whilethepre-mRNAisstillbeingsynthesized,a7-methylguanosinecapisaddedtothe5'endofthegrowing
transcript by a phosphate linkage. This functional group protects the nascent mRNA from degradation. In
addition, factors involved in protein synthesis recognize the cap to help initiate translation by ribosomes.
PAGE: 433
422 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
3' Poly-A Tail
Once elongation is complete, the pre-mRNA is cleaved by an endonuclease between an AAUAAA consensus
sequenceandaGU-richsequence,leavingtheAAUAAAsequenceonthepre-mRNA.Anenzymecalledpoly-A
polymerasethenaddsastringofapproximately200Aresidues,calledthepoly-Atail.Thismodificationfurther
protects the pre-mRNA from degradation and is also the binding site for a protein necessary for exporting the
processed mRNA to the cytoplasm.
Pre-mRNA Splicing
Eukaryotic genes are composed of exons, which correspond to protein-coding sequences (ex-on signifies that
they are expressed), and intervening sequences called introns (int-ron denotes their intervening role), which
maybeinvolvedingeneregulationbutareremovedfromthepre-mRNAduringprocessing.Intronsequencesin
mRNA do not encode functional proteins.
The discovery of introns came as a surprise to researchers in the 1970s who expected that pre-mRNAs would
specifyproteinsequenceswithoutfurtherprocessing,astheyhadobservedinprokaryotes.Thegenesofhigher
eukaryotes very often contain one or more introns. These regions may correspond to regulatory sequences;
however,thebiologicalsignificanceofhavingmanyintronsorhavingverylongintronsinageneisunclear.Itis
possible that introns slow down gene expression because it takes longer to transcribe pre-mRNAs with lots of
introns.Alternatively,intronsmaybenonfunctionalsequenceremnantsleftoverfromthefusionofancientgenes
throughout the course of evolution. This is supported by the fact that separate exons often encode separate
protein subunits or domains. For the most part, the sequences of introns can be mutated without ultimately
affecting the protein product.
All of a pre-mRNA’s introns must be completely and precisely removed before protein synthesis. If the process
errs by even a single nucleotide, the reading frame of the rejoined exons would shift, and the resulting protein
would be dysfunctional. The process of removing introns and reconnecting exons is called splicing (Figure
15.13). Introns are removed and degraded while the pre-mRNA is still in the nucleus. Splicing occurs by a
sequence-specific mechanism that ensures introns will be removed and exons rejoined with the accuracy and
precisionofasinglenucleotide.Althoughtheintronitselfisnoncoding,thebeginningandendofeachintronis
markedwithspecificnucleotides:GUatthe5'endandAGatthe3'endoftheintron.Thesplicingofpre-mRNAs
is conducted by complexes of proteins and RNA molecules called spliceosomes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 434
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 423
Figure 15.13 Pre-mRNA splicing involves the precise removal of introns from the primary RNA transcript. The
splicingprocessiscatalyzedbyproteincomplexescalledspliceosomesthatarecomposedofproteinsandRNA
moleculescalledsmallnuclearRNAs(snRNAs).Spliceosomesrecognizesequencesatthe5'and3'endofthe
intron.
Errorsinsplicingareimplicatedincancersandotherhumandiseases.Whatkindsofmutationsmightlead
to splicing errors? Think of different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur.
Note that more than 70 individual introns can be present, and each has to undergo the process of splicing—in
addition to 5' capping and the addition of a poly-A tail—just to generate a single, translatable mRNA molecule.
See how introns are removed during RNA splicing at this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
RNA_splicing).
Processing of tRNAs and rRNAs
The tRNAs and rRNAs are structural molecules that have roles in protein synthesis; however, these RNAs
are not themselves translated. Pre-rRNAs are transcribed, processed, and assembled into ribosomes in the
nucleolus.Pre-tRNAsaretranscribedandprocessedinthenucleusandthenreleasedintothecytoplasmwhere
they are linked to free amino acids for protein synthesis.
MostofthetRNAsandrRNAsineukaryotesandprokaryotesarefirsttranscribedasalongprecursormolecule
that spans multiple rRNAs or tRNAs. Enzymes then cleave the precursors into subunits corresponding to each
structural RNA. Some of the bases of pre-rRNAs are methylated; that is, a –CH3 methyl functional group is
addedforstability.Pre-tRNAmoleculesalsoundergomethylation.Aswithpre-mRNAs,subunitexcisionoccurs
in eukaryotic pre-RNAs destined to become tRNAs or rRNAs.
PAGE: 435
424 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
MaturerRNAsmakeupapproximately50percentofeachribosome.Someofaribosome’sRNAmoleculesare
purelystructural,whereasothershavecatalyticorbindingactivities.MaturetRNAstakeonathree-dimensional
structure through local regions of base pairing stabilized by intramolecular hydrogen bonding. The tRNA folds
to position the amino acid binding site at one end and the anticodon at the other end (Figure 15.14). The
anticodonisathree-nucleotidesequenceinatRNAthatinteractswithanmRNAcodonthroughcomplementary
base pairing.
Figure 15.14 This is a space-filling model of a tRNA molecule that adds the amino acid phenylalanine to a growing
polypeptidechain.TheanticodonAAGbindstheCodonUUConthemRNA.Theaminoacidphenylalanineisattached
to the other end of the tRNA.
15.5 | Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the different steps in protein synthesis
• Discuss the role of ribosomes in protein synthesis
Thesynthesisofproteinsconsumesmoreofacell’senergythananyothermetabolicprocess.Inturn,proteins
accountformoremassthananyothercomponentoflivingorganisms(withtheexceptionofwater),andproteins
performvirtuallyeveryfunctionofacell.Theprocessoftranslation,orproteinsynthesis,involvesthedecodingof
anmRNAmessageintoapolypeptideproduct.Aminoacidsarecovalentlystrungtogetherbyinterlinkingpeptide
bondsinlengthsrangingfromapproximately50tomorethan1000aminoacidresidues.Eachindividualamino
acidhasanaminogroup(NH2)andacarboxyl(COOH)group.Polypeptidesareformedwhentheaminogroup
of one amino acid forms an amide (i.e., peptide) bond with the carboxyl group of another amino acid (Figure
15.15). This reaction is catalyzed by ribosomes and generates one water molecule.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 436
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 425
Figure15.15Apeptidebondlinksthecarboxylendofoneaminoacidwiththeaminoendofanother,producingone
watermoleculeduringtheprocess.Forsimplicityinthisimage,onlythefunctionalgroupsinvolvedinthepeptidebond
are shown. The R and R' designations refer to the rest of each amino acid structure.
The Protein Synthesis Machinery
InadditiontothemRNAtemplate,manymoleculesandmacromoleculescontributetotheprocessoftranslation.
Thecompositionofeachcomponentmayvaryacrossspecies;forexample,ribosomesmayconsistofdifferent
numbersofrRNAsandpolypeptidesdependingontheorganism.However,thegeneralstructuresandfunctions
ofthe protein synthesis machineryarecomparable frombacteria tohumancells. Translation requiresthe input
of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. (Note: A ribosome can be thought of
as an enzyme whose amino acid binding sites are specified by mRNA.)
Click through the steps of this PBS interactive (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/prokary_protein) to see
protein synthesis in action.
Ribosomes
Even before an mRNA is translated, a cell must invest energy to build each of its ribosomes. In E. coli, there
are between 10,000 and 70,000 ribosomes present in each cell at any given time. A ribosome is a complex
macromoleculecomposedofstructuralandcatalyticrRNAs,andmanydistinctpolypeptides.Ineukaryotes,the
nucleolus is completely specialized for the synthesis and assembly of rRNAs.
Ribosomes exist in the cytoplasm of prokaryotes and in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum of
eukaryotes.Mitochondriaandchloroplastsalsohavetheirownribosomesinthematrixandstroma,whichlook
moresimilartoprokaryoticribosomes(andhavesimilardrugsensitivities)thantheribosomesjustoutsidetheir
outer membranes in the cytoplasm. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not
synthesizingproteinsandreassociateduringtheinitiationoftranslation.InE.coli,thesmallsubunitisdescribed
as30S,andthelargesubunitis50S,foratotalof70S(recallthatSvedbergunitsarenotadditive).Mammalian
ribosomeshaveasmall40Ssubunitandalarge60Ssubunit,foratotalof80S.Thesmallsubunitisresponsible
for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit sequentially binds tRNAs. Each mRNA molecule is
simultaneouslytranslatedbymanyribosomes,allsynthesizingproteininthesamedirection:readingthemRNA
from5'to3'andsynthesizingthepolypeptidefromtheNterminustotheCterminus.ThecompletemRNA/poly-
ribosome structure is called apolysome.
tRNAs
ThetRNAsarestructuralRNAmoleculesthatweretranscribedfromgenesbyRNApolymeraseIII. Depending
on the species, 40 to 60 types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm. Transfer RNAs serve as adaptor molecules.
EachtRNAcarriesaspecificaminoacidandrecognizesoneormoreofthemRNAcodonsthatdefinetheorder
of amino acids in a protein. Aminoacyl-tRNAs bind to the ribosome and add the corresponding amino acid to
PAGE: 437
426 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
thepolypeptidechain.Therefore,tRNAsarethemoleculesthatactually“translate”thelanguageofRNAintothe
language of proteins.
Of the 64 possible mRNA codons—or triplet combinations of A, U, G, and C—three specify the termination of
protein synthesis and 61 specify the addition of amino acids to the polypeptide chain. Of these 61, one codon
(AUG) also encodes the initiation of translation. Each tRNA anticodon can base pair with one or more of the
mRNA codons for its amino acid. For instance, if the sequence CUA occurred on an mRNA template in the
properreadingframe,itwouldbindaleucinetRNAexpressingthecomplementarysequence,GAU.Theability
of some tRNAs to match more than one codon is what gives the genetic code its blocky structure.
As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small
package. Consider that tRNAs need to interact with three factors: 1) they must be recognized by the correct
aminoacyl synthetase (see below); 2) they must be recognized by ribosomes; and 3) they must bind to the
correct sequence in mRNA.
Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases
Theprocessofpre-tRNAsynthesisbyRNApolymeraseIIIonlycreatestheRNAportionoftheadaptormolecule.
Thecorrespondingaminoacidmustbeaddedlater,oncethetRNAisprocessedandexportedtothecytoplasm.
Through the process of tRNA “charging,” each tRNA molecule is linked to its correct amino acid by one of a
groupofenzymescalledaminoacyltRNAsynthetases.AtleastonetypeofaminoacyltRNAsynthetaseexists
for each of the 20 amino acids; the exact number of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases varies by species. These
enzymes first bind and hydrolyze ATP to catalyze a high-energy bond between an amino acid and adenosine
monophosphate(AMP);apyrophosphatemoleculeisexpelledinthisreaction.Theactivatedaminoacidisthen
transferred to the tRNA, and AMP is released. The term "charging" is appropriate, since the high-energy bond
that attaches an amino acid to its tRNA is later used to drive the formation of the peptide bond. Each tRNA is
named for its amino acid.
The Mechanism of Protein Synthesis
As with mRNA synthesis, protein synthesis can be divided into three phases: initiation, elongation, and
termination. The process of translation is similar in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Here we’ll explore how
translation occurs in E. coli, a representative prokaryote, and specify any differences between prokaryotic and
eukaryotic translation.
Initiation of Translation
Proteinsynthesisbeginswiththeformationofaninitiationcomplex.InE.coli,thiscomplexinvolvesthesmall
30S ribosome, the mRNA template, three initiation factors (IFs; IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3), and a special initiator
Metf
tRNA, called tRNA .
InE.colimRNA,asequenceupstreamofthefirstAUGcodon,calledtheShine-Dalgarnosequence(AGGAGG),
interacts with the rRNA molecules that compose the ribosome. This interaction anchors the 30S ribosomal
subunit at the correct location on the mRNA template. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), which is a purine
nucleotidetriphosphate,actsasanenergysourceduringtranslation—bothatthestartofelongationandduring
the ribosome’s translocation. Binding of the mRNA to the 30S ribosome also requires IF-III.
The initiator tRNA then interacts with the start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG). This tRNA carries the amino
acid methionine, which is formylated after its attachment to the tRNA. The formylation creates a "faux" peptide
Metf
bond between the formyl carboxyl group and the amino group of the methionine. Binding of the fMet-tRNA
is mediated by the initiation factor IF-2. The fMet begins every polypeptide chain synthesized by E. coli, but
it is usually removed after translation is complete. When an in-frame AUG is encountered during translation
Met
elongation,anon-formylatedmethionineisinsertedbyaregularMet-tRNA .Aftertheformationoftheinitiation
complex,the30Sribosomalsubunitisjoinedbythe50Ssubunittoformthetranslationcomplex.Ineukaryotes,
a similar initiation complex forms, comprising mRNA, the 40S small ribosomal subunit, eukaryotic IFs, and
nucleosidetriphosphates(GTPandATP).ThemethionineonthechargedinitiatortRNA,calledMet-tRNAi,isnot
formylated. However, Met-tRNAiis distinct from other Met-tRNAs in that it can bind IFs.
Instead of depositing at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence, the eukaryotic initiation complex recognizes the
7-methylguanosinecapatthe5'endofthemRNA.Acap-bindingprotein(CBP)andseveralotherIFsassistthe
movementoftheribosometothe5'cap.Onceatthecap,theinitiationcomplextracksalongthemRNAinthe5'
to3'direction,searchingfortheAUGstartcodon.ManyeukaryoticmRNAsaretranslatedfromthefirstAUG,but
this is not always the case. According to Kozak’s rules, the nucleotides around the AUG indicate whether it is
thecorrectstartcodon.Kozak’srulesstatethatthefollowingconsensussequencemustappeararoundtheAUG
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 438
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 427
ofvertebrategenes:5'-gccRccAUGG-3'.TheR(forpurine)indicatesasitethatcanbeeitherAorG,butcannot
be C or U. Essentially, the closer the sequence is to this consensus, the higher the efficiency of translation.
Once the appropriate AUG is identified, the other proteins and CBP dissociate, and the 60S subunit binds
to the complex of Met-tRNAi, mRNA, and the 40S subunit. This step completes the initiation of translation in
eukaryotes.
Translation, Elongation, and Termination
In prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the basics of elongation are the same, so we will review elongation from the
perspectiveofE.coli.Whenthetranslationcomplexisformed,thetRNAbindingregionoftheribosomeconsists
ofthreecompartments. TheA(aminoacyl)sitebindsincomingchargedaminoacyltRNAs.TheP(peptidyl)site
bindschargedtRNAscarryingaminoacidsthathaveformedpeptidebondswiththegrowingpolypeptidechain
buthavenotyetdissociatedfromtheircorrespondingtRNA.TheE(exit)sitereleasesdissociatedtRNAssothat
theycanberechargedwithfreeaminoacids.Theinitiatingmethionyl-tRNA,however,occupiesthePsiteatthe
beginning of the elongation phase of translation in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
During translation elongation, the mRNA template provides tRNA binding specificity. As the ribosome moves
along the mRNA, each mRNA codon comes into register, and specific binding with the corresponding charged
tRNA anticodon is ensured. If mRNA were not present in the elongation complex, the ribosome would bind
tRNAs nonspecifically and randomly (?).
Elongation proceeds with charged tRNAs sequentially entering and leaving the ribosome as each new amino
acidisaddedtothepolypeptidechain.MovementofatRNAfromAtoPtoEsiteisinducedbyconformational
changes that advance the ribosome by three bases in the 3' direction. The energy for each step along the
ribosome is donated by elongation factors that hydrolyze GTP. GTP energy is required both for the binding of
a new aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site and for its translocation to the P site after formation of the peptide bond.
Peptide bonds form between the amino group of the amino acid attached to the A-site tRNA and the carboxyl
groupoftheaminoacidattachedtotheP-sitetRNA.Theformationofeachpeptidebondiscatalyzedbypeptidyl
transferase, an RNA-based enzyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit. The energy for each
peptidebondformationisderivedfromthehigh-energybondlinkingeachaminoacidtoitstRNA.Afterpeptide
bond formation, the A-site tRNA that now holds the growing peptide chain moves to the P site, and the P-site
tRNA that is now empty moves to the E site and is expelled from the ribosome (Figure 15.16). Amazingly, the
E. coli translation apparatus takes only 0.05 seconds to add each amino acid, meaning that a 200-amino-acid
protein can be translated in just 10 seconds.
PAGE: 439
428 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
Figure 15.16TranslationbeginswhenaninitiatortRNAanticodonrecognizesastartcodononmRNAboundto
asmallribosomalsubunit. Thelargeribosomalsubunit joinsthesmallsubunit, andasecondtRNA isrecruited.
AsthemRNAmovesrelativetotheribosome,successivetRNAsmovethroughtheribosomeandthepolypeptide
chain is formed. Entry of a release factor into the A site terminates translation and the components dissociate.
Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks the A site on the
bacterial ribosome, and chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What specific effect would you expect
each of these antibiotics to have on protein synthesis?
Tetracycline would directly affect:
a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
b. ribosome assembly
c. growth of the protein chain
Chloramphenicol would directly affect:
a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
b. ribosome assembly
c. growth of the protein chain
Termination of translation occurs when a nonsense codon (UAA, UAG, or UGA) is encountered. Upon aligning
with the A site, these nonsense codons are recognized by protein release factors that resemble tRNAs. The
releasing factors in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes instruct peptidyl transferase to add a water molecule to
the carboxyl end of the P-site amino acid. This reaction forces the P-site amino acid to detach from its tRNA,
andthenewlymadeproteinisreleased.ThesmallandlargeribosomalsubunitsdissociatefromthemRNAand
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 440
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 429
from each other; they are recruited almost immediately into another translation initiation complex. After many
ribosomes have completed translation, the mRNA is degraded so the nucleotides can be reused in another
transcription reaction.
Protein Folding, Modification, and Targeting
During and after translation, individual amino acids may be chemically modified, signal sequences appended,
andthenewprotein“folded”intoadistinctthree-dimensionalstructureasaresultofintramolecularinteractions.
A signal sequence is a short sequence at the amino end of a protein that directs it to a specific cellular
compartment. These sequences can be thought of as the protein’s “train ticket” to its ultimate destination, and
are recognized by signal-recognition proteins that act as conductors. For instance, a specific signal sequence
terminuswilldirectaproteintothemitochondriaorchloroplasts(inplants).Oncetheproteinreachesitscellular
destination, the signal sequence is usually clipped off.
Many proteins fold spontaneously, but some proteins require helper molecules, called chaperones, to prevent
them from aggregating during the complicated process of folding. Even if a protein is properly specified by
its corresponding mRNA, it could take on a completely dysfunctional shape if abnormal temperature or pH
conditions prevent it from folding correctly.
PAGE: 441
430 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
KEY TERMS
7-methylguanosine cap modificationaddedtothe5'endofpre-mRNAstoprotectmRNAfromdegradationand
assist translation
aminoacyl tRNA synthetase enzymethat “charges”tRNA molecules bycatalyzing abondbetween the tRNA
and a corresponding amino acid
anticodon three-nucleotide sequence in a tRNA molecule that corresponds to an mRNA codon
CAAT box (GGCCAATCT) essential eukaryotic promoter sequence involved in binding transcription factors
central dogma states that genes specify the sequence of mRNAs, which in turn specify the sequence of
proteins
codon three consecutive nucleotides in mRNA that specify the insertion of an amino acid or the release of a
polypeptide chain during translation
colinear in terms of RNA and protein, three “units” of RNA (nucleotides) specify one “unit” of protein (amino
acid) in a consecutive fashion
consensus DNA sequence that is used by many species to perform the same or similar functions
core enzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting of α, α, β, and β' but missing σ; this complex performs
elongation
degeneracy (of the genetic code) describes that a given amino acid can be encoded by more than one
nucleotide triplet; the code is degenerate, but not ambiguous
downstream nucleotides following the initiation site in the direction of mRNA transcription; in general,
sequences that are toward the 3' end relative to a site on the mRNA
exon sequence present in protein-coding mRNA after completion of pre-mRNA splicing
FACT complexthat “facilitates chromatin transcription” bydisassembling nucleosomes aheadof atranscribing
RNA polymerase II and reassembling them after the polymerase passes by
GC-rich box (GGCG) nonessential eukaryotic promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to increase the
efficiency of transcription; may be present several times in a promoter
hairpin structure of RNA when it folds back on itself and forms intramolecular hydrogen bonds between
complementary nucleotides
holoenzyme prokaryotic RNA polymerase consisting of α, α, β, β', and σ; this complex is responsible for
transcription initiation
initiation site nucleotide from which mRNA synthesis proceeds in the 5' to 3' direction; denoted with a “+1”
initiator tRNA in prokaryotes, called tRNAM
f
et; in eukaryotes, called tRNAi; a tRNA that interacts with a start
codon, binds directly to the ribosome P site, and links to a special methionine to begin a polypeptide chain
intron non–protein-coding intervening sequences that are spliced from mRNA during processing
Kozak’s rules determinesthecorrectinitiationAUGinaeukaryoticmRNA;thefollowingconsensussequence
must appear around the AUG: 5’-GCC(purine)CCAUGG-3’; the bolded bases are most important
nonsense codon one of the three mRNA codons that specifies termination of translation
nontemplate strand strand of DNA that is not used to transcribe mRNA; this strand is identical to the mRNA
except that T nucleotides in the DNA are replaced by U nucleotides in the mRNA
Octamer box (ATTTGCAT) nonessential eukaryotic promoter sequence that binds cellular factors to increase
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 442
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 431
the efficiency of transcription; may be present several times in a promoter
peptidyl transferase RNA-based enzyme that is integrated into the 50S ribosomal subunit and catalyzes the
formation of peptide bonds
plasmid extrachromosomal,covalentlyclosed,circularDNAmoleculethatmayonlycontainoneorafewgenes;
common in prokaryotes
poly-A tail modificationaddedtothe3'endofpre-mRNAstoprotectmRNAfromdegradationandassistmRNA
export from the nucleus
polysome mRNA molecule simultaneously being translated by many ribosomes all going in the same direction
preinitiation complex cluster of transcription factors and other proteins that recruit RNA polymerase II for
transcription of a DNA template
promoter DNA sequence to which RNA polymerase and associated factors bind and initiate transcription
reading frame sequenceoftripletcodonsinmRNAthatspecifyaparticularprotein;aribosomeshiftofoneor
two nucleotides in either direction completely abolishes synthesis of that protein
rho-dependent termination in prokaryotes, termination of transcription by an interaction between RNA
polymerase and the rho protein at a run of G nucleotides on the DNA template
rho-independent termination sequence-dependent termination of prokaryotic mRNA synthesis; caused by
hairpin formation in the mRNA that stalls the polymerase
RNA editing direct alteration of one or more nucleotides in an mRNA that has already been synthesized
Shine-Dalgarno sequence (AGGAGG); initiates prokaryotic translation by interacting with rRNA molecules
comprising the 30S ribosome
signal sequence short tail of amino acids that directs a protein to a specific cellular compartment
small nuclear RNA molecules synthesized by RNA polymerase III that have a variety of functions, including
splicing pre-mRNAs and regulating transcription factors
splicing process of removing introns and reconnecting exons in a pre-mRNA
start codon AUG (or rarely, GUG) on an mRNA from which translation begins; always specifies methionine
TATA box conservedpromotersequenceineukaryotesandprokaryotesthathelpstoestablishtheinitiationsite
for transcription
template strand strand of DNA that specifies the complementary mRNA molecule
transcription bubble region of locally unwound DNA that allows for transcription of mRNA
upstream nucleotidesprecedingtheinitiationsite;ingeneral,sequencestowardthe5'endrelativetoasiteon
the mRNA
CHAPTER SUMMARY
15.1The Genetic Code
The genetic code refers to the DNA alphabet (A, T, C, G), the RNA alphabet (A, U, C, G), and the polypeptide
alphabet (20 amino acids). The central dogma describes the flow of genetic information in the cell from genes
to mRNA to proteins. Genes are used to make mRNA by the process of transcription; mRNA is used to
synthesize proteins by the process of translation. The genetic code is degenerate because 64 triplet codons in
mRNA specify only 20 amino acids and three nonsense codons. Most amino acids have several similar
codons. Almost every species on the planet uses the same genetic code.
PAGE: 443
432 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
15.2Prokaryotic Transcription
In prokaryotes, mRNA synthesis is initiated at a promoter sequence on the DNA template comprising two
consensus sequences that recruit RNA polymerase. The prokaryotic polymerase consists of a core enzyme of
four protein subunits and aσprotein that assists only with initiation. Elongation synthesizes mRNA in the 5' to
3' direction at a rate of 40 nucleotides per second. Termination liberates the mRNA and occurs either by rho
protein interaction or by the formation of an mRNA hairpin.
15.3Eukaryotic Transcription
Transcription in eukaryotes involves one of three types of polymerases, depending on the gene being
transcribed. RNA polymerase II transcribes all of the protein-coding genes, whereas RNA polymerase I
transcribes the tandemly duplicated rRNA genes, and RNA polymerase III transcribes various small RNAs, like
the 5S rRNA, tRNA, and small nuclear RNA genes. The initiation of transcription in eukaryotes involves the
binding of several transcription factors to complex promoter sequences that are usually located upstream of the
gene being copied. The mRNA is synthesized in the 5' to 3' direction, and the FACT complex moves and
reassembles nucleosomes as the polymerase passes by. Whereas RNA polymerases I and III terminate
transcription by protein- or RNA hairpin-dependent methods, RNA polymerase II transcribes for 1,000 or more
nucleotides beyond the gene template and cleaves the excess during pre-mRNA processing.
15.4RNA Processing in Eukaryotes
Eukaryotic pre-mRNAs are modified with a 5' methylguanosine cap and a poly-A tail. These structures protect
the mature mRNA from degradation and help export it from the nucleus. Pre-mRNAs also undergo splicing, in
which introns are removed and exons are reconnected with single-nucleotide accuracy. Only finished mRNAs
that have undergone 5' capping, 3' polyadenylation, and intron splicing are exported from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. Pre-rRNAs and pre-tRNAs may be processed by intramolecular cleavage, splicing, methylation, and
chemical conversion of nucleotides. Rarely, RNA editing is also performed to insert missing bases after an
mRNA has been synthesized.
15.5Ribosomes and Protein Synthesis
The players in translation include the mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors. The
small ribosomal subunit binds to the mRNA template either at the Shine-Dalgarno sequence (prokaryotes) or
the 5' cap (eukaryotes). Translation begins at the initiating AUG on the mRNA, specifying methionine. The
formation of peptide bonds occurs between sequential amino acids matched to the mRNA template by their
tRNAs according to the genetic code. Charged tRNAs enter the ribosomal A site, and their amino acid bonds
with the amino acid at the P site. The entire mRNA is translated in three-nucleotide “steps” of the ribosome.
When a nonsense codon is encountered, a release factor binds and dissociates the components and frees the
new protein. Folding of the protein occurs during and after translation.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 15.11A scientist splices a eukaryotic antibiotics to have on protein synthesis?
promoter in front of a bacterial gene and inserts the
Tetracycline would directly affect:
gene in a bacterial chromosome. Would you expect
the bacteria to transcribe the gene?
a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
2.Figure 15.13Errors in splicing are implicated in
b. ribosome assembly
cancers and other human diseases. What kinds of
c. growth of the protein chain
mutations might lead to splicing errors? Think of
different possible outcomes if splicing errors occur. Chloramphenicol would directly affect
3.Figure 15.16Many antibiotics inhibit bacterial
protein synthesis. For example, tetracycline blocks a. tRNA binding to the ribosome
the A site on the bacterial ribosome, and b. ribosome assembly
chloramphenicol blocks peptidyl transfer. What c. growth of the protein chain
specific effect would you expect each of these
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 444
Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins 433
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The AUC and AUA codons in mRNA both specify a. A > B > C
isoleucine. What feature of the genetic code explains b. B > C > A
this? c. C > B > A
a. complementarity d. A > C > B
b. nonsense codons
10.Which feature of promoters can be found in both
c. universality
prokaryotes and eukaryotes?
d. degeneracy
a. GC box
5.How many nucleotides are in 12 mRNA codons? b. TATA box
c. octamer box
a. 12 d. -10 and -35 sequences
b. 24
11.What transcripts will be most affected by low
c. 36
levels of α-amanitin?
d. 48
a. 18S and 28S rRNAs
6.Which event contradicts the central dogma of b. pre-mRNAs
molecular biology? c. 5S rRNAs and tRNAs
a. Poly-A polymerase enzymes process mRNA d. other small nuclear RNAs
in the nucleus.
12.How do enhancers and promoters differ?
b. Endonuclease enzymes splice out and
repair damaged DNA.
a. Enhancers bind transcription factors to
c. Scientists use reverse transcriptase
silence gene expression, while promoters
enzymes to make DNA from RNA.
activate transcription.
d. Codons specifying amino acids are
b. Enhancers increase the efficiency of gene
degenerate and universal.
expression, but are not essential for
7.Which subunit of theE. colipolymerase confers transcription. Promoter recognition is
specificity to transcription? essential to transcription initiation.
a. α c. Promoters bind transcription factors to
b. β increase the efficiency of transcription.
c. β' Enhancers bind RNA polymerases to initiate
d. σ transcription.
d. There is no difference. Both are
8.The -10 and -35 regions of prokaryotic promoters
transcription factor-binding sequences in
are called consensus sequences because ________.
DNA.
a. they are identical in all bacterial species 13.Which pre-mRNA processing step is important for
b. they are similar in all bacterial species initiating translation?
c. they exist in all organisms a. poly-A tail
d. they have the same function in all b. RNA editing
organisms c. splicing
d. 7-methylguanosine cap
9.Three different bacteria species have the following
consensus sequences upstream of a conserved 14.What processing step enhances the stability of
gene. pre-tRNAs and pre-rRNAs?
a. methylation
b. nucleotide modification
Species A Species B Species C
c. cleavage
-10 TAATAAT TTTAAT TATATT d. splicing
-35 TTGACA TTGGCC TTGAAA 15.A scientist identifies a pre-mRNA with the
following structure.
Table 15.2
Order the bacteria from most to least efficient
initiation of gene transcription. What is the predicted size of the corresponding
mature mRNA in base pairs (bp), excluding the 5’
cap and 3’ poly-A tail?
PAGE: 445
434 Chapter 15 | Genes and Proteins
a. 220bp 18.A scientist introduces a mutation that makes the
b. 295bp 60S ribosomal subunit nonfunctional in a human cell
c. 140bp line. What would be the predicted effect on
d. 435bp translation?
a. Translation stalls after the initiation AUG
16.The RNA components of ribosomes are
codon is identified.
synthesized in the ________.
b. The ribosome cannot catalyze the formation
a. cytoplasm
of peptide bonds between the tRNAs in the
b. nucleus
A and P sites.
c. nucleolus
c. The ribosome cannot interact with mRNAs.
d. endoplasmic reticulum
d. tRNAs cannot exit the E site of the
17.In any given species, there are at least how many ribosome.
types of aminoacyl tRNA synthetases?
a. 20
b. 40
c. 100
d. 200
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
19.Imagine if there were 200 commonly occurring transcribed? (Hint: Be sure to identify the initiation
amino acids instead of 20. Given what you know site.)
about the genetic code, what would be the shortest
25.A scientist observes that a cell has an RNA
possible codon length? Explain.
polymerase deficiency that prevents it from making
20.Discuss how degeneracy of the genetic code proteins. Describe three additional observations that
makes cells more robust to mutations. would together support the conclusion that a defect in
RNA polymerase I activity, and not problems with the
21.A scientist sequencing mRNA identifies the
other polymerases, causes the defect.
following strand:
CUAUGUGUCGUAACAGCCGAUGACCCG 26.Chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients often
harbor nonsense mutations in their spliceosome
What is the sequence of the amino acid chain this
machinery. Describe how this mutation of the
mRNA makes when it is translated?
spliceosome would change the final location and
22.If mRNA is complementary to the DNA template sequence of a pre-mRNA.
strand and the DNA template strand is
27.Transcribe and translate the following DNA
complementary to the DNA nontemplate strand, then
sequence (nontemplate strand): 5'-
why are base sequences of mRNA and the DNA
ATGGCCGGTTATTAAGCA-3'
nontemplate strand not identical? Could they ever
be? 28.Explain how single nucleotide changes can have
vastly different effects on protein function.
23.In your own words, describe the difference
between rho-dependent and rho-independent 29.A normal mRNA that reads 5’ –
termination of transcription in prokaryotes. UGCCAUGGUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC– 3’
has an insertion mutation that changes the sequence
24.A fragment of bacterial DNA reads:
to 5’
3’ -UGCCAUGGUUAAUAACACAUGAGGCCUGAAC–
–TACCTATAATCTCAATTGATAGAAGCACTCTAC– 3’. Translate the original mRNA and the mutated
5’ mRNA, and explain how insertion mutations can
Assuming that this fragment is the template strand, have dramatic effects on proteins. (Hint: Be sure to
what is the sequence of mRNA that would be find the initiation site.)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 446
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 435
16 | GENE EXPRESSION
Figure16.1Thegeneticcontentofeachsomaticcellinanorganismisthesame,butnotallgenesareexpressedin
everycell.Thecontrolofwhichgenesareexpresseddictateswhetheracellis,forexample,(a)aneyecellor(b)aliver
cell. It is the differential gene expression patterns that arise in different cells that give rise to (c) a complete organism.
Chapter Outline
16.1:Regulation of Gene Expression
16.2:Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
16.3:Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
16.4:Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
16.5:Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
16.6:Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational Gene Regulation
16.7:Cancer and Gene Regulation
Introduction
EachsomaticcellinthebodygenerallycontainsthesameDNA.Afewexceptionsincluderedbloodcells,which
containnoDNAintheirmaturestate,andsomeimmunesystemcellsthatrearrangetheirDNAwhileproducing
antibodies. In general, however, the genes that determine whether you have green eyes, brown hair, and how
fastyoumetabolizefoodarethesameinthecellsinyoureyesandyourliver,eventhoughtheseorgansfunction
quite differently. If each cell has the same DNA, how is it that cells or organs are different? Why do cells in the
eye differ so dramatically from cells in the liver?
Whereas each cell shares the same genome and DNA sequence, each cell does not turn on, or express, the
same set of genes. Each cell type needs a different set of proteins to perform its function. Therefore, only a
small subset of proteins is expressed in a cell. For the proteins to be expressed, the DNA must be transcribed
into RNA and the RNA must be translated into protein. In a given cell type, not all genes encoded in the DNA
are transcribed into RNA or translated into protein because specific cells in our body have specific functions.
Specialized proteins that make up the eye (iris, lens, and cornea) are only expressed in the eye, whereas the
specialized proteins in the heart (pacemaker cells, heart muscle, and valves) are only expressed in the heart.
At any given time, only a subset of all of the genes encoded by our DNA are expressed and translated into
proteins.Theexpressionofspecificgenesisahighlyregulatedprocesswithmanylevelsandstagesofcontrol.
This complexity ensures the proper expression in the proper cell at the proper time.
PAGE: 447
436 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
16.1 | Regulation of Gene Expression
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss why every cell does not express all of its genes all of the time
• Describe how prokaryotic gene regulation occurs at the transcriptional level
• Discuss how eukaryotic gene regulation occurs at the epigenetic, transcriptional, post-transcriptional,
translational, and post-translational levels
For a cell to function properly, necessary proteins must be synthesized at the proper time and place. All cells
control or regulate the synthesis of proteins from information encoded in their DNA. The process of turning on
a gene to produce RNA and protein is called gene expression. Whether in a simple unicellular organism or a
complex multi-cellular organism, each cell controls when and how its genes are expressed. For this to occur,
theremustbeinternalchemicalmechanismsthatcontrolwhenageneisexpressedtomakeRNAandprotein,
howmuchoftheproteinismade,andwhenitistimetostopmakingthatproteinbecauseitisnolongerneeded.
Theregulationofgeneexpressionconservesenergyandspace.Itwouldrequireasignificantamountofenergy
foranorganismtoexpresseverygeneatalltimes,soitismoreenergyefficienttoturnonthegenesonlywhen
theyarerequired.Inaddition,onlyexpressingasubsetofgenesineachcellsavesspacebecauseDNAmustbe
unwoundfromitstightlycoiledstructuretotranscribeandtranslatetheDNA.Cellswouldhavetobeenormous
if every protein were expressed in every cell all the time.
Thecontrolofgeneexpressionisextremelycomplex.Malfunctionsinthisprocessaredetrimentaltothecelland
can lead to the development of many diseases, including cancer.
Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression
To understand how gene expression is regulated, we must first understand how a gene codes for a functional
protein in a cell. The process occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, just in slightly different manners.
Prokaryotic organisms are single-celled organisms that lack a cell nucleus, and their DNA therefore floats
freelyinthecellcytoplasm.Tosynthesizeaprotein,theprocessesoftranscriptionandtranslationoccuralmost
simultaneously. When the resulting protein is no longer needed, transcription stops. As a result, the primary
method to control what type of protein and how much of each protein is expressed in a prokaryotic cell is
the regulation of DNA transcription. All of the subsequent steps occur automatically. When more protein is
required, more transcription occurs. Therefore, in prokaryotic cells, the control of gene expression is mostly at
the transcriptional level.
Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have intracellular organelles that add to their complexity. In eukaryotic cells, the
DNA is contained inside the cell’s nucleus and there it is transcribed into RNA. The newly synthesized RNA
is then transported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm, where ribosomes translate the RNA into protein.
Theprocessesoftranscriptionandtranslationarephysicallyseparatedbythenuclearmembrane;transcription
occursonlywithinthenucleus,andtranslationoccursonlyoutsidethenucleusinthecytoplasm.Theregulation
of gene expression can occur at all stages of the process (Figure 16.2). Regulation may occur when the DNA
is uncoiled and loosened from nucleosomes to bind transcription factors ( epigenetic level), when the RNA
is transcribed ( transcriptional level), when the RNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm after it is
transcribed(post-transcriptionallevel),whentheRNAistranslatedintoprotein(translationallevel),orafter
the protein has been made (post-translationallevel).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 448
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 437
Figure16.2Regulationinprokaryotesandeukaryotes.Prokaryotictranscriptionandtranslationoccursimultaneously
in the cytoplasm, and regulation occurs at the transcriptional level. Eukaryotic gene expression is regulated during
transcriptionandRNAprocessing,whichtakeplaceinthenucleus,andduringproteintranslation,whichtakesplace
in the cytoplasm. Further regulation may occur through post-translational modifications of proteins.
The differences in the regulation of gene expression between prokaryotes and eukaryotes are summarized in
Table 16.1. The regulation of gene expression is discussed in detail in subsequent modules.
Differences in the Regulation of Gene Expression of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic
Organisms
Prokaryotic organisms Eukaryotic organisms
Lack a membrane-bound nucleus Contain nucleus
DNA is found in the cytoplasm DNA is confined to the nuclear compartment
RNA transcription and protein
RNA transcription occurs prior to protein formation, and it takes place in
formation occur almost
the nucleus. Translation of RNA to protein occurs in the cytoplasm.
simultaneously
Gene expression is regulated
Gene expression is regulated at many levels (epigenetic, transcriptional,
primarily at the transcriptional
nuclear shuttling, post-transcriptional, translational, and post-translational)
level
Table 16.1
PAGE: 449
438 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
Evolution of Gene Regulation
Prokaryoticcellscanonlyregulategeneexpressionbycontrollingtheamountoftranscription.Aseukaryotic
cells evolved, the complexity of the control of gene expression increased. For example, with the evolution
of eukaryotic cells came compartmentalization of important cellular components and cellular processes. A
nuclear region that contains the DNA was formed. Transcription and translation were physically separated
into two different cellular compartments. It therefore became possible to control gene expression by
regulatingtranscriptioninthenucleus,andalsobycontrollingtheRNAlevelsandproteintranslationpresent
outside the nucleus.
Most gene regulation is done to conserve cell resources. However, other regulatory processes may be
defensive. Cellular processes such as developed to protect the cell from viral or parasitic infections. If the
cellcouldquicklyshutoffgeneexpressionforashortperiodoftime,itwouldbeabletosurviveaninfection
whenotherorganismscouldnot.Therefore,theorganismevolvedanewprocessthathelpeditsurvive,and
it was able to pass this new development to offspring.
16.2 | Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the steps involved in prokaryotic gene regulation
• Explain the roles of activators, inducers, and repressors in gene regulation
TheDNAofprokaryotesisorganizedintoacircularchromosome,supercoiledwithinthenucleoidregionofthe
cell cytoplasm. Proteins that are needed for a specific function, or that are involved in the same biochemical
pathway, are encoded together in blocks called operons. For example, all of the genes needed to use lactose
as an energy source are coded next to each other in the lactose (or lac) operon, and transcribed into a single
mRNA.
In prokaryotic cells, there are three types of regulatory molecules that can affect the expression of operons:
repressors, activators, and inducers. Repressors and activators are proteins produced in the cell. Both
repressorsandactivatorsregulategeneexpressionbybindingtospecificDNAsitesadjacenttothegenesthey
control. In general, activators bind to the promoter site, while repressors bind to operator regions. Repressors
prevent transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus, whereas activators increase the
transcriptionofageneinresponsetoanexternalstimulus.Inducersaresmallmoleculesthatmaybeproduced
by the cell or that are in the cell’s environment. Inducers either activate or repress transcription depending on
the needs of the cell and the availability of substrate.
The trp Operon: A Repressible Operon
Bacteria such as Escherichia coli need amino acids to survive, and are able to synthesize many of them.
Tryptophan is one such amino acid that E. coli can either ingest from the environment or synthesize using
enzymes that are encoded by five genes. These five genes are next to each other in what is called the
tryptophan(trp)operon(Figure16.3).ThegenesaretranscribedintoasinglemRNA,whichisthentranslated
toproduceallfiveenzymes.Iftryptophanispresentintheenvironment,thenE.colidoesnotneedtosynthesize
it and the trp operon is switched off. However, when tryptophan availability is low, the switch controlling
the operon is turned on, the mRNA is transcribed, the enzyme proteins are translated, and tryptophan is
synthesized.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 450
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 439
Figure 16.3 The tryptophan operon. The five genes that are needed to synthesize tryptophan in E. coli are located
nexttoeachotherinthetrpoperon.Whentryptophanisplentiful,twotryptophanmoleculesbindtherepressorprotein
attheoperatorsequence.ThisphysicallyblockstheRNApolymerasefromtranscribingthetryptophangenes.When
tryptophan is absent, the repressor protein does not bind to the operator and the genes are transcribed.
The trp operon includes three important regions: the coding region, the trp operator and the trp promoter. The
codingregionincludesthegenesforthefivetryptophanbiosynthesisenzymes.Justbeforethecodingregionis
thetranscriptionalstartsite.Thepromotersequence,towhichRNApolymerasebindstoinitiatetranscription,
isbeforeor“upstream”ofthetranscriptionalstartsite.Betweenthepromoterandthetranscriptionalstartsiteis
the operator region.
The trp operator contains the DNA code to which the trp repressor protein can bind. However, the repressor
alone cannot bind to the operator. When tryptophan is present in the cell, two tryptophan molecules bind to
the trp repressor, which changes the shape of the repressor protein to a form that can bind to the trp operator.
Binding of the tryptophan–repressor complex at the operator physically prevents the RNA polymerase from
binding to the promoter and transcribing the downstream genes.
Whentryptophanisnotpresentinthecell,therepressorbyitselfdoesnotbindtotheoperator,thepolymerase
cantranscribe theenzymegenes, andtryptophan issynthesized. Because therepressorprotein actively binds
to the operator to keep the genes turned off, the trp operon is said to be negatively regulated and the proteins
that bind to the operator to silencetrpexpression arenegative regulators.
Watch this video to learn more about the trp operon. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.)
(http://cnx.org/content/m66504/1.3/#eip-id1169842033659)
Catabolite Activator Protein (CAP): A Transcriptional Activator
Just as the trp operon is negatively regulated by tryptophan molecules, there are proteins that bind to the
promoter sequences that act as positive regulators to turn genes on and activate them. For example, when
glucose is scarce, E. coli bacteria can turn to other sugar sources for fuel. To do this, new genes to process
thesealternatesugarsmustbetranscribed.Whenglucoselevelsdrop,cyclicAMP(cAMP)beginstoaccumulate
in the cell. The cAMP molecule is a signaling molecule that is involved in glucose and energy metabolism in
E. coli. Accumulating cAMP binds to the positive regulator catabolite activator protein (CAP), a protein that
PAGE: 451
440 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
bindstothepromotersofoperonswhichcontroltheprocessingofalternativesugars.WhencAMPbindstoCAP,
thecomplexthenbindstothepromoterregionofthegenesthatareneededtousethealternatesugarsources
(Figure 16.4). In these operons, a CAP-binding site is located upstream of the RNA-polymerase-binding site
in the promoter. CAP binding stabilizes the binding of RNA polymerase to the promoter region and increases
transcription of the associated protein-coding genes.
Figure16.4TranscriptionalactivationbytheCAPprotein.Whenglucoselevelsfall,E.colimayuseothersugarsfor
fuelbutmusttranscribenewgenestodoso.Asglucosesuppliesbecomelimited,cAMPlevelsincrease.ThiscAMP
bindstotheCAP protein, apositive regulator that bindstoapromoter regionupstream ofthegenesrequiredtouse
other sugar sources.
The lac Operon: An Inducible Operon
Thethirdtypeofgeneregulationinprokaryoticcellsoccursthroughinducibleoperons,whichhaveproteinsthat
bind to activate or repress transcription depending on the local environment and the needs of the cell. The lac
operon is a typical inducible operon. As mentioned previously, E. coli is able to use other sugars as energy
sourceswhenglucoseconcentrationsarelow.Onesuchsugarsourceislactose.Thelacoperonencodesthe
genes necessary to acquire and process the lactose from the local environment. The Z gene of the lac operon
encodes beta-galactosidase, which breaks lactose down to glucose and galactose.
However,forthelacoperontobeactivated,twoconditionsmustbemet.First,thelevelofglucosemustbevery
low or non-existent. Second, lactose must be present. Only when glucose is absent and lactose is present will
the lac operon be transcribed (Figure 16.5). In the absence of glucose, the binding of the CAP protein makes
transcriptionofthelacoperonmoreeffective.Whenlactoseispresent,itbindstothelacrepressorandchanges
itsshapesothatitcannotbindtothelacoperatortopreventtranscription.Thiscombinationofconditionsmakes
sense for the cell, because it would be energetically wasteful to synthesize the enzymes to process lactose if
glucose was plentiful or lactose was not available.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 452
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 441
Figure 16.5 Regulation of the lac operon. Transcription of the lac operon is carefully regulated so that its
expression only occurs when glucose is limited and lactose is present to serve as an alternative fuel source.
Question:InE.coli,thetrpoperonisonbydefault,whilethelacoperonisoff.Whydoyouthinkthisisthe
case?
If glucose is present, then CAP fails to bind to the promoter sequence to activate transcription. If lactose is
absent, then the repressor binds to the operator to prevent transcription. If either of these conditions is met,
thentranscriptionremainsoff.Onlywhenglucoseisabsentandlactoseispresentisthelacoperontranscribed
(Table 16.2).
Signals that Induce or Repress Transcription of the lac Operon
Glucose CAP binds Lactose Repressor binds Transcription
+ - - + No
Table 16.2
PAGE: 453
442 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
Signals that Induce or Repress Transcription of the lac Operon
Glucose CAP binds Lactose Repressor binds Transcription
+ - + - Some
- + - + No
- + + - Yes
Table 16.2
Watch an animated tutorial about the workings of lac operon here. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66504/1.3/#eip-id1165239273914)
16.3 | Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how chromatin remodeling controls transcriptional access
• Describe how access to DNA is controlled by histone modification
• Describe how DNA methylation is related to epigenetic gene changes
Eukaryotic gene expression is more complex than prokaryotic gene expression because the processes of
transcriptionandtranslationarephysicallyseparated.Unlikeprokaryoticcells,eukaryoticcellscanregulategene
expressionatmanydifferentlevels.Epigeneticchangesareinheritablechangesingeneexpressionthatdonot
result from changes in the DNA sequence. Eukaryotic gene expression begins with control of access to the
DNA.TranscriptionalaccesstotheDNAcanbecontrolledintwogeneralways:chromatinremodelingandDNA
methylation. Chromatin remodeling changes the way that DNA is associated with chromosomal histones. DNA
methylation is associated with developmental changes and gene silencing.
Epigenetic Control: Regulating Access to Genes within the
Chromosome
Thehumangenomeencodesover20,000genes,withhundredstothousandsofgenesoneachofthe23human
chromosomes.TheDNAinthenucleusispreciselywound,folded,andcompactedintochromosomessothatit
willfitintothenucleus.Itisalsoorganizedsothatspecificsegmentscanbeaccessedasneededbyaspecific
cell type.
The first level of organization, or packing, is the winding of DNA strands around histone proteins. Histones
package and order DNA into structural units called nucleosome complexes, which can control the access of
proteinstotheDNAregions(Figure16.6a).Undertheelectronmicroscope,thiswindingofDNAaroundhistone
proteins to form nucleosomes looks like small beads on a string (Figure 16.6b).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 454
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 443
Figure16.6DNAisfoldedaroundhistoneproteinstocreate(a)nucleosomecomplexes.Thesenucleosomescontrol
theaccessofproteinstotheunderlyingDNA.Whenviewedthroughanelectronmicroscope(b),thenucleosomeslook
like beads on a string. (credit “micrograph”: modification of work by Chris Woodcock)
Thesebeads(histoneproteins)canmovealongthestring(DNA)toexposedifferentsectionsofthemolecule.If
DNA encoding a specific gene is to be transcribed into RNA, the nucleosomes surrounding that region of DNA
can slide down the DNA to open that specific chromosomal region and allow for the transcriptional machinery
(RNA polymerase) to initiate transcription (Figure 16.7).
Figure 16.7 Nucleosomes can slide along DNA. When nucleosomes are spaced closely together (top),
transcriptionfactorscannotbindandgeneexpressionisturnedoff.Whenthenucleosomesarespacedfarapart
(bottom),theDNAisexposed.Transcriptionfactorscanbind,allowinggeneexpressiontooccur.Modificationsto
the histones and DNA affect nucleosome spacing.
In females, one of the two X chromosomes is inactivated during embryonic development because of
epigeneticchangestothechromatin.Whatimpactdoyouthinkthesechangeswouldhaveonnucleosome
packing?
PAGE: 455
444 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
How closely the histone proteins associate with the DNA is regulated by signals found on both the histone
proteins and on the DNA. These signals are functional groups added to histone proteins or to DNA and
determine whether a chromosomal region should be open or closed (Figure 16.8 depicts modifications to
histone proteins and DNA). These tags are not permanent, but may be added or removed as needed. Some
chemicalgroups(phosphate, methyl, oracetylgroups)areattached tospecific aminoacidsinhistone "tails" at
the N-terminus of the protein. These groups do not alter the DNA base sequence, but they do alter how tightly
woundtheDNAisaroundthehistoneproteins.DNAisanegativelychargedmoleculeandunmodifiedhistones
are positively charged; therefore, changes in the charge of the histone will change how tightly wound the DNA
molecule will be. By adding chemical modifications like acetyl groups, the charge becomes less positive, and
thebindingofDNAtothehistonesisrelaxed.Alteringthelocationofnucleosomesandthetightnessofhistone
binding opens some regions of chromatin to transcription and closes others.
The DNA molecule itself can also be modified by methylation. DNA methylation occurs within very specific
regionscalledCpGislands.ThesearestretcheswithahighfrequencyofcytosineandguaninedinucleotideDNA
pairs (CG) found in the promoter regions of genes. The cytosine member of the CG pair can be methylated (a
methylgroupisadded).Methylatedgenesareusuallysilenced,althoughmethylationmayhaveotherregulatory
effects. In some cases, genes that are silenced during the development of the gametes of one parent are
transmitted in their silenced condition to the offspring. Such genes are said to be imprinted. Parental diet or
other environmental conditions may also affect the methylation patterns of genes, which in turn modifies gene
expression.ChangesinchromatinorganizationinteractwithDNAmethylation.DNAmethyltransferasesappear
to be attracted to chromatin regions with specific histone modifications. Highly methylated (hypermethylated)
DNA regions with deacetylated histones are tightly coiled and transcriptionally inactive.
Figure 16.8 Histone proteins and DNA nucleotides can be modified chemically. Modifications affect nucleosome
spacing and gene expression. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
Epigenetic changes are not permanent, although they often persist through multiple rounds of cell division and
mayevencrossgenerationallines.Chromatinremodelingaltersthechromosomalstructure(openorclosed)as
needed. If a gene is to be transcribed, the histone proteins and DNA in the chromosomal region encoding that
genearemodifiedinawaythatopensthepromoterregiontoallowRNApolymeraseandotherproteins,called
transcriptionfactors,tobindandinitiatetranscription.Ifageneistoremainturnedoff,orsilenced,thehistone
proteins and DNA have different modifications that signal a closed chromosomal configuration. In this closed
configuration, the RNA polymerase and transcription factors do not have access to the DNA and transcription
cannot occur (Figure 16.8).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 456
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 445
View this video that describes how epigenetic regulation controls gene expression. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66505/1.3/#eip-id1169842033590)
16.4 | Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the role of transcription factors in gene regulation
• Explain how enhancers and repressors regulate gene expression
Likeprokaryoticcells,thetranscriptionofgenesineukaryotesrequirestheactionofanRNApolymerasetobind
to a DNA sequence upstream of a gene in order to initiate transcription. However, unlike prokaryotic cells, the
eukaryotic RNA polymerase requires other proteins, or transcription factors, to facilitate transcription initiation.
RNA polymerase by itself cannot initiate transcription in eukaryotic cells. There are two types of transcription
factors that regulate eukaryotic transcription: General (or basal) transcription factors bind to the core promoter
regiontoassistwiththebindingofRNApolymerase.Specifictranscriptionfactorsbindtovariousregionsoutside
ofthecorepromoterregionandinteractwiththeproteinsatthecorepromotertoenhanceorrepresstheactivity
of the polymerase.
View the process of transcription—the making of RNA from a DNA template. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66506/1.3/#eip-id1168020166468)
The Promoter and the Transcription Machinery
Genes are organized to make the control of gene expression easier. The promoter region is immediately
upstream of the coding sequence. This region can be short (only a few nucleotides in length) or quite long
(hundreds of nucleotides long). The longer the promoter, the more available space for proteins to bind. This
also adds more control to the transcription process. The length of the promoter is gene-specific and can
differ dramatically between genes. Consequently, the level of control of gene expression can also differ quite
dramatically between genes. The purpose of the promoter is to bind transcription factors that control the
initiation of transcription.
Within the core promoter region, 25 to 35 bases upstream of the transcriptional start site, resides the TATA
box. The TATA box has the consensus sequence of 5’-TATAAA-3’. The TATA box is the binding site for a
proteincomplexcalledTFIID,whichcontainsaTATA-bindingprotein.BindingofTFIIDrecruitsothertranscription
factors, including TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIF, and TFIIH. Some of these transcription factors help to bind the RNA
polymerase to the promoter, and others help to activate the transcription initiation complex.
In addition to the TATA box, other binding sites are found in some promoters. Some biologists prefer to restrict
the range of the eukaryotic promoter to the core promoter, or polymerase binding site, and refer to these
PAGE: 457
446 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
additionalsitesaspromoter-proximalelements,becausetheyareusuallyfoundwithinafewhundredbasepairs
upstream of the transcriptional start site. Examples of these elements are the CAAT box, with the consensus
sequence 5’-CCAAT-3’ and the GC box, with the consensus sequence 5’-GGGCGG-3’. Specific transcription
factorscanbindtothesepromoter-proximalelementstoregulategenetranscription.Agivengenemayhaveits
owncombinationofthesespecifictranscription-factor bindingsites.Therearehundredsoftranscription factors
inacell,eachofwhichbindsspecificallytoaparticularDNAsequencemotif.Whentranscriptionfactorsbindto
thepromoterjustupstreamoftheencodedgene,itisreferredtoasacis-actingelement,becauseitisonthe
same chromosome just next to the gene. Transcription factors respond to environmental stimuli that cause the
proteins to find their binding sites and initiate transcription of the gene that is needed.
Enhancers and Transcription
In some eukaryotic genes, there are additional regions that help increase or enhance transcription. These
regions,calledenhancers,arenotnecessarilyclosetothegenestheyenhance.Theycanbelocatedupstream
of a gene, within the coding region of the gene, downstream of a gene, or may be thousands of nucleotides
away.
Enhancerregionsarebindingsequences,orsites,forspecifictranscriptionfactors.Whenaproteintranscription
factor binds to its enhancer sequence, the shape of the protein changes, allowing it to interact with proteins at
thepromotorsite.However,sincetheenhancerregionmaybedistantfromthepromoter,theDNAmustbendto
allowtheproteinsatthetwositestocomeintocontact.DNAbendingproteinshelptobendtheDNAandbring
the enhancer and promoter regions together (Figure 16.9). This shape change allows for the interaction of the
specific activator proteins bound to the enhancers with the general transcription factors bound to the promoter
region and the RNA polymerase.
Figure 16.9 Interaction between proteins at the promoter and enhancer sites. An enhancer is a DNA sequence that
promotestranscription.EachenhancerismadeupofshortDNAsequencescalleddistalcontrolelements.Activators
boundtothedistalcontrolelementsinteractwithmediatorproteinsandtranscriptionfactors.Twodifferentgenesmay
have the same promoter but different distal control elements, enabling differential gene expression.
Turning Genes Off: Transcriptional Repressors
Likeprokaryoticcells,eukaryoticcellsalsohavemechanismstopreventtranscription.Transcriptionalrepressors
canbindtopromoterorenhancerregionsandblocktranscription.Likethetranscriptionalactivators,repressors
respond to external stimuli to prevent the binding of activating transcription factors.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 458
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 447
16.5 | Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand RNA splicing and explain its role in regulating gene expression
• Describe the importance of RNA stability in gene regulation
RNA is transcribed, but must be processed into a mature form before translation can begin. This processing
that takes place after an RNA molecule has been transcribed, but before it is translated into a protein, is
calledpost-transcriptionalmodification.Aswiththeepigeneticandtranscriptionalstagesofprocessing,thispost-
transcriptional step can also be regulated to control gene expression in the cell. If the RNA is not processed,
shuttled, or translated, then no protein will be synthesized.
RNA Splicing, the First Stage of Post-transcriptional Control
Ineukaryoticcells,theRNAtranscriptoftencontainsregions,calledintrons,thatareremovedpriortotranslation.
The regions of RNA that code for protein are called exons. (Figure 16.10). After an RNA molecule has been
transcribed, but prior to its departure from the nucleus to be translated, the RNA is processed and the introns
areremovedbysplicing.Splicingisdonebyspliceosomes,ribonucleoproteincomplexesthatcanrecognizethe
two ends of the intron, cut the transcript at those two points, and bring the exons together for ligation.
Figure 16.10Pre-mRNA can be alternatively spliced to create different proteins.
PAGE: 459
448 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
Alternative RNA Splicing
Inthe1970s,geneswerefirstobservedthatexhibitedalternativeRNAsplicing.AlternativeRNAsplicingisa
mechanismthatallowsdifferentproteinproductstobeproducedfromonegenewhendifferentcombinations
of exons are combined to form the mRNA (Figure 16.11). This alternative splicing can be haphazard, but
more often it is controlled and acts as a mechanism of gene regulation, with the frequency of different
splicingalternativescontrolledbythecellasawaytocontroltheproductionofdifferentproteinproductsin
differentcellsoratdifferentstagesofdevelopment.Alternativesplicingisnowunderstoodtobeacommon
mechanismofgeneregulationineukaryotes;accordingtooneestimate,70percentofgenesinhumansare
expressedasmultipleproteinsthroughalternativesplicing.Althoughtherearemultiplewaystoalternatively
splice RNA transcripts, the original 5'-3' order of the exons is always conserved. That is, a transcript with
exons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 might be spliced 1 2 4 5 6 7 or 1 2 3 6 7, but never 1 2 5 4 3 6 7.
Figure 16.11There are five basic modes of alternative splicing.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 460
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 449
How could alternative splicing evolve? Introns have a beginning- and ending-recognition sequence; it is
easy to imagine the failure of the splicing mechanism to identify the end of an intron and instead find the
endofthenextintron,thusremovingtwointronsandtheinterveningexon.Infact,therearemechanismsin
placetopreventsuchintronskipping,butmutationsarelikelytoleadtotheirfailure.Such“mistakes”would
morethanlikelyproduceanonfunctionalprotein.Indeed,thecauseofmanygeneticdiseasesisabnormal
splicing rather than mutations in a coding sequence. However, alternative splicing could possibly create a
protein variant without the loss of the original protein, opening up possibilities for adaptation of the new
varianttonewfunctions.Geneduplicationhasplayedanimportantroleintheevolutionofnewfunctionsin
a similar way by providing genes that may evolve without eliminating the original, functional protein.
Question: In the corn snake Pantherophis guttatus, there are several different color variants, including
amelanistic snakes whose skin patterns display only red and yellow pigments. The cause of amelanism in
these snakeswasrecently identified astheinsertion ofatransposable element into anintron intheOCA2
(oculocutaneous albinism) gene. How might the insertion of extra genetic material into an intron lead to a
nonfunctional protein?
Visualize how mRNA splicing happens by watching the process in action in this video. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66507/1.5/#eip-id1171119155972)
Control of RNA Stability
Before the mRNA leaves the nucleus, it is given two protective "caps" that prevent the ends of the strand
from degrading during its journey. 5' and 3' exonucleases can degrade unprotected RNAs. The 5' cap, which
is placed on the 5' end of the mRNA, is usually composed of a methylated guanosine triphosphate molecule
(GTP). The GTP is placed "backward" on the 5' end of the mRNA, so that the 5' carbons of the GTP and the
terminal nucleotide are linked through three phosphates. The poly-A tail, which is attached to the 3' end, is
usuallycomposedofalongchainofadeninenucleotides.ThesechangesprotectthetwoendsoftheRNAfrom
exonuclease attack.
OncetheRNAistransportedtothecytoplasm,thelengthoftimethattheRNAresidestherecanbecontrolled.
Each RNA molecule has a defined lifespan and decays at a specific rate. This rate of decay can influence
how much protein is in the cell. If the decay rate is increased, the RNA will not exist in the cytoplasm as long,
shorteningthetimeavailablefortranslationofthemRNAtooccur.Conversely,iftherateofdecayisdecreased,
themRNAmoleculewillresideinthecytoplasmlongerandmoreproteincanbetranslated.Thisrateofdecayis
referredtoastheRNAstability.IftheRNAisstable,itwillbedetectedforlongerperiodsoftimeinthecytoplasm.
BindingofproteinstotheRNAcanalsoinfluenceitsstability.ProteinscalledRNA-bindingproteins,orRBPs,
canbindtotheregionsofthemRNAjustupstreamordownstreamoftheprotein-codingregion.Theseregionsin
theRNAthatarenottranslatedintoproteinarecalledtheuntranslatedregions,orUTRs.Theyarenotintrons
(thosehavebeenremovedinthenucleus).Rather,theseareregionsthatregulatemRNAlocalization,stability,
andproteintranslation.Theregionjustbeforetheprotein-codingregioniscalledthe5'UTR,whereastheregion
afterthecodingregioniscalledthe3'UTR(Figure16.12).ThebindingofRBPstotheseregionscanincrease
or decrease the stability of an RNA molecule, depending on the specific RBP that binds.
PAGE: 461
450 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
Figure 16.12 RNA-binding proteins. The protein-coding region of this processed mRNA is flanked by 5' and 3'
untranslatedregions(UTRs).ThepresenceofRNA-bindingproteinsatthe5'or3'UTRinfluencesthestabilityofthe
RNA molecule.
RNA Stability and microRNAs
In addition to RBPs that bind to and control (increase or decrease) RNA stability, other elements called
microRNAs can bind to the RNA molecule. These microRNAs, or miRNAs, are short RNA molecules that
are only 21 to 24 nucleotides in length. The miRNAs are made in the nucleus as longer pre-miRNAs. These
pre-miRNAs are chopped into mature miRNAs by a protein called Dicer. Like transcription factors and RBPs,
mature miRNAs recognize a specific sequence and bind to the RNA; however, miRNAs also associate with a
ribonucleoprotein complex called the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). The RNA component of the
RISCbase-pairswithcomplementarysequencesonanmRNAandeitherimpedetranslationofthemessageor
lead to the degradation of the mRNA.
16.6 | Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational
Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand the process of translation and discuss its key factors
• Describe how the initiation complex controls translation
• Explain the different ways in which the post-translational control of gene expression takes place
After RNA has been transported to the cytoplasm, it is translated into protein. Control of this process is largely
dependent on the RNA molecule. As previously discussed, the stability of the RNA will have a large impact on
its translation into a protein. As the stability changes, the amount of time that it is available for translation also
changes.
The Initiation Complex and Translation Rate
Like transcription, translation is controlled by proteins that bind and initiate the process. In translation, the
complexthatassemblestostarttheprocessisreferredtoasthetranslationinitiationcomplex.Ineukaryotes,
translation is initiated by binding the initiating met-tRNAi to the 40S ribosome. This tRNA is brought to the 40S
ribosome by a protein initiation factor, eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF-2). The eIF-2 protein binds to the
high-energy molecule guanosine triphosphate (GTP). The tRNA-eIF2-GTP complex then binds to the 40S
ribosome.AsecondcomplexformsonthemRNA.Severaldifferentinitiationfactorsrecognizethe5'capofthe
mRNAandproteinsboundtothepoly-AtailofthesamemRNA,formingthemRNAintoaloop.Thecap-binding
protein eIF4F brings the mRNA complex together with the 40S ribosome complex. The ribosome then scans
along the mRNA until it finds a start codon AUG. When the anticodon of the initiator tRNA and the start codon
are aligned, the GTP is hydrolyzed, the initiation factors are released, and the large 60S ribosomal subunit
bindstoformthetranslationcomplex.ThebindingofeIF-2totheRNAiscontrolledbyphosphorylation.IfeIF-2is
phosphorylated,itundergoesaconformationalchangeandcannotbindtoGTP.Therefore,theinitiationcomplex
cannot form properly and translation is impeded (Figure 16.13). When eIF-2 remains unphosphorylated, the
initiation complex can form normally and translation can proceed.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 462
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 451
Figure 16.13Gene expression can be controlled by factors that bind the translation initiation complex.
An increase in phosphorylation levels of eIF-2 has been observed in patients with neurodegenerative
diseasessuchasAlzheimer’s,Parkinson’s,andHuntington’s.Whatimpactdoyouthinkthismighthaveon
protein synthesis?
Chemical Modifications, Protein Activity, and Longevity
Proteins can be chemically modified with the addition of groups including methyl, phosphate, acetyl, and
ubiquitin groups. The addition or removal of these groups from proteins regulates their activity or the length of
timetheyexistinthecell.Sometimesthesemodificationscanregulatewhereaproteinisfoundinthecell—for
example, in the nucleus, in the cytoplasm, or attached to the plasma membrane.
Chemical modifications occur in response to external stimuli such as stress, the lack of nutrients, heat, or
ultraviolet light exposure. These changes can alter epigenetic accessibility, transcription, mRNA stability, or
translation—allresultinginchangesinexpressionofvariousgenes.Thisisanefficientwayforthecelltorapidly
change the levels of specific proteins in response to the environment. Because proteins are involved in every
stage of gene regulation, the phosphorylation of a protein (depending on the protein that is modified) can alter
accessibility to the chromosome, can alter translation (by altering transcription factor binding or function), can
change nuclear shuttling (by influencing modifications to the nuclear pore complex), can alter RNA stability (by
bindingornotbindingtotheRNAtoregulateitsstability),canmodifytranslation(increaseordecrease),orcan
change post-translational modifications (add or remove phosphates or other chemical modifications).
The addition of an ubiquitin group to a protein marks that protein for degradation. Ubiquitin acts like a flag
indicatingthattheproteinlifespaniscomplete.Theseproteinsaremovedtotheproteasome,anorganellethat
functionstoremoveproteins,tobedegraded(Figure16.14).Onewaytocontrolgeneexpression,therefore,is
to alter the longevity of the protein.
PAGE: 463
452 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
Figure 16.14Proteins with ubiquitin tags are marked for degradation within the proteasome.
16.7 | Cancer and Gene Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how changes to gene expression can cause cancer
• Explain how changes to gene expression at different levels can disrupt the cell cycle
• Discuss how understanding regulation of gene expression can lead to better drug design
Cancerisnotasinglediseasebutincludesmanydifferentdiseases.Incancercells,mutationsmodifycell-cycle
control and cells don’t stop growing as they normally would. Mutations can also alter the growth rate or the
progressionofthecellthroughthecellcycle.Oneexampleofagenemodificationthataltersthegrowthrateis
increasedphosphorylationofcyclinB,aproteinthatcontrolstheprogressionofacellthroughthecellcycleand
serves as a cell-cycle checkpoint protein.
For cells to move through each phase of the cell cycle, the cell must pass through checkpoints. This ensures
that the cell has properly completed the step and has not encountered any mutation that will alter its function.
Manyproteins,includingcyclinB,controlthesecheckpoints.ThephosphorylationofcyclinB,apost-translational
event, alters its function. As a result, cells can progress through the cell cycle unimpeded, even if mutations
exist in the cell and its growth should be terminated. This post-translational change of cyclin B prevents it from
controlling the cell cycle and contributes to the development of cancer.
Cancer: Disease of Altered Gene Expression
Cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene expression. There are many proteins that are turned
on or off (gene activation or gene silencing) that dramatically alter the overall activity of the cell. A gene that is
not normally expressed in that cell can be switched on and expressed at high levels. This can be the result of
gene mutation or changes in gene regulation (epigenetic, transcription, post-transcription, translation, or post-
translation).
Changes in epigenetic regulation, transcription, RNA stability, protein translation, and post-translational control
can be detected in cancer. While these changes don’t occur simultaneously in one cancer, changes at each of
theselevelscanbedetectedwhenobservingcanceratdifferentsitesindifferentindividuals.Therefore,changes
in histone acetylation (epigenetic modification that leads to gene silencing), activation of transcription factors
byphosphorylation, increasedRNA stability,increasedtranslational control, andprotein modification canallbe
detected atsomepointinvariouscancercells.Scientists areworkingtounderstandthecommonchangesthat
give rise to certain types of cancer or how a modification might be exploited to destroy a tumor cell.
Tumor Suppressor Genes, Oncogenes, and Cancer
Innormalcells,somegenesfunctiontopreventexcess,inappropriatecellgrowth.Thesearetumor-suppressor
genes, which are active in normal cells to prevent uncontrolled cell growth. There are many tumor-suppressor
genesincells.Themoststudiedtumor-suppressorgeneisp53,whichismutatedinover50percentofallcancer
types. The p53protein itself functions asatranscription factor.It canbindtosites inthe promoters ofgenesto
initiatetranscription.Therefore,themutationofp53incancerwilldramaticallyalterthetranscriptionalactivityof
its target genes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 464
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 453
Watch this animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/p53_cancer) to learn more about the use of p53 in
fighting cancer.
Proto-oncogenes are positive cell-cycle regulators. When mutated, proto-oncogenes can become oncogenes
and cause cancer. Overexpression of the oncogene can lead to uncontrolled cell growth. This is because
oncogenes can alter transcriptional activity, stability, or protein translation of another gene that directly or
indirectly controls cell growth. An example of an oncogene involved in cancer is a protein called myc. Myc
is a transcription factor that is aberrantly activated in Burkett’s Lymphoma, a cancer of the lymph system.
Overexpression of myc transforms normal B cells into cancerous cells that continue to grow uncontrollably.
High B-cell numbers can result in tumors that can interfere with normal bodily function. Patients with Burkett’s
lymphoma can develop tumors on their jaw or in their mouth that interfere with the ability to eat.
Cancer and Epigenetic Alterations
Silencing genes through epigenetic mechanisms is also very common in cancer cells. There are characteristic
modifications to histone proteins and DNA that are associated with silenced genes. In cancer cells, the DNA
in the promoter region of silenced genes is methylated on cytosine DNA residues in CpG islands. Histone
proteinsthatsurroundthatregionlacktheacetylationmodificationthatispresentwhenthegenesareexpressed
in normal cells. This combination of DNA methylation and histone deacetylation (epigenetic modifications that
lead to gene silencing) is commonly found in cancer. When these modifications occur, the gene present in
thatchromosomalregionissilenced.Increasingly,scientistsunderstandhowepigeneticchangesarealteredin
cancer. Because these changes are temporary and can be reversed—for example, by preventing the action of
the histone deacetylase protein that removes acetyl groups, or by DNA methyl transferase enzymes that add
methyl groups to cytosines in DNA—it is possible to design new drugs and new therapies to take advantage
ofthereversiblenatureoftheseprocesses.Indeed,manyresearchersaretestinghowasilencedgenecanbe
switched back on in a cancer cell to help re-establish normal growth patterns.
Genes involved in the development of many other illnesses, ranging from allergies to inflammation to autism,
arethoughttoberegulatedbyepigeneticmechanisms.Asourknowledgeofhowgenesarecontrolleddeepens,
new ways to treat diseases like cancer will emerge.
Cancer and Transcriptional Control
Alterations in cells that give rise to cancer can affect the transcriptional control of gene expression. Mutations
thatactivatetranscriptionfactors,suchasincreasedphosphorylation,canincreasethebindingofatranscription
factor to its binding site in a promoter. This could lead to increased transcriptional activation of that gene that
results in modified cell growth. Alternatively, a mutation in the DNA of a promoter or enhancer region can
increase the binding ability of a transcription factor. This could also lead to the increased transcription and
aberrant gene expression that is seen in cancer cells.
Researchershavebeeninvestigatinghowtocontrolthetranscriptionalactivationofgeneexpressionincancer.
Identifyinghowatranscriptionfactorbinds,orapathwaythatactivateswhereagenecanbeturnedoff,hasledto
newdrugsandnewwaystotreatcancer.Inbreastcancer,forexample,manyproteinsareoverexpressed.This
canleadtoincreasedphosphorylationofkeytranscriptionfactorsthatincreasetranscription.Onesuchexample
istheoverexpressionoftheepidermalgrowth-factorreceptor(EGFR)inasubsetofbreastcancers.TheEGFR
pathway activates many protein kinases that, in turn, activate many transcription factors which control genes
involved in cell growth. New drugs that prevent the activation of EGFR have been developed and are used to
treat these cancers.
Cancer and Post-transcriptional Control
Changes in the post-transcriptional control of a gene can also result in cancer. Recently, several groups of
researchershaveshownthatspecificcancershavealteredexpressionofmiRNAs.BecausemiRNAsbindtothe
3' UTR of RNA molecules to degrade them, overexpression of these miRNAs could be detrimental to normal
PAGE: 465
454 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
cellular activity. Too many miRNAs could dramatically decrease the RNA population, leading to a decrease in
protein expression. Several studies have demonstrated a change in the miRNA population in specific cancer
types. It appears that the subset of miRNAs expressed in breast cancer cells is quite different from the subset
expressedinlungcancercellsorevenfromnormalbreastcells.ThissuggeststhatalterationsinmiRNAactivity
can contribute to the growth of breast cancer cells. These types of studies also suggest that if some miRNAs
are specifically expressed only in cancer cells, they could be potential drug targets. It would, therefore, be
conceivable that new drugs that turn off miRNA expression in cancer could be an effective method to treat
cancer.
Cancer and Translational/Post-translational Control
There are many examples of how translational or post-translational modifications of proteins arise in cancer.
Modifications are found in cancer cells from the increased translation of a protein to changes in protein
phosphorylation to alternative splice variants of a protein. An example of how the expression of an alternative
form of a protein can have dramatically different outcomes is seen in colon cancer cells. The c-Flip protein, a
protein involved in mediating the cell-death pathway, comes in two forms: long (c-FLIPL) and short (c-FLIPS).
Both forms appear to be involved in initiating controlled cell-death mechanisms in normal cells. However, in
coloncancercells,expressionofthelongformresultsinincreasedcellgrowthinsteadofcelldeath.Clearly,the
expression of the wrong protein dramatically alters cell function and contributes to the development of cancer.
New Drugs to Combat Cancer: Targeted Therapies
Scientistsareusingwhatisknownabouttheregulationofgeneexpressionindiseasestates,includingcancer,to
developnewwaystotreatandpreventdiseasedevelopment.Manyscientistsaredesigningdrugsonthebasis
of the gene expression patterns within individual tumors. This idea, that therapy and medicines can be tailored
to an individual, has given rise to the field of personalized medicine. With an increased understanding of gene
regulation and gene function, medicines can be designed to specifically target diseased cells without harming
healthy cells. Some new medicines, called targeted therapies, have exploited the overexpression of a specific
protein or the mutation of a gene to develop a new medication to treat disease. One such example is the use
of anti-EGF receptor medications to treat the subset of breast cancer tumors that have very high levels of the
EGFprotein.Undoubtedly,moretargetedtherapieswillbedevelopedasscientistslearnmoreabouthowgene
expression changes can cause cancer.
Clinical Trial Coordinator
A clinical trial coordinator is the person managing the proceedings of the clinical trial. This job includes
coordinatingpatientschedulesandappointments,maintainingdetailednotes,buildingthedatabasetotrack
patients(especiallyforlong-termfollow-upstudies),ensuringproperdocumentationhasbeenacquiredand
accepted, and working with the nurses and doctors to facilitate the trial and publication of the results. A
clinicaltrialcoordinatormayhaveasciencebackground,likeanursingdegree,orothercertification.People
whohaveworkedinsciencelabsorinclinicalofficesarealsoqualifiedtobecomeaclinicaltrialcoordinator.
Thesejobsaregenerallyinhospitals;however,someclinicsanddoctor’sofficesalsoconductclinicaltrials
and may hire a coordinator.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 466
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 455
KEY TERMS
3' UTR 3' untranslated region; region just downstream of the protein-coding region in an RNA molecule that is
not translated
5' cap amethylatedguanosinetriphosphate(GTP)moleculethatisattachedtothe5'endofamessengerRNA
to protect the end from degradation
5' UTR 5'untranslatedregion;regionjustupstreamoftheprotein-codingregioninanRNAmoleculethatisnot
translated
activator protein that binds to prokaryotic operators to increase transcription
catabolite activator protein (CAP) protein that complexes with cAMP to bind to the promoter sequences of
operons which control sugar processing when glucose is not available
cis-acting element transcriptionfactorbindingsiteswithinthepromoterthatregulatethetranscriptionofagene
adjacent to it
Dicer enzyme that chops the pre-miRNA into the mature form of the miRNA
DNA methylation epigenetic modification that leads to gene silencing; a process involving adding a methyl
group to the DNA molecule
enhancer segment of DNA that is upstream, downstream, perhaps thousands of nucleotides away, or on
another chromosome that influence the transcription of a specific gene
epigenetic heritable changes that do not involve changes in the DNA sequence
eukaryotic initiation factor-2 (eIF-2) protein that binds first to an mRNA to initiate translation
gene expression processes that control the turning on or turning off of a gene
guanine diphosphate (GDP) molecule that is left after the energy is used to start translation
guanine triphosphate (GTP) energy-providing molecule that binds to eIF-2 and is needed for translation
histone acetylation epigenetic modification that leads to gene silencing; a process involving adding or
removing an acetyl functional group
inducible operon operonthatcanbeactivatedorrepresseddependingoncellularneedsandthesurrounding
environment
initiation complex protein complex containing eIF-2 that starts translation
lacoperon operon in prokaryotic cells that encodes genes required for processing and intake of lactose
large 60S ribosomal subunit second,largerribosomalsubunitthatbindstotheRNAtotranslateitintoprotein
microRNA (miRNA) smallRNAmolecules(approximately21nucleotidesinlength)thatbindtoRNAmolecules
to degrade them
myc oncogene that causes cancer in many cancer cells
negative regulator protein that prevents transcription
operator region of DNA outside of the promoter region that binds activators or repressors that control gene
expression in prokaryotic cells
operon collectionofgenesinvolvedinapathwaythataretranscribedtogetherasasinglemRNAinprokaryotic
cells
poly-A tail aseriesofadeninenucleotidesthatareattachedtothe3'endofanmRNAtoprotecttheendfrom
PAGE: 467
456 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
degradation
positive regulator protein that increases transcription
post-transcriptional control of gene expression after the RNA molecule has been created but before it is
translated into protein
post-translational control of gene expression after a protein has been created
proteasome organelle that degrades proteins
repressor protein that binds to the operator of prokaryotic genes to prevent transcription
RISC protein complex that binds along with the miRNA to the RNA to degrade it
RNA stability how long an RNA molecule will remain intact in the cytoplasm
RNA-binding protein (RBP) protein that binds to the 3' or 5' UTR to increase or decrease the RNA stability
small 40S ribosomal subunit ribosomal subunit that binds to the RNA to translate it into protein
trans-acting element transcription factor binding site found outside the promoter or on another chromosome
that influences the transcription of a particular gene
transcription factor protein that binds to the DNA at the promoter or enhancer region and that influences
transcription of a gene
transcription factor binding site sequence of DNA to which a transcription factor binds
transcriptional start site site at which transcription begins
trpoperon series of genes necessary to synthesize tryptophan in prokaryotic cells
tryptophan amino acid that can be synthesized by prokaryotic cells when necessary
untranslated region segmentoftheRNAmoleculethatisnottranslatedintoprotein.Theseregionsliebefore
(upstream or 5') and after (downstream or 3') the protein-coding region
CHAPTER SUMMARY
16.1Regulation of Gene Expression
While all somatic cells within an organism contain the same DNA, not all cells within that organism express the
same proteins. Prokaryotic organisms express most of their genes most of the time. However, some genes are
expressed only when they are needed. Eukaryotic organisms, on the other hand, express only a subset of their
genes in any given cell. To express a protein, the DNA is first transcribed into RNA, which is then translated
into proteins, which are then targeted to specific cellular locations. In prokaryotic cells, transcription and
translation occur almost simultaneously. In eukaryotic cells, transcription occurs in the nucleus and is separate
from the translation that occurs in the cytoplasm. Gene expression in prokaryotes is mostly regulated at the
transcriptional level (some epigenetic and post-translational regulation is also present), whereas in eukaryotic
cells, gene expression is regulated at the epigenetic, transcriptional, post-transcriptional, translational, and
post-translational levels.
16.2Prokaryotic Gene Regulation
The regulation of gene expression in prokaryotic cells occurs at the transcriptional level. There are two majors
kinds of proteins that control prokaryotic transcription: repressors and activators. Repressors bind to an
operator region to block the action of RNA polymerase. Activators bind to the promoter to enhance the binding
of RNA polymerase. Inducer molecules can increase transcription either by inactivating repressors or by
activating activator proteins. In thetrpoperon, thetrprepressor is itself activated by binding to tryptophan.
Therefore, if tryptophan is not needed, the repressor is bound to the operator and transcription remains off. The
lacoperon is activated by the CAP (catabolite activator protein), which binds to the promoter to stabilize RNA
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 468
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 457
polymerase binding. CAP is itself activated by cAMP, whose concentration rises as the concentration of
glucose falls. However, thelacoperon also requires the presence of lactose for transcription to occur. Lactose
inactivates thelacrepressor, and prevents the repressor protein from binding to thelacoperator. With the
repressor inactivated, transcription may proceed. Therefore glucose must be absent and lactose must be
present for effective transcription of thelacoperon.
16.3Eukaryotic Epigenetic Gene Regulation
In eukaryotic cells, the first stage of gene-expression control occurs at the epigenetic level. Epigenetic
mechanisms control access to the chromosomal region to allow genes to be turned on or off. Chromatin
remodeling controls how DNA is packed into the nucleus by regulating how tightly the DNA is wound around
histone proteins. The DNA itself may be methylated to selectively silence genes. The addition or removal of
chemical modifications (or flags) to histone proteins or DNA signals the cell to open or close a chromosomal
region. Therefore, eukaryotic cells can control whether a gene is expressed by controlling accessibility to the
binding of RNA polymerase and its transcription factors.
16.4Eukaryotic Transcription Gene Regulation
To start transcription, general transcription factors, such as TFIID, TFIIB, and others, must first bind to the TATA
box and recruit RNA polymerase to that location. Additional transcription factors may also bind to other
regulatory elements at the promoter to increase or prevent transcription. In addition to promoter sequences,
enhancer regions help augment transcription. Enhancers can be upstream, downstream, within a gene itself, or
on other chromosomes. Specific transcription factors bound to enhancer regions may either increase or prevent
transcription.
16.5Eukaryotic Post-transcriptional Gene Regulation
Post-transcriptional control can occur at any stage after transcription, including RNA splicing and RNA stability.
Once RNA is transcribed, it must be processed to create a mature RNA that is ready to be translated. This
involves the removal of introns that do not code for protein. Spliceosomes bind to the signals that mark the
exon/intron border to remove the introns and ligate the exons together. Once this occurs, the RNA is mature
and can be translated. Alternative splicing can produce more than one mRNA from a given transcript. Different
splicing variants may be produced under different conditions.
RNA is created and spliced in the nucleus, but needs to be transported to the cytoplasm to be translated. RNA
is transported to the cytoplasm through the nuclear pore complex. Once the RNA is in the cytoplasm, the length
of time it resides there before being degraded, called RNA stability, can also be altered to control the overall
amount of protein that is synthesized. The RNA stability can be increased, leading to longer residency time in
the cytoplasm, or decreased, leading to shortened time and less protein synthesis. RNA stability is controlled
by RNA-binding proteins (RPBs) and microRNAs (miRNAs). These RPBs and miRNAs bind to the 5' UTR or
the 3' UTR of the RNA to increase or decrease RNA stability. MicroRNAs associated with RISC complexes may
repress translation or lead to mRNA breakdown.
16.6Eukaryotic Translational and Post-translational Gene Regulation
Changing the status of the RNA or the protein itself can affect the amount of protein, the function of the protein,
or how long it is found in the cell. To translate the protein, a protein initiator complex must assemble on the
RNA. Modifications (such as phosphorylation) of proteins in this complex can prevent proper translation from
occurring. Once a protein has been synthesized, it can be modified (phosphorylated, acetylated, methylated, or
ubiquitinated). These post-translational modifications can greatly impact the stability, degradation, or function of
the protein.
16.7Cancer and Gene Regulation
Cancer can be described as a disease of altered gene expression. Changes at every level of eukaryotic gene
expression can be detected in some form of cancer at some point in time. In order to understand how changes
to gene expression can cause cancer, it is critical to understand how each stage of gene regulation works in
normal cells. By understanding the mechanisms of control in normal, non-diseased cells, it will be easier for
scientists to understand what goes wrong in disease states including complex ones like cancer.
PAGE: 469
458 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 16.5InE. coli, thetrpoperon is on by would have on nucleosome packing?
default, while thelacoperon is off. Why do you think
3.Figure 16.13An increase in phosphorylation
that this is the case?
levels of eIF-2 has been observed in patients with
2.Figure 16.7In females, one of the two X neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s,
chromosomes is inactivated during embryonic Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s. What impact do you
development because of epigenetic changes to the think this might have on protein synthesis?
chromatin. What impact do you think these changes
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Control of gene expression in eukaryotic cells site to promote transcription. In this scenario, AraC is
occurs at which level(s)? a(n) ________.
a. only the transcriptional level a. activator
b. epigenetic and transcriptional levels b. inducer
c. epigenetic, transcriptional, and translational c. repressor
levels d. operator
d. epigenetic, transcriptional, post-
10.What are epigenetic modifications?
transcriptional, translational, and post-
a. the addition of reversible changes to histone
translational levels
proteins and DNA
5.Post-translational control refers to: b. the removal of nucleosomes from the DNA
a. regulation of gene expression after c. the addition of more nucleosomes to the
transcription DNA
b. regulation of gene expression after d. mutation of the DNA sequence
translation
11.Which of the following are true of epigenetic
c. control of epigenetic activation
changes?
d. period between transcription and translation
a. allow DNA to be transcribed
6.How does the regulation of gene expression b. move histones to open or close a
support continued evolution of more complex chromosomal region
organisms? c. are temporary
a. Cells can become specialized within a d. all of the above
multicellular organism.
12.The binding of ________ is required for
b. Organisms can conserve energy and
transcription to start.
resources.
a. a protein
c. Cells grow larger to accommodate protein
b. DNA polymerase
production.
c. RNA polymerase
d. Both A and B.
d. a transcription factor
7.If glucose is absent, but so is lactose, thelac
13.What will result from the binding of a transcription
operon will be ________.
factor to an enhancer region?
a. activated
a. decreased transcription of an adjacent gene
b. repressed
b. increased transcription of a distant gene
c. activated, but only partially
c. alteration of the translation of an adjacent
d. mutated
gene
8.Prokaryotic cells lack a nucleus. Therefore, the d. initiation of the recruitment of RNA
genes in prokaryotic cells are: polymerase
a. all expressed, all of the time
14.A scientist compares the promoter regions of two
b. transcribed and translated almost
genes. Gene A’s core promoter plus proximal
simultaneously
promoter elements encompasses 70bp. Gene B’s
c. transcriptionally controlled because
core promoter plus proximal promoter elements
translation begins before transcription ends
encompasses 250bp. Which of the scientist’s
d. b and c are both true
hypotheses is most likely to be correct?
9.Thearaoperon is an inducible operon that controls
the production of the sugar arabinose. When
arabinose is present in a bacterium it binds to the
protein AraC, and the complex binds to the initiator
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 470
Chapter 16 | Gene Expression 459
a. More transcripts will be made from Gene B. 19.Post-translational modifications of proteins can
b. Transcription of Gene A involves fewer affect which of the following?
transcription factors. a. protein function
c. Enhancers control Gene B’s transcription. b. transcriptional regulation
d. Transcription of Gene A is more controlled c. chromatin modification
than transcription of Gene B. d. all of the above
15.Which of the following are involved in post- 20.A scientist mutates eIF-2 to eliminate its GTP
transcriptional control? hydrolysis capability. How would this mutated form of
a. control of RNA splicing eIF-2 alter translation?
b. control of RNA shuttling a. Initiation factors would not be able to bind to
c. control of RNA stability mRNA.
d. all of the above b. The large ribosomal subunit would not be
able to interact with mRNA transcripts.
16.Binding of an RNA binding protein will ________
c. tRNAi-Met would not scan mRNA transcripts
the stability of the RNA molecule.
for the start codon.
a. increase
d. eIF-2 would not be able to interact with the
b. decrease
small ribosomal subunit.
c. neither increase nor decrease
d. either increase or decrease 21.Cancer causing genes are called ________.
17.An unprocessed pre-mRNA has the following
a. transformation genes
structure.
b. tumor suppressor genes
c. oncogenes
d. mutated genes
22.Targeted therapies are used in patients with a set
Which of the following is not a possible size (in bp) of gene expression pattern. A targeted therapy that
the mature mRNA? prevents the activation of the estrogen receptor in
breast cancer would be beneficial to which type of
patient?
a. 205bp
a. patients who express the EGFR receptor in
b. 180bp
normal cells
c. 150bp
b. patients with a mutation that inactivates the
d. 100bp
estrogen receptor
18.Alternative splicing has been estimated to occur c. patients with lots of the estrogen receptor
in more than 95% of multi-exon genes. Which of the expressed in their tumor
following is not an evolutionary advantage of d. patients that have no estrogen receptor
alternative splicing? expressed in their tumor
a. Alternative splicing increases diversity
without increasing genome size.
b. Different gene isoforms can be expressed in
different tissues.
c. Alternative splicing creates shorter mRNA
transcripts.
d. Different gene isoforms can be expressed
during different stages of development.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
23.Name two differences between prokaryotic and an inducible operon?
eukaryotic cells and how these differences benefit
27.In cancer cells, alteration to epigenetic
multicellular organisms.
modifications turns off genes that are normally
24.Describe how controlling gene expression will expressed. Hypothetically, how could you reverse
alter the overall protein levels in the cell. this process to turn these genes back on?
25.Describe how transcription in prokaryotic cells 28.A scientific study demonstrated that rat mothering
can be altered by external stimulation such as excess behavior impacts the stress response in their pups.
lactose in the environment. Rats that were born and grew up with attentive
mothers showed low activation of stress-response
26.What is the difference between a repressible and
PAGE: 471
460 Chapter 16 | Gene Expression
genes later in life, while rats with inattentive mothers 34.How can external stimuli alter post-transcriptional
had high activation of stress-response genes in the control of gene expression?
same situation. An additional study that swapped the
35.Protein modification can alter gene expression in
pups at birth (i.e., rats born to inattentive mothers
many ways. Describe how phosphorylation of
grew up with attentive mothers and vice versa)
proteins can alter gene expression.
showed the same positive effect of attentive
mothering. How do genetics and/or epigenetics 36.Alternative forms of a protein can be beneficial or
explain the results of this study? harmful to a cell. What do you think would happen if
too much of an alternative protein bound to the 3'
29.Some autoimmune diseases show a positive
UTR of an RNA and caused it to degrade?
correlation with dramatically decreased expression of
histone deacetylase 9 (HDAC9, an enzyme that 37.Changes in epigenetic modifications alter the
removes acetyl groups from histones). Why would accessibility and transcription of DNA. Describe how
the decreased expression of HDAC9 cause immune environmental stimuli, such as ultraviolet light
cells to produce inflammatory genes at inappropriate exposure, could modify gene expression.
times? 38.A scientist discovers a virus encoding a Protein X
30.A mutation within the promoter region can alter that degrades a subunit of the eIF4F complex.
transcription of a gene. Describe how this can Knowing that this virus transcribes its own mRNAs in
happen. the cytoplasm of human cells, why would Protein X
be an effective virulence factor?
31.What could happen if a cell had too much of an
activating transcription factor present? 39.New drugs are being developed that decrease
DNA methylation and prevent the removal of acetyl
32.A scientist identifies a potential transcription
groups from histone proteins. Explain how these
regulation site 300bp downstream of a gene and
drugs could affect gene expression to help kill tumor
hypothesizes that it is a repressor. What experiment
cells.
(with results) could he perform to support this
hypothesis? 40.How can understanding the gene expression
pattern in a cancer cell tell you something about that
33.Describe how RBPs can prevent miRNAs from
specific form of cancer?
degrading an RNA molecule.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 472
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 461
17 | BIOTECHNOLOGY
AND GENOMICS
Figure 17.1 Genomics compares the DNA of different organisms, enabling scientists to create maps with which to
navigate different organisims' DNA. (credit "map": modification of photo by NASA)
Chapter Outline
17.1:Biotechnology
17.2:Mapping Genomes
17.3:Whole-Genome Sequencing
17.4:Applying Genomics
17.5:Genomics and Proteomics
Introduction
The study of nucleic acids began with the discovery of DNA, progressed to the study of genes and small
fragments,andhasnowexplodedtothefieldofgenomics.Genomicsisthestudyofentiregenomes,including
the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and organization, and their interactions within a species
and with other species. DNA sequencing technology has contributed to advances in genomics. Just as
informationtechnologyhasledtoGooglemapsthatenablepeopletoobtaindetailedinformationaboutlocations
around the globe, researchers use genomic information to create similar DNA maps of different organisms.
Thesefindings havehelpedanthropologists tobetter understand humanmigration andhaveaidedthemedical
fieldthroughmappinghumangeneticdiseases.Genomicinformationcancontributetoscientificunderstanding
in various ways and knowledge in the field is quickly growing.
17.1 | Biotechnology
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe gel electrophoresis
• Explain molecular and reproductive cloning
• Describe biotechnology uses in medicine and agriculture
PAGE: 473
462 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
Biotechnology is the use of biological agents for technological advancement. Biotechnology was used for
breeding livestock and crops long before people understood the scientific basis of these techniques. Since the
discovery of the structure of DNA in 1953, the biotechnology field has grown rapidly through both academic
research and private companies. The primary applications of this technology are in medicine (vaccine and
antibiotic production) and agriculture (crop genetic modification in order to increase yields). Biotechnology also
has many industrial applications, such as fermentation, treating oil spills, and producing biofuels (Figure 17.2).
Figure 17.2 Fungi, bacteria, and other organisms that have antimicrobial properties produce antibiotics. The first
antibioticdiscoveredwaspenicillin.Pharmaceuticalcompaniesnowcommerciallyproduceandtestantibioticsfortheir
potentialtoinhibitbacterialgrowth.(credit"advertisement":modificationofworkbyNIH;credit"testplate":modification
of work by Don Stalons/CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Basic Techniques to Manipulate Genetic Material (DNA and RNA)
To understand the basic techniques used to work with nucleic acids, remember that nucleic acids are
macromoleculesmadeofnucleotides(asugar,aphosphate,andanitrogenousbase)linkedbyphosphodiester
bonds. The phosphate groups on these molecules each have a net negative charge. An entire set of DNA
moleculesinthenucleusiscalledthegenome.DNAhastwocomplementarystrandslinkedbyhydrogenbonds
between the paired bases. Exposure to high temperatures (DNA denaturation) can separate the two strands
and cooling can reanneal them. The DNA polymerase enzyme can replicate the DNA. Unlike DNA, which is
locatedintheeukaryoticcells'nucleus,RNAmoleculesleavethenucleus.ThemostcommontypeofRNAthat
researchers analyze is the messenger RNA (mRNA) because it represents the protein-coding genes that are
activelyexpressed.However,RNAmoleculespresentsomeotherchallengestoanalysis,astheyareoftenless
stable than DNA.
DNA and RNA Extraction
To study or manipulate nucleic acids, one must first isolate or extract the DNA or RNA from the cells.
ResearchersusevarioustechniquestoextractdifferenttypesofDNA(Figure17.3).Mostnucleicacidextraction
techniquesinvolvestepstobreakopenthecellanduseenzymaticreactionstodestroyallmacromoleculesthat
arenotdesired(suchasunwantedmoleculedegradationandseparationfromtheDNAsample).Alysisbuffer
(a solution which is mostly a detergent) breaks cells. Note that lysis means "to split". These enzymes break
apart lipid molecules in the cell membranes and nuclear membranes. Enzymes such as proteases that break
down proteins inactivate macromolecules, and ribonucleases (RNAses) that break down RNA. Using alcohol
precipitates the DNA. Human genomic DNA is usually visible as a gelatinous, white mass. One can store the
DNA samples frozen at –80°C for several years.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 474
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 463
Figure 17.3This diagram shows the basic method of DNA extraction.
Scientists perform RNA analysis to study gene expression patterns in cells. RNA is naturally very unstable
becauseRNAsesarecommonlypresentinnatureandverydifficulttoinactivate.SimilartoDNA,RNAextraction
involves using various buffers and enzymes to inactivate macromolecules and preserve the RNA.
Gel Electrophoresis
BecausenucleicacidsarenegativelychargedionsatneutralorbasicpHinanaqueousenvironment,anelectric
field can mobilize them. Gel electrophoresis is a technique that scientists use to separate molecules on the
basis of size, using this charge. One can separate the nucleic acids as whole chromosomes or fragments.
Thenucleicacidsloadintoaslotnearthesemisolid,porousgelmatrix'snegativeelectrode,andpulledtoward
the positive electrode at the gel's opposite end. Smaller molecules move through the gel's pores faster than
larger molecules. This difference in the migration rate separates the fragments on the basis of size. There
are molecular weight standard samples that researchers can run alongside the molecules to provide a size
comparison. We can observe nucleic acids in a gel matrix using various fluorescent or colored dyes. Distinct
nucleicacidfragmentsappearasbandsatspecificdistancesfromthegel'stop(thenegativeelectrodeend)on
the basis of their size (Figure 17.4). A mixture of genomic DNA fragments of varying sizes appear as a long
smear;whereas,uncutgenomicDNAisusuallytoolargetorunthroughthegelandformsasinglelargebandat
the gel's top.
PAGE: 475
464 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
Figure17.4a)ShownareDNAfragmentsfromsevensamplesrunonagel,stainedwithafluorescentdye,andviewed
underUVlight;andb)aresearcherfromInternationalRiceResearchInstitute,reviewingDNAprofilesusingUVlight.
(credit: a: James Jacob, Tompkins Cortland Community College b: International Rice Research Institute)
Nucleic Acid Fragment Amplification by Polymerase Chain Reaction
Although genomic DNA is visible to the naked eye when it is extracted in bulk, DNA analysis often requires
focusing on one or more specific genome regions. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a technique that
scientistsusetoamplifyspecificDNAregionsforfurtheranalysis(Figure17.5).ResearchersusePCRformany
purposes in laboratories, such as cloning gene fragments to analyze genetic diseases, identifying contaminant
foreign DNA in a sample, and amplifying DNA for sequencing. More practical applications include determining
paternity and detecting genetic diseases.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 476
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 465
Figure 17.5 Scientists use polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, to amplify a specific DNA sequence. Primers—short
piecesofDNAcomplementarytoeachendofthetargetsequencecombinewithgenomicDNA,Taqpolymerase,and
deoxynucleotides.TaqpolymeraseisaDNApolymeraseisolatedfromthethermostablebacteriumThermusaquaticus
that is able to withstand the high temperatures that scientists use in PCR. Thermus aquaticus grows in the Lower
GeyserBasinofYellowstoneNationalPark.ReversetranscriptasePCR(RT-PCR)issimilartoPCR,butcDNAismade
from an RNA template before PCR begins.
DNA fragments can also be amplified from an RNA template in a process called reverse transcriptase PCR
(RT-PCR). The first step is to recreate the original DNA template strand (called cDNA) by applying DNA
nucleotidestothemRNA.Thisprocessiscalledreversetranscription.Thisrequiresthepresenceofanenzyme
called reverse transcriptase. After the cDNA is made, regular PCR can be used to amplify it.
Deepen your understanding of the polymerase chain reaction by clicking through this interactive exercise
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/PCR).
Hybridization, Southern Blotting, and Northern Blotting
Scientists can probe nucleic acid samples, such as fragmented genomic DNA and RNA extracts, for the
presenceofcertainsequences.ScientistsdesignandlabelshortDNAfragments,orprobeswithradioactiveor
fluorescent dyes to aid detection. Gel electrophoresis separates the nucleic acid fragments according to their
PAGE: 477
466 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
size. Scientists then transfer the fragments in the gel onto a nylon membrane in a procedure we call blotting
(Figure 17.6). Scientists can then probe the nucleic acid fragments that are bound to the membrane's surface
with specific radioactively or fluorescently labeled probe sequences. When scientists transfer DNA to a nylon
membrane,theyrefertothetechniqueasSouthernblotting.WhentheytransfertheRNAtoanylonmembrane,
theycallitNorthernblotting.ScientistsuseSouthernblotstodetectthepresenceofcertainDNAsequencesin
a given genome, and Northern blots to detect gene expression.
Figure17.6ScientistsuseSouthernblottingtofindaparticularsequenceinaDNAsample.ScientistsseparateDNA
fragmentsonagel,transferthemtoanylonmembrane,andincubatethemwithaDNAprobecomplementarytothe
sequenceofinterest.NorthernblottingissimilartoSouthernblotting,butscientistsrunRNAonthegelinsteadofDNA.
In Western blotting, scientists run proteins on a gel and detect them using antibodies.
Molecular Cloning
In general, the word “cloning” means the creation of a perfect replica; however, in biology, the re-creation of
a whole organism is referred to as “reproductive cloning.” Long before attempts were made to clone an entire
organism,researcherslearnedhowtoreproducedesiredregionsorfragmentsofthegenome,aprocessthatis
referred to as molecular cloning.
Cloning small genome fragments allows researchers to manipulate and study specific genes (and their protein
products),ornoncodingregionsinisolation.Aplasmid,orvector,isasmallcircularDNAmoleculethatreplicates
independently of the chromosomal DNA. In cloning, scientists can use the plasmid molecules to provide a
"folder" in which to insert a desired DNA fragment. Plasmids are usually introduced into a bacterial host for
proliferation.Inthebacterialcontext,scientistscalltheDNAfragmentfromthehumangenome(orthegenome
of another studied organism) foreign DNA, or a transgene, to differentiate it from the bacterium's DNA, or the
host DNA.
Plasmidsoccurnaturallyinbacterialpopulations(suchasEscherichiacoli)andhavegenesthatcancontribute
favorable traits to the organism, such as antibiotic resistance (the ability to be unaffected by antibiotics).
Scientists have repurposed and engineered plasmids as vectors for molecular cloning and the large-scale
productionofimportantreagents,suchasinsulinandhumangrowthhormone.Animportantfeatureofplasmid
vectors is the ease with which scientists can introduce a foreign DNA fragment via the multiple cloning
site (MCS). The MCS is a short DNA sequence containing multiple sites that different commonly available
restriction endonucleases can cut. Restriction endonucleases recognize specific DNA sequences and cut
them in a predictable manner. They are naturally produced by bacteria as a defense mechanism against
foreign DNA. Many restriction endonucleases make staggered cuts in the two DNA strands, such that the
cut ends have a 2- or 4-base single-stranded overhang. Because these overhangs are capable of annealing
with complementary overhangs, we call them “sticky ends.” Adding the enzyme DNA ligase permanently joins
the DNA fragments via phosphodiester bonds. In this way, scientists can splice any DNA fragment generated
by restriction endonuclease cleavage between the plasmid DNA's two ends that has been cut with the same
restriction endonuclease (Figure 17.7).
Recombinant DNA Molecules
Plasmids with foreign DNA inserted into them are called recombinant DNA molecules because they are
created artificially and do not occur in nature. They are also called chimeric molecules because the origin of
different molecule parts of the molecules can be traced back to different species of biological organisms or
eventochemicalsynthesis.WecallproteinsthatareexpressedfromrecombinantDNAmoleculesrecombinant
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 478
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 467
proteins. Not all recombinant plasmids are capable of expressing genes. The recombinant DNA may need to
move into a different vector (or host) that is better designed for gene expression. Scientists may also engineer
plasmids to express proteins only when certain environmental factors stimulate them, so they can control the
recombinant proteins' expression.
Figure 17.7This diagram shows the steps involved in molecular cloning.
You are working in a molecular biology lab and, unbeknownst to you, your lab partner left the foreign
genomicDNAthatyouareplanningtocloneonthelabbenchovernightinsteadofstoringitinthefreezer.
Asaresult,itwasdegradedbynucleases,butstillusedintheexperiment.Theplasmid,ontheotherhand,
is fine. What results would you expect from your molecular cloning experiment?
a. There will be no colonies on the bacterial plate.
b. There will be blue colonies only.
c. There will be blue and white colonies.
d. The will be white colonies only.
PAGE: 479
468 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
View an animation of recombination in cloning (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/recombination) from the
DNA Learning Center.
Cellular Cloning
Unicellular organisms, suchasbacteria andyeast, naturally produceclonesofthemselves whentheyreplicate
asexually by binary fission; this is known as cellular cloning. The nuclear DNA duplicates by the process of
mitosis, which creates an exact replica of the genetic material.
Reproductive Cloning
Reproductive cloning is a method scientists use to clone or identically copy an entire multicellular organism.
Most multicellular organisms undergo reproduction by sexual means, which involves genetic hybridization of
twoindividuals(parents),makingitimpossibletogenerateanidenticalcopyoracloneofeitherparent.Recent
advances in biotechnology have made it possible to artificially induce mammal asexual reproduction in the
laboratory.
Parthenogenesis,or“virginbirth,”occurswhenanembryogrowsanddevelopswithouteggfertilization.Thisisa
formofasexualreproduction.Anexampleofparthenogenesisoccursinspeciesinwhichthefemalelaysanegg
andiftheeggisfertilized,itisadiploideggandtheindividualdevelopsintoafemale.Iftheeggisnotfertilized,
itremainsahaploidegganddevelopsintoamale.Theunfertilizedeggisaparthenogenic,orvirginegg.Some
insects and reptiles lay parthenogenic eggs that can develop into adults.
Sexual reproduction requires two cells. When the haploid egg and sperm cells fuse, a diploid zygote results.
The zygote nucleus contains the genetic information to produce a new individual. However, early embryonic
development requires the cytoplasmic material contained in the egg cell. This idea forms the basis for
reproductivecloning.Therefore,ifwereplacetheeggcell'shaploidnucleuswithadiploidnucleusfromthecell
ofanyindividualofthesamespecies(adonor),itwillbecomeazygotethatisgeneticallyidenticaltothedonor.
Somaticcellnucleartransferisthetechniqueoftransferringadiploidnucleusintoanenucleatedegg.Scientists
can use it for either therapeutic cloning or reproductive cloning.
ThefirstclonedanimalwasDolly,asheepbornin1996.Thereproductivecloningsuccessrateatthetimewas
very low. Dolly lived for seven years and died of respiratory complications (Figure 17.8). There is speculation
that because the cell DNA belongs to an older individual, DNA's age may affect a cloned individual's life
expectancy. Since Dolly, scientists have cloned successfully several animals such as horses, bulls, and goats,
although these animals often exhibit facial, limb, and cardiac abnormalities. There have been attempts at
producing cloned human embryos as sources of embryonic stem cells for therapeutic purposes. Therapeutic
cloning produces stem cells in the attempt to remedy detrimental diseases or defects (unlike reproductive
cloning,whichaimstoreproduceanorganism).Still,somehavemettherapeuticcloningeffortswithresistance
because of bioethical considerations.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 480
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 469
Figure17.8Dollythesheepwasthefirstmammaltobecloned.TocreateDolly,theyremovedthenucleusfroma
donoreggcell.Theythenintroducedthenucleusfromasecondsheepintothecell,whichdividedtotheblastocyst
stage before they implanted it in a surrogate mother. (credit: modification of work by "Squidonius"/Wikimedia
Commons)
Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset or a Scottish Blackface sheep?
Genetic Engineering
Geneticengineeringisthealterationofanorganism’sgenotypeusingrecombinantDNAtechnologytomodify
an organism’s DNA to achieve desirable traits. The addition of foreign DNA in the form of recombinant DNA
vectorsgeneratedbymolecularcloningisthemostcommonmethodofgeneticengineering.Theorganismthat
receives the recombinant DNA is a genetically modified organism (GMO). If the foreign DNA comes from a
different species, the host organism is transgenic. Scientists have genetically modified bacteria, plants, and
animals since the early 1970s for academic, medical, agricultural, and industrial purposes. In the US, GMOs
such as Roundup-ready soybeans and borer-resistant corn are part of many common processed foods.
Gene Targeting
Althoughclassicalmethodsofstudyinggenefunctionbeganwithagivenphenotypeanddeterminedthegenetic
basisofthatphenotype,moderntechniquesallowresearcherstostartattheDNAsequencelevelandask:"What
does this gene or DNA element do?" This technique, reverse genetics, has resulted in reversing the classic
geneticmethodology.Thismethodwouldbesimilartodamagingabodyparttodetermineitsfunction.Aninsect
that loses a wing cannot fly, which means that the wing's function is flight. The classical genetic method would
compareinsectsthatcannotflywithinsectsthatcanfly,andobservethatthenon-flyinginsectshavelostwings.
Similarly, mutating or deleting genes provides researchers with clues about gene function. We collectively call
the methods they use to disable gene function gene targeting. Gene targeting is the use of recombinant DNA
vectors to alter a particular gene's expression, either by introducing mutations in a gene, or by eliminating a
certain gene's expression by deleting a part or all of the gene sequence from the organism's genome.
PAGE: 481
470 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
Biotechnology in Medicine and Agriculture
It is easy to see how biotechnology can be used for medicinal purposes. Knowledge of the genetic makeup of
ourspecies,thegeneticbasisofheritablediseases,andtheinventionoftechnologytomanipulateandfixmutant
genes provides methods to treat the disease. Biotechnology in agriculture can enhance resistance to disease,
pest, and environmental stress, and improve both crop yield and quality.
Genetic Diagnosis and Gene Therapy
Scientists call the process of testing for suspected genetic defects before administering treatment genetic
diagnosis by genetic testing. Depending on the inheritance patterns of a disease-causing gene, family
members are advised to undergo genetic testing. For example, doctors usually advise women diagnosed with
breastcancertohaveabiopsysothatthemedicalteamcandeterminethegeneticbasisofcancerdevelopment.
Doctors base treatment plans on genetic test findings that determine the type of cancer. If inherited gene
mutations cause the cancer, doctors also advise other female relatives to undergo genetic testing and periodic
screeningforbreastcancer.Doctorsalsooffergenetictestingforfetuses(orembryoswithinvitrofertilization)to
determine the presence or absence of disease-causing genes in families with specific debilitating diseases.
Gene therapy is a genetic engineering technique used to cure disease. In its simplest form, it involves the
introductionofagoodgeneatarandomlocationinthegenometoaidthecureofadiseasethatiscausedbya
mutatedgene.Thegoodgeneisusuallyintroducedintodiseasedcellsaspartofavectortransmittedbyavirus
thatcaninfectthehostcellanddelivertheforeignDNA(Figure17.9).Moreadvancedformsofgenetherapytry
tocorrectthemutationattheoriginalsiteinthegenome,suchasisthecasewithtreatmentofseverecombined
immunodeficiency (SCID).
Figure17.9Genetherapyusinganadenovirusvectorcanbeusedtocurecertaingeneticdiseasesinwhichaperson
has a defective gene. (credit: NIH)
Production of Vaccines, Antibiotics, and Hormones
Traditionalvaccinationstrategiesuseweakenedorinactiveformsofmicroorganismstomounttheinitialimmune
response.Moderntechniquesusethegenesofmicroorganismsclonedintovectorstomassproducethedesired
antigen.Doctorsthenintroducetheantigenintothebodytostimulatetheprimaryimmuneresponseandtrigger
immune memory. The medical field has used genes cloned from the influenza virus to combat the constantly
changing strains of this virus.
Antibiotics are a biotechnological product. Microorganisms, such as fungi, naturally produce them to attain an
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 482
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 471
advantage over bacterial populations. Cultivating and manipulating fungal cells produces antibodies.
Scientists used recombinant DNA technology to produce large-scale quantities of human insulin in E. coli as
earlyas1978.Previously,itwasonlypossibletotreatdiabeteswithpiginsulin,whichcausedallergicreactions
inhumansbecauseofdifferences inthegeneproduct. Inaddition, doctors usehumangrowth hormone(HGH)
totreatgrowthdisordersinchildren.ResearchersclonedtheHGHgenefromacDNAlibraryandinserteditinto
E. colicells by cloning it into a bacterial vector.
Transgenic Animals
Althoughseveralrecombinantproteinsinmedicinearesuccessfullyproducedinbacteria,someproteinsrequire
a eukaryotic animal host for proper processing. For this reason, the desired genes are cloned and expressed
in animals, such as sheep, goats, chickens, and mice. We call animals that have been modified to express
recombinantDNAtransgenicanimals.Severalhumanproteinsareexpressedintransgenicsheepandgoatmilk,
and some are expressed in chicken eggs. Scientists have used mice extensively for expressing and studying
recombinant gene and mutation effects.
Transgenic Plants
Manipulating the DNA of plants (i.e., creating GMOs) has helped to create desirable traits, such as disease
resistance,herbicideandpesticideresistance,betternutritionalvalue,andbettershelf-life(Figure17.10).Plants
are the most important source of food for the human population. Farmers developed ways to select for plant
varieties with desirable traits long before modern-day biotechnology practices were established.
Figure 17.10 Corn, a major agricultural crop used to create products for a variety of industries, is often modified
through plant biotechnology. (credit: Keith Weller, USDA)
We call plants that have received recombinant DNA from other species transgenic plants. Because they are
not natural, government agencies closely monitor transgenic plants and other GMOs to ensure that they are fit
forhumanconsumptionanddonotendangerotherplantandanimallife.Becauseforeigngenescanspreadto
other species in the environment, extensive testing is required to ensure ecological stability. Staples like corn,
potatoes, and tomatoes were the first crop plants that scientists genetically engineered.
Transformation of Plants UsingAgrobacterium tumefaciens
Gene transfer occurs naturally between species in microbial populations. Many viruses that cause human
diseases, suchascancer,actbyincorporating their DNA into thehumangenome. Inplants, tumors causedby
PAGE: 483
472 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
the bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens occur by DNA transfer from the bacterium to the plant. Although the
tumors do not kill the plants, they stunt the plants and they become more susceptible to harsh environmental
conditions. A. tumefaciens affects many plants such as walnuts, grapes, nut trees, and beets. Artificially
introducing DNA into plant cells is more challenging than in animal cells because of the thick plant cell wall.
ResearchersusedthenaturaltransferofDNAfromAgrobacteriumtoaplanthosttointroduceDNAfragmentsof
theirchoiceintoplanthosts.Innature,thedisease-causingA.tumefacienshaveasetofplasmids,Tiplasmids
(tumor-inducing plasmids), that contain genes to produce tumors in plants. DNA from the Ti plasmid integrates
into the infected plant cell’s genome. Researchers manipulate the Ti plasmids to remove the tumor-causing
genes and insert the desired DNA fragment for transfer into the plant genome. The Ti plasmids carry antibiotic
resistance genes to aid selection and researchers can propagate them inE. colicells as well.
The Organic InsecticideBacillus thuringiensis
Bacillusthuringiensis(Bt)isabacteriumthatproducesproteincrystalsduringsporulationthataretoxictomany
insect species that affect plants. Insects need to ingest Bt toxin in order to activate the toxin. Insects that have
eaten Bt toxin stop feeding on the plants within a few hours. After the toxin activates in the insects' intestines,
they die within a couple of days. Modern biotechnology has allowed plants to encode their own crystal Bt
toxin that acts against insects. Scientists have cloned the crystal toxin genes from Bt and introduced them into
plants.Bttoxinissafefortheenvironment,nontoxictohumansandothermammals,andorganicfarmershave
approved it as a natural insecticide.
Flavr Savr Tomato
ThefirstGMcroponthemarketwastheFlavrSavrTomatoin1994.ScientistsusedantisenseRNAtechnology
to slow the softening and rotting process caused by fungal infections, which led to increased shelf life of the
GM tomatoes. Additional genetic modification improved the tomato's flavor. The Flavr Savr tomato did not
successfully stay in the market because of problems maintaining and shipping the crop.
17.2 | Mapping Genomes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define genomics
• Describe genetic and physical maps
• Describe genomic mapping methods
Genomics is the study of entire genomes, including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and
organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species. Genome mapping is the process
offindingthelocationsofgenesoneachchromosome.Themapsthatgenomemappingcreatearecomparable
to the maps that we use to navigate streets. A genetic map is an illustration that lists genes and their location
onachromosome.Geneticmapsprovidethebigpicture(similartoaninterstatehighwaymap)andusegenetic
markers(similartolandmarks).Ageneticmarkerisageneorsequenceonachromosomethatco-segregates
(showsgeneticlinkage)withaspecifictrait.Earlygeneticistscalledthislinkageanalysis.Physicalmapspresent
the intimate details of smaller chromosome regions (similar to a detailed road map). A physical map is a
representationofthephysicaldistance,innucleotides,betweengenesorgeneticmarkers.Bothgeneticlinkage
mapsandphysicalmapsarerequiredtobuildagenome’scompletepicture.Havingacompletegenomemapof
the genome makes it easier for researchers to study individual genes. Human genome maps help researchers
intheireffortstoidentifyhumandisease-causinggenesrelatedtoillnesseslikecancer,heartdisease,andcystic
fibrosis. We can use genome mapping in a variety of other applications, such as using live microbes to clean
uppollutantsorevenpreventpollution.Researchinvolvingplantgenomemappingmayleadtoproducinghigher
crop yields or developing plants that better adapt to climate change.
Genetic Maps
Thestudyofgeneticmapsbeginswithlinkageanalysis,aprocedurethatanalyzestherecombinationfrequency
between genes to determine if they are linked or show independent assortment. Scientists used the term
linkage before the discovery of DNA. Early geneticists relied on observing phenotypic changes to understand
anorganism’sgenotype. ShortlyafterGregorMendel(thefatherofmoderngenetics)proposedthattraitswere
determined by what we now call genes, other researchers observed that different traits were often inherited
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 484
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 473
together,andtherebydeducedthatthegeneswerephysicallylinkedbytheirlocationonthesamechromosome.
Gene mapping relative to each other based on linkage analysis led to developing the first genetic maps.
Observations that certain traits were always linked and certain others were not linked came from studying the
offspringofcrossesbetweenparentswithdifferenttraits.Forexample,ingardenpeaexperiments,researchers
discovered,thattheflower’scolorandplantpollen’sshapewerelinkedtraits,andthereforethegenesencoding
these traits were in close proximity on the same chromosome. We call exchanging DNA between homologous
chromosome pairs genetic recombination, which occurs by crossing over DNA between homologous DNA
strands,suchasnonsisterchromatids.Linkageanalysisinvolvesstudyingtherecombinationfrequencybetween
anytwogenes.Thegreaterthedistancebetweentwogenes,thehigherthechancethatarecombinationevent
will occur between them, and the higher the recombination frequency between them. Figure 17.11 shows two
possibilitiesforrecombinationbetweentwononsisterchromatidsduringmeiosis.Iftherecombinationfrequency
between two genes is less than 50 percent, they are linked.
Figure17.11Crossovermayoccuratdifferentlocationsonthechromosome.RecombinationbetweengenesAandB
ismorefrequentthanrecombinationbetweengenesBandCbecausegenesAandBarefartherapart.Therefore,a
crossover is more likely to occur between them.
The generation of genetic maps requires markers, just as a road map requires landmarks (such as rivers
and mountains). Scientists based early genetic maps on using known genes as markers. Scientists now use
more sophisticated markers, including those based on non-coding DNA, to compare individuals’ genomes in a
population.Althoughindividualsofagivenspeciesaregeneticallysimilar,theyarenotidentical.Everyindividual
hasauniquesetoftraits.Theseminordifferencesinthegenomebetweenindividualsinapopulationareuseful
for genetic mapping purposes. In general, a good genetic marker is a region on the chromosome that shows
variability or polymorphism (multiple forms) in the population.
Some genetic markers that scientists use in generating genetic maps are restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLP), variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs), microsatellite polymorphisms, and
thesinglenucleotidepolymorphisms(SNPs).WecandetectRFLPs(sometimespronounced“rif-lips”)when
the DNA of an individual is cut with a restriction endonuclease that recognizes specific sequences in the DNA
togenerateaseriesofDNAfragments,whichwecanthenanalyzeusinggelelectrophoresis.Everyindividual’s
DNA will give rise to a unique pattern of bands when cut with a particular set of restriction endonucleases.
Scientists sometimes refer to this as an individual’s DNA “fingerprint.” Certain chromosome regions that are
subject to polymorphism will lead to generating the unique banding pattern. VNTRs are repeated sets of
nucleotidespresentinDNA’snon-codingregions.Non-coding,or“junk,”DNAhasnoknownbiologicalfunction;
however, research shows that much of this DNA is actually transcribed. While its function is uncertain, it is
certainly active, and it may be involved in regulating coding genes. The number of repeats may vary in a
population’sindividualorganisms.MicrosatellitepolymorphismsaresimilartoVNTRs,buttherepeatunitisvery
small. SNPs are variations in a single nucleotide.
PAGE: 485
474 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
Becausegeneticmapsrelycompletelyonthenaturalprocessofrecombination,naturalincreasesordecreases
in the recombination level given genome area affects mapping. Some parts of the genome are recombination
hotspots;whereas,othersdonotshowapropensityforrecombination.Forthisreason,itisimportanttolookat
mapping information developed by multiple methods.
Physical Maps
Aphysicalmapprovidesdetailoftheactualphysicaldistancebetweengeneticmarkers,aswellasthenumber
ofnucleotides.Therearethreemethodsscientistsusetocreateaphysicalmap:cytogeneticmapping,radiation
hybrid mapping, and sequence mapping. Cytogenetic mapping uses information from microscopic analysis
of stained chromosome sections (Figure 17.12). It is possible to determine the approximate distance between
genetic markers using cytogenetic mapping, but not the exact distance (number of base pairs). Radiation
hybrid mapping uses radiation, such as x-rays, to break the DNA into fragments. We can adjust the radiation
amount to create smaller or larger fragments. This technique overcomes the limitation of genetic mapping,
and we can adjust the radiation so that increased or decreased recombination frequency does not affect it.
SequencemappingresultedfromDNAsequencingtechnologythatallowedforcreatingdetailedphysicalmaps
withdistancesmeasuredintermsofthenumberofbasepairs.Creatinggenomiclibrariesandcomplementary
DNA (cDNA) libraries (collections of cloned sequences or all DNA from a genome) has sped the physical
mapping process. A genetic site that scientists use to generate a physical map with sequencing technology (a
sequence-taggedsite,orSTS)isauniquesequenceinthegenomewithaknownexactchromosomallocation.
Anexpressedsequencetag(EST)andasinglesequencelengthpolymorphism(SSLP)arecommonSTSs.An
ESTisashortSTSthatwecanidentifywithcDNAlibraries,whileweobtainSSLPsfromknowngeneticmarkers,
which provide a link between genetic and physical maps.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 486
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 475
Figure 17.12 A cytogenetic map shows the appearance of a chromosome after scientists stain and exam it under a
microscope. (credit: National Human Genome Research Institute)
Genetic and Physical Maps Integration
Genetic maps provide the outline and physical maps provide the details. It is easy to understand why both
genome mapping technique types are important to show the big picture. Scientists use information from each
technique in combination to study the genome. Scientists are using genomic mapping with different model
organisms for research. Genome mapping is still an ongoing process, and as researchers develop more
advancedtechniques,theyexpectmorebreakthroughs.Genomemappingissimilartocompletingacomplicated
puzzle using every piece of available data. Mapping information generated in laboratories all over the world
goes into central databases, such as GenBank at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).
Researchers are making efforts for the information to be more easily accessible to other researchers and the
generalpublic.Justasweuseglobalpositioningsystemsinsteadofpapermapstonavigatethroughroadways,
NCBI has created a genome viewer tool to simplify the data-mining process.
PAGE: 487
476 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
How to Use a Genome Map Viewer
Problem statement: Do the human, macaque, and mouse genomes contain common DNA sequences?
Develop a hypothesis.
To test the hypothesis, click thislink (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mapview/).
InSearchboxontheleftpanel,typeanygenenameorphenotypiccharacteristic,suchasirispigmentation
(eye color). Select the species you want to study, and then press Enter. The genome map viewer will
indicatewhichchromosomeencodesthegeneinyoursearch.Clickeachhitinthegenomeviewerformore
detailedinformation.Thistypeofsearchisthemostbasicuseofthegenomeviewer.Youcanalsouseitto
compare sequences between species, as well as many other complicated tasks.
Is the hypothesis correct? Why or why not?
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) is a searchable online catalog of human genes and genetic
disorders. This website shows genome mapping information, and also details the history and research of
each trait and disorder. Click this link (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/OMIM) to search for traits (such as
handedness) and genetic disorders (such as diabetes).
17.3 | Whole-Genome Sequencing
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe three types of sequencing
• Define whole-genome sequencing
Although there have been significant advances in the medical sciences in recent years, doctors are still
confounded by some diseases, and they are using whole-genome sequencing to discover the root of the
problem.Whole-genomesequencingisaprocessthatdeterminesanentiregenome’sDNAsequence.Whole-
genomesequencingisabrute-forceapproachtoproblemsolvingwhenthereisageneticbasisatthecoreofa
disease. Several laboratories now provide services to sequence, analyze, and interpret entire genomes.
For example, whole-exome sequencing is a lower-cost alternative to whole genome sequencing. In exome
sequencing, the doctor sequences only the DNA’s coding, exon-producing regions. In 2010, doctors used
whole-exome sequencing to save a young boy whose intestines had multiple mysterious abscesses. The child
had several colon operations with no relief. Finally, they performed whole-exome sequencing, which revealed
a defect in a pathway that controls apoptosis (programmed cell death). The doctors used a bone-marrow
transplant to overcome this genetic disorder, leading to a cure for the boy. He was the first person to receive
successful treatment based on a whole-exome sequencing diagnosis. Today, human genome sequencing is
more readily available and results are available within two days for about $1000.
Strategies Used in Sequencing Projects
The basic sequencing technique used in all modern day sequencing projects is the chain termination method
(alsoknownasthedideoxymethod),whichFredSangerdevelopedinthe1970s.Thechainterminationmethod
involves DNA replication of a single-stranded template by using a primer and a regular deoxynucleotide
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 488
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 477
(dNTP), which is a monomer, or a single DNA unit. The primer and dNTP mix with a small proportion of
fluorescently labeled dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs). The ddNTPs are monomers that are missing a hydroxyl
group (–OH) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain (Figure 17.13). Scientists
label each ddNTP with a different color of fluorophore. Every time a ddNTP incorporates in the growing
complementary strand, it terminates the DNA replication process, which results in multiple short strands of
replicated DNA that each terminate at a different point during replication. When gel electrophoresis processes
thereactionmixtureafterseparatingintosinglestrands,themultiplenewlyreplicatedDNAstrandsformaladder
becauseofthedifferingsizes.BecausetheddNTPsarefluorescentlylabeled,eachbandonthegelreflectsthe
DNA strand’s size and the ddNTP that terminated the reaction. The different colors of the fluorophore-labeled
ddNTPshelpidentifytheddNTPincorporatedatthatposition.Readingthegelonthebasisofeachband’scolor
on the ladder produces the template strand’s sequence (Figure 17.14).
Figure 17.13 A dideoxynucleotide is similar in structure to a deoxynucleotide, but is missing the 3' hydroxyl group
(indicated by the box). When a dideoxynucleotide is incorporated into a DNA strand, DNA synthesis stops.
Figure 17.14 This figure illustrates Frederick Sanger's dideoxy chain termination method. Using dideoxynucleotides,
theDNAfragmentcanterminateatdifferentpoints.TheDNAseparatesonthebasisofsize,andwecanreadthese
bands based on the fragments’ size.
Early Strategies: Shotgun Sequencing and Pair-Wise End Sequencing
In shotgun sequencing method, several DNA fragment copies cut randomly into many smaller pieces
(somewhat like what happens to a round shot cartridge when fired from a shotgun). All of the segments
sequence using the chain-sequencing method. Then, with sequence computer assistance, scientists can
analyze the fragments to see where their sequences overlap. By matching overlapping sequences at each
fragment’s end, scientists can reform the entire DNA sequence. A larger sequence that is assembled from
overlapping shorter sequences is called a contig. As an analogy, consider that someone has four copies of
a landscape photograph that you have never seen before and know nothing about how it should appear. The
personthenripsupeachphotographwiththeirhands,sothatdifferentsizepiecesarepresentfromeachcopy.
PAGE: 489
478 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
The person then mixes all of the pieces together and asks you to reconstruct the photograph. In one of the
smallerpiecesyouseeamountain.Inalargerpiece,youseethatthesamemountainisbehindalake.Athird
fragmentshowsonlythelake,butitrevealsthatthereisacabinontheshoreofthelake.Therefore,fromlooking
at the overlapping information in these three fragments, you know that the picture contains a mountain behind
a lake that has a cabin on its shore. This is the principle behind reconstructing entire DNA sequences using
shotgun sequencing.
Originally, shotgun sequencing only analyzed one end of each fragment for overlaps. This was sufficient for
sequencing small genomes. However, the desire to sequence larger genomes, such as that of a human, led
to developing double-barrel shotgun sequencing, or pairwise-end sequencing. In pairwise-end sequencing,
scientists analyze each fragment’s end for overlap. Pairwise-end sequencing is, therefore, more cumbersome
than shotgun sequencing, but it is easier to reconstruct the sequence because there is more available
information.
Next-generation Sequencing
Since2005,automatedsequencingtechniquesusedbylaboratoriesareundertheumbrellaofnext-generation
sequencing,whichisagroupofautomatedtechniquesusedforrapidDNAsequencing.Theseautomatedlow-
cost sequencers can generate sequences of hundreds of thousands or millions of short fragments (25 to 500
basepairs)inthespanofoneday.Thesesequencersusesophisticatedsoftwaretogetthroughthecumbersome
process of putting all the fragments in order.
Comparing Sequences
A sequence alignment is an arrangement of proteins, DNA, or RNA. Scientists use it to identify similar
regions between cell types or species, which may indicate function or structure conservation. We can use
sequencealignmentstoconstructphylogenetictrees.Thefollowingwebsiteusesasoftwareprogramcalled
BLAST (basic local alignment search tool) (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) .
Under “Basic Blast,” click “Nucleotide Blast.” Input the following sequence into the large "query sequence"
box:ATTGCTTCGATTGCA.Belowthebox,locatethe"Species"fieldandtype"human"or"Homosapiens".
Then click “BLAST” to compare the inputted sequence against the human genome’s known sequences.
Theresultisthatthissequenceoccursinoverahundredplacesinthehumangenome.Scrolldownbelow
the graphic with the horizontal bars and you will see a short description of each of the matching hits. Pick
oneof the hits nearthe top of the list andclickon"Graphics". This will bring youto apage that showsthe
sequence’s location within the entire human genome. You can move the slider that looks like a green flag
back and forth to view the sequences immediately around the selected gene. You can then return to your
selected sequence by clicking the "ATG" button.
Use of Whole-Genome Sequences of Model Organisms
British biochemist and Nobel Prize winner Fred Sanger used a bacterial virus, the bacteriophage fx174 (5368
basepairs), tocompletely sequencethefirst genome. Other scientists later sequencedseveralother organelle
andviralgenomes.Americanbiotechnologist,biochemist,geneticist,andbusinessmanCraigVentersequenced
the bacterium Haemophilus influenzae in the 1980s. Approximately 74 different laboratories collaborated on
sequencing the genome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which began in 1989 and was completed in
1996, because it was 60 times bigger than any other genome sequencing. By 1997, the genome sequences
of two important model organisms were available: the bacterium Escherichia coli K12 and the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We now know the genomes of other model organisms, such as the mouse Mus
musculus, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, the nematode Caenorhabditis. elegans, and humans Homo
sapiens. Researchers perform extensive basic research in model organisms because they can apply the
information to genetically similar organisms. A model organism is a species that researchers use as a model
to understand the biological processes in other species that the model organism represents. Having entire
genomes sequenced helps with the research efforts in these model organisms. The process of attaching
biologicalinformationtogenesequencesisgenomeannotation.Annotatinggenesequenceshelpswithbasic
experiments in molecular biology, such as designing PCR primers and RNA targets.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 490
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 479
Click through each genome sequencing step at thissite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/DNA_sequence).
Genome Sequence Uses
DNA microarrays are methods that scientists use to detect gene expression by analyzing different DNA
fragmentsthatarefixedtoaglassslideorasiliconchiptoidentifyactivegenesandsequences.Wecandiscover
almostonemilliongenotypicabnormalitiesusingmicroarrays;whereas,whole-genomesequencingcanprovide
informationaboutallsixbillionbasepairsinthehumangenome.Althoughstudyinggenomesequencingmedical
applications is interesting, this discipline dwells on abnormal gene function. Knowing about the entire genome
will allow researchers to discover future onset diseases and other genetic disorders early. This will allow for
moreinformeddecisionsaboutlifestyle,medication,andhavingchildren.Genomicsisstillinitsinfancy,although
someday it may become routine to use whole-genome sequencing to screen every newborn to detect genetic
abnormalities.
Inadditiontodiseaseandmedicine,genomicscancontributetodevelopingnovelenzymesthatconvertbiomass
to biofuel, which results in higher crop and fuel production, and lower consumer cost. This knowledge should
allow better methods of control over the microbes that industry uses to produce biofuels. Genomics could
also improve monitoring methods that measure the impact of pollutants on ecosystems and help clean up
environmentalcontaminants.Genomicshasaidedindevelopingagrochemicalsandpharmaceuticalsthatcould
benefit medical science and agriculture.
Itsoundsgreattohavealltheknowledgewecangetfromwhole-genomesequencing;however,humanshavea
responsibilitytousethisknowledgewisely.Otherwise,itcouldbeeasytomisusethepowerofsuchknowledge,
leadingtodiscriminationbasedonaperson'sgenetics,humangeneticengineering,andotherethicalconcerns.
This information could also lead to legal issues regarding health and privacy.
17.4 | Applying Genomics
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain pharmacogenomics
• Define polygenic
IntroducingDNAsequencingandwholegenomesequencingprojects,particularlytheHumanGenomeproject,
has expanded the applicability of DNA sequence information. Many fields, such as metagenomics,
pharmacogenomics, and mitochondrial genomics are using genomics. Understanding and finding cures for
diseases is the most common application of genomics.
Predicting Disease Risk at the Individual Level
Predicting disease risk involves screening currently healthy individuals by genome analysis at the individual
level. Health care professionals can recommend intervention with lifestyle changes and drugs before disease
onset. However, this approach is most applicable when the problem resides within a single gene defect. Such
defects only account for approximately 5 percent of diseases in developed countries. Most of the common
diseases, such as heart disease, are multi-factored or polygenic, which is a phenotypic characteristic that
involves two or more genes, and also involve environmental factors such as diet. In April 2010, scientists
at Stanford University published the genome analysis of a healthy individual (Stephen Quake, a scientist at
Stanford University, who had his genome sequenced. The analysis predicted his propensity to acquire various
diseases.ThemedicalteamperformedariskassessmenttoanalyzeQuake’spercentageofriskfor55different
medical conditions. The team found a rare genetic mutation, which showed him to be at risk for sudden heart
attack. The results also predicted that Quake had a 23 percent risk of developing prostate cancer and a 1.4
PAGE: 491
480 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
percent risk of developing Alzheimer’s. The scientists used databases and several publications to analyze the
genomicdata.Eventhoughgenomicsequencingisbecomingmoreaffordableandanalyticaltoolsarebecoming
more reliable, researchers still must address ethical issues surrounding genomic analysis at a population level.
Figure17.15PCA3isagenethatisexpressedinprostateepithelialcellsandoverexpressedincancerouscells.
AhighPCA3concentrationinurineisindicativeofprostatecancer.ThePCA3testisabetterindicatorofcancer
than the more well known PSA test, which measures the level of PSA (prostate-specific antigen) in the blood.
In 2011, the United States Preventative Services Task Force recommended against using the PSA test to
screen healthy men for prostate cancer. Their recommendation is based on evidence that screening does
notreducetheriskofdeathfromprostatecancer.Prostatecanceroftendevelopsveryslowlyanddoesnot
causeproblems,whilethecancertreatmentcanhaveseveresideeffects.ThePCA3testismoreaccurate,
but screening may still result in men who would not have been harmed by the cancer itself suffering side
effectsfromtreatment.Whatdoyouthink?Shouldallhealthymenreceiveprostatecancerscreeningsusing
the PCA3 or PSA test? Should people in general receive screenings to find out if they have a genetic risk
for cancer or other diseases?
Pharmacogenomics and Toxicogenomics
Pharmacogenomics, or toxicogenomics, involves evaluating drug effectiveness and safety on the basis of
information from an individual's genomic sequence. We can study genomic responses to drugs using
experimentalanimals(suchaslaboratoryratsormice)orlivecellsinthelaboratorybeforeembarkingonstudies
with humans. Studying changes in gene expression could provide information about the transcription profile
in the drug's presence, which we can use as an early indicator of the potential for toxic effects. For example,
genesinvolvedincellulargrowthandcontrolledcelldeath,whendisturbed,couldleadtocancerouscellgrowth.
Genome-wide studies can also help to find new genes involved in drug toxicity. Medical professionals can use
personal genome sequence information to prescribe medications that will be most effective and least toxic on
thebasisoftheindividualpatient’sgenotype.Thegenesignaturesmaynotbecompletelyaccurate,butmedical
professionals can test them further before pathologic symptoms arise.
Microbial Genomics: Metagenomics
Traditionally, scholars have taught microbiology with the view that it is best to study microorganisms under
pure culture conditions. This involves isolating a single cell type and culturing it in the laboratory. Because
microorganismscangothroughseveralgenerationsinamatterofhours,theirgeneexpressionprofilesadaptto
thenewlaboratoryenvironmentveryquickly.Inaddition,thevastmajorityofbacterialspeciesresistculturingin
isolation.Mostmicroorganismsdonotliveasisolatedentities,butinmicrobialcommunitiesorbiofilms.Forallof
thesereasons,purecultureisnotalwaysthebestwaytostudymicroorganisms.Metagenomicsisthestudyof
thecollectivegenomesofmultiplespeciesthatgrowandinteractinanenvironmentalniche.Metagenomicscan
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 492
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 481
beusedtoidentifynewspeciesmorerapidlyandtoanalyzetheeffectofpollutantsontheenvironment(Figure
17.16).
Figure 17.16Metagenomics involves isolating DNA from multiple species within an environmental niche.
Microbial Genomics: Creation of New Biofuels
Knowledge of the genomics of microorganisms is being used to find better ways to harness biofuels from
algaeandcyanobacteria. Theprimarysourcesoffuel today arecoal, oil, wood, andother plant products, such
as ethanol. Although plants are renewable resources, there is still a need to find more alternative renewable
sourcesofenergytomeetourpopulation’senergydemands.Themicrobialworldisoneofthelargestresources
for genes that encode new enzymes and produce new organic compounds, and it remains largely untapped.
Microorganismsareusedtocreateproducts,suchasenzymesthatareusedinresearch,antibiotics,andother
antimicrobial mechanisms. Microbial genomics is helping to develop diagnostic tools, improved vaccines, new
disease treatments, and advanced environmental cleanup techniques.
Mitochondrial Genomics
Mitochondria are intracellular organelles that contain their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA mutates at a rapid
rate and scientists often use it to study evolutionary relationships. Another feature that makes studying the
mitochondrial genome interesting is that the mitochondrial DNA in most multicellular organisms passes from
themotherduringthefertilizationprocess.Forthisreason,scientistsoftenusemitochondrialgenomicstotrace
genealogy.
Experts have used information and clues from DNA samples at crime scenes as evidence in court cases, and
theyhaveusedgeneticmarkersinforensicanalysis.Genomicanalysishasalsobecomeusefulinthisfield.The
firstpublicationshowcasingthefirstuseofgenomicsinforensicscameoutin2001.Itwasacollaborativeattempt
between academic research institutions and the FBI to solve the mysterious cases of anthrax communicated
via the US Postal Service. Using microbial genomics, researchers determined that the culprit used a specific
anthrax strain in all the mailings.
Genomics in Agriculture
Genomics can reduce the trials and failures involved in scientific research to a certain extent, which could
improveagriculturalcropyieldqualityandquantity.Linkingtraitstogenesorgenesignatureshelpsimprovecrop
breedingtogeneratehybridswiththemostdesirablequalities.Scientistsusegenomicdatatoidentifydesirable
traits, and then transfer those traits to a different organism. Researchers are discovering how genomics can
improveagriculturalproduction'squalityandquantity.Forexample,scientistscouldusedesirabletraitstocreate
PAGE: 493
482 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
a useful product or enhance an existing product, such as making a drought-sensitive crop more tolerant of the
dry season.
17.5 | Genomics and Proteomics
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain systems biology
• Describe a proteome
• Define protein signature
Proteins are the final products of genes, which help perform the function that the gene encodes. Amino acids
comprise proteins and play important roles in the cell. All enzymes (except ribozymes) are proteins that act
as catalysts to affect the rate of reactions. Proteins are also regulatory molecules, and some are hormones.
Transportproteins,suchashemoglobin,helptransportoxygentovariousorgans.Antibodiesthatdefendagainst
foreign particles are also proteins. In the diseased state, protein function can be impaired because of changes
at the genetic level or because of direct impact on a specific protein.
Aproteomeistheentiresetofproteinsthatacelltypeproduces.Wecanstudyproteomsusingtheknowledge
of genomes because genes code for mRNAs, and the mRNAs encode proteins. Although mRNA analysis is a
step in the right direction, not all mRNAs are translated into proteins. Proteomics is the study of proteomes'
function.Proteomicscomplementsgenomicsandisusefulwhenscientistswanttotesttheirhypothesesthatthey
based on genes. Even though all multicellular organisms' cells have the same set of genes, the set of proteins
producedindifferenttissuesisdifferentanddependentongeneexpression.Thus,thegenomeisconstant,but
the proteome varies and is dynamic within an organism. In addition, RNAs can be alternately spliced (cut and
pastedtocreatenovelcombinationsandnovelproteins)andmanyproteinsmodifythemselvesaftertranslation
by processes such as proteolytic cleavage, phosphorylation, glycosylation, and ubiquitination. There are also
protein-protein interactions, which complicate studying proteomes. Although the genome provides a blueprint,
the final architecture depends on several factors that can change the progression of events that generate the
proteome.
Metabolomics is related to genomics and proteomics. Metabolomics involves studying small molecule
metabolites in an organism. The metabolome is the complete set of metabolites that are related to an
organism's genetic makeup. Metabolomics offers an opportunity to compare genetic makeup and physical
characteristics, as well as genetic makeup and environmental factors. The goal of metabolome research is to
identify, quantify, and catalogue all the metabolites in living organisms' tissues and fluids.
Basic Techniques in Protein Analysis
The ultimate goal of proteomics is to identify or compare the proteins expressed from a given genome under
specificconditions,studytheinteractionsbetweentheproteins,andusetheinformationtopredictcellbehavior
or develop drug targets. Just as scientists analyze the genome using the basic DNA sequencing technique,
proteomicsrequirestechniquesforproteinanalysis.Thebasictechniqueforproteinanalysis,analogoustoDNA
sequencing, is mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry identifies and determines a molecule's characteristics.
Advances in spectrometry have allowed researchers to analyze very small protein samples. X-ray
crystallography, for example, enables scientists to determine a protein crystal's three-dimensional structure
at atomic resolution. Another protein imaging technique, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), uses atoms'
magneticpropertiestodeterminetheprotein'sthree-dimensionalstructureinaqueoussolution.Scientistshave
also used protein microarrays to study protein interactions. Large-scale adaptations of the basic two-hybrid
screen (Figure 17.17) have provided the basis for protein microarrays. Scientists use computer software to
analyze the vast amount of data for proteomic analysis.
Genomic- and proteomic-scale analyses are part of systems biology, which is the study of whole biological
systems (genomes and proteomes) based on interactions within the system. The European Bioinformatics
Institute andtheHumanProteomeOrganization(HUPO)aredevelopingandestablishingeffectivetoolstosort
through the enormous pile of systems biology data. Because proteins are the direct products of genes and
reflectactivityatthegenomiclevel,itisnaturaltouseproteomestocomparetheproteinprofilesofdifferentcells
to identify proteins and genes involved in disease processes. Most pharmaceutical drug trials target proteins.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 494
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 483
Researchers use information that they obtain from proteomics to identify novel drugs and to understand their
mechanisms of action.
Figure 17.17 Scientists use two-hybrid screening to determine whether two proteins interact. In this method, a
transcriptionfactorsplitsintoaDNA-bindingdomain(BD)andanactivatordomain(AD).Thebindingdomainisableto
bindthepromoterintheactivatordomain'sabsence,butitdoesnotturnontranscription.Thebaitproteinattachesto
the BD, and the prey protein attaches to the AD. Transcription occurs only if the prey “catches” the bait.
Scientists are challenged when implementing proteomic analysis because it is difficult to detect small protein
quantities. Although mass spectrometry is good for detecting small protein amounts, variations in protein
expressionindiseasedstatescanbedifficulttodiscern.Proteinsarenaturallyunstablemolecules,whichmakes
proteomic analysis much more difficult than genomic analysis.
Cancer Proteomics
Researchers are studying patients' genomes and proteomes to understand the genetic basis of diseases. The
most prominent disease researchers are studying with proteomic approaches is cancer. These approaches
improve screening and early cancer detection. Researchers are able to identify proteins whose expression
indicates the disease process. An individual protein is a biomarker; whereas, a set of proteins with altered
expression levels is a protein signature. For a biomarker or protein signature to be useful as a candidate for
early cancer screening and detection, they must secrete in body fluids, such as sweat, blood, or urine, such
thathealthprofessionalscanperformlarge-scalescreeningsinanoninvasivefashion.Thecurrentproblemwith
using biomarkers for early cancer detection is the high rate of false-negative results. A false negative is an
incorrect test result that should have been positive. In other words, many cancer cases go undetected, which
makesbiomarkersunreliable.SomeexamplesofproteinbiomarkersincancerdetectionareCA-125forovarian
cancerandPSAforprostatecancer.Proteinsignaturesmaybemorereliablethanbiomarkerstodetectcancer
cells.Researchersarealsousingproteomicstodevelopindividualizedtreatmentplans,whichinvolvespredicting
whetherornotanindividualwillrespondtospecificdrugsandthesideeffectsthattheindividualmayexperience.
Researchers also use proteomics to predict the possibility of disease recurrence.
TheNationalCancerInstitutehasdevelopedprogramstoimprovecancerdetectionandtreatment.TheClinical
Proteomic Technologies for Cancer and the Early Detection Research Network are efforts to identify protein
signatures specific to different cancer types. The Biomedical Proteomics Program identifies protein signatures
and designs effective therapies for cancer patients.
PAGE: 495
484 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
KEY TERMS
antibiotic resistance ability of an organism to be unaffected by an antibiotic's actions
biomarker individual protein that is uniquely produced in a diseased state
biotechnology use of biological agents for technological advancement
cDNA library collection of cloned cDNA sequences
cellular cloning production of identical cell populations by binary fission
chain termination method method of DNA sequencing using labeled dideoxynucleotides to terminate DNA
replication; it is also called the dideoxy method or the Sanger method
clone exact replica
contig larger sequence of DNA assembled from overlapping shorter sequences
cytogenetic mapping technique that uses a microscope to create a map from stained chromosomes
deoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer (single unit)
dideoxynucleotide individual DNA monomer that is missing a hydroxyl group (–OH)
DNA microarray methodtodetectgeneexpressionbyanalyzingmanyDNAfragmentsthatarefixedtoaglass
slide or a silicon chip to identify active genes and identify sequences
expressed sequence tag (EST) short STS that is identified with cDNA
false negative incorrect test result that should have been positive
foreign DNA DNA that belongs to a different species or DNA that is artificially synthesized
gel electrophoresis technique used to separate molecules on the basis of size using electric charge
gene targeting method for altering the sequence of a specific gene by introducing the modified version on a
vector
gene therapy technique used to cure inheritable diseases by replacing mutant genes with good genes
genetic diagnosis diagnosis of the potential for disease development by analyzing disease-causing genes
genetic engineering alteration of the genetic makeup of an organism
genetic map outline of genes and their location on a chromosome
genetic marker gene or sequence on a chromosome with a known location that is associated with a specific
trait
genetic recombination DNA exchange between homologous chromosome pairs
genetic testing process of testing for the presence of disease-causing genes
genetically modified organism (GMO) organism whose genome has been artificially changed
genome annotation process of attaching biological information to gene sequences
genome mapping process of finding the location of genes on each chromosome
genomic library collectionofclonedDNAwhichrepresentsallofthesequencesandfragmentsfromagenome
genomics study of entire genomes including the complete set of genes, their nucleotide sequence and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 496
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 485
organization, and their interactions within a species and with other species
host DNA DNA that is present in the genome of the organism of interest
linkage analysis procedure that analyzes recombining genes to determine if they are linked
lysis buffer solution to break the cell membrane and release cell contents
metabolome complete set of metabolites which are related to an organism's genetic makeup
metabolomics study of small molecule metabolites in an organism
metagenomics study of multiple species' collective genomes that grow and interact in an environmental niche
microsatellite polymorphism variationbetweenindividualsinthesequenceandnumberofmicrosatelliteDNA
repeats
model organism speciesthatresearchersstudyanduseasamodeltounderstandthebiologicalprocessesin
other species represented by the model organism
molecular cloning cloning of DNA fragments
multiple cloning site (MCS) site that multiple restriction endonucleases can recognize
next-generation sequencing group of automated techniques for rapid DNA sequencing
Northern blotting transfer of RNA from a gel to a nylon membrane
pharmacogenomics study of drug interactions with the genome or proteome; also called toxicogenomics
physical map representation of the physical distance between genes or genetic markers
polygenic phenotypic characteristic caused by two or more genes
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique to amplify DNA
probe small DNA fragment to determine if the complementary sequence is present in a DNA sample
protease enzyme that breaks down proteins
protein signature set of uniquely expressed proteins in the diseased state
proteome entire set of proteins that cell type produces
proteomics study of proteomes' function
pure culture growth of a single cell type in the laboratory
radiation hybrid mapping information obtained by fragmenting the chromosome with x-rays
recombinant DNA combiningDNAfragmentsthatmolecularcloninggeneratesthatdonotexistinnature;also
a chimeric molecule
recombinant protein a gene's protein product derived by molecular cloning
reproductive cloning entire organism cloning
restriction endonuclease enzyme that can recognize and cleave specific DNA sequences
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) variation between individuals in the length of DNA
fragments, which restriction endonucleases generate
reverse genetics method of determining the gene's function by starting with the gene itself instead of starting
with the gene product
PAGE: 497
486 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) PCR technique that involves converting RNA to DNA by reverse
transcriptase
ribonuclease enzyme that breaks down RNA
sequence mapping mapping information obtained after DNA sequencing
shotgun sequencing method used to sequence multiple DNA fragments to generate the sequence of a large
piece of DNA
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation between individuals in a single nucleotide
Southern blotting DNA transfer from a gel to a nylon membrane
systems biology studyofwholebiologicalsystems(genomesandproteomes)basedoninteractionswithinthe
system
Ti plasmid plasmid system derived from Agrobacterium tumifaciens that scientists have used to introduce
foreign DNA into plant cells
transgenic organism that receives DNA from a different species
variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs) variation in the number of tandem repeats between individuals
in the population
whole-genome sequencing process that determines an entire genome's DNA sequence
CHAPTER SUMMARY
17.1Biotechnology
Nucleic acids can be isolated from cells for the purposes of further analysis by breaking open the cells and
enzymatically destroying all other major macromolecules. Fragmented or whole chromosomes can separate on
the basis of size by gel electrophoresis. PCR can amplify short DNA or RNA stretches. Researchers can use
Southern and Northern blotting to detect the presence of specific short sequences in a DNA or RNA sample.
The term “cloning” may refer to cloning small DNA fragments (molecular cloning), cloning cell populations
(cellular cloning), or cloning entire organisms (reproductive cloning). Medical professionals perform genetic
testing to identify disease-causing genes, and use gene therapy to cure an inheritable disease.
Transgenic organisms possess DNA from a different species, usually generated by molecular cloning
techniques. Vaccines, antibiotics, and hormones are examples of products obtained by recombinant DNA
technology. Scientists usually create transgenic plants to improve crop plant characteristics.
17.2Mapping Genomes
Genome mapping is similar to solving a big, complicated puzzle with pieces of information coming from
laboratories all over the world. Genetic maps provide an outline for locating genes within a genome, and they
estimate the distance between genes and genetic markers on the basis of recombination frequencies during
meiosis. Physical maps provide detailed information about the physical distance between the genes. The most
detailed information is available through sequence mapping. Researchers combine information from all
mapping and sequencing sources to study an entire genome.
17.3Whole-Genome Sequencing
Whole-genome sequencing is the latest available resource to treat genetic diseases. Some doctors are using
whole-genome sequencing to save lives. Genomics has many industrial applications including biofuel
development, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, and pollution control. The basic principle of all modern-day
sequencing strategies involves the chain termination method of sequencing.
Although the human genome sequences provide key insights to medical professionals, researchers use whole-
genome sequences of model organisms to better understand the species' genome. Automation and the
decreased cost of whole-genome sequencing may lead to personalized medicine in the future.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 498
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 487
17.4Applying Genomics
Imagination is the only barrier to the applicability of genomics. Researchers are applying genomics to most
fields of biology. They use it for personalized medicine, prediction of disease risks at an individual level,
studying drug interactions before conducting clinical trials, and studying microorganisms in the environment as
opposed to the laboratory. They are also applying it to developments such as generating new biofuels,
genealogical assessment using mitochondria, advances in forensic science, and improvements in agriculture.
17.5Genomics and Proteomics
Proteomics is the study of the entire set of proteins expressed by a given type of cell under certain
environmental conditions. In a multicellular organism, different cell types will have different proteomes, and
these will vary with environmental changes. Unlike a genome, a proteome is dynamic and in constant flux,
which makes it both more complicated and more useful than the knowledge of genomes alone.
Proteomics approaches rely on protein analysis. Researchers are constantly upgrading these techniques.
Researchers have used proteomics to study different cancer types. Medical professionals are using different
biomarkers and protein signatures to analyze each cancer type. The future goal is to have a personalized
treatment plan for each individual.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 17.7You are working in a molecular 3.Figure 17.15In 2011, the United States
biology lab and, unbeknownst to you, your lab Preventative Services Task Force recommended
partner left the foreign genomic DNA that you are against using the PSA test to screen healthy men for
planning to clone on the lab bench overnight instead prostate cancer. Their recommendation is based on
of storing it in the freezer. As a result, it was evidence that screening does not reduce the risk of
degraded by nucleases, but still used in the death from prostate cancer. Prostate cancer often
experiment. The plasmid, on the other hand, is fine. develops very slowly and does not cause problems,
What results would you expect from your molecular while the cancer treatment can have severe side
cloning experiment? effects. ThePCA3test is considered to be more
a. There will be no colonies on the bacterial accurate, but screening may still result in men who
plate. would not have been harmed by the cancer itself
b. There will be blue colonies only. suffering side effects from treatment. What do you
c. There will be blue and white colonies. think? Should all healthy men be screened for
d. The will be white colonies only. prostate cancer using thePCA3or PSA test? Should
people in general be screened to find out if they have
2.Figure 17.8Do you think Dolly was a Finn-Dorset
a genetic risk for cancer or other diseases?
or a Scottish Blackface sheep?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.GMOs are created by ________. a. is of pig origin
a. generating genomic DNA fragments with b. is a recombinant protein
restriction endonucleases c. is made by the human pancreas
b. introducing recombinant DNA into an d. is recombinant DNA
organism by any means
7.Bt toxin is considered to be ________.
c. overexpressing proteins inE. coli
a. a gene for modifying insect DNA
d. all of the above
b. an organic insecticide produced by bacteria
5.Gene therapy can be used to introduce foreign c. useful for humans to fight against insects
DNA into cells ________. d. a recombinant protein
a. for molecular cloning
8.The Flavr Savr Tomato:
b. by PCR
a. is a variety of vine-ripened tomato in the
c. of tissues to cure inheritable disease
supermarket
d. all of the above
b. was created to have better flavor and shelf-
6.Insulin produced by molecular cloning: life
c. does not undergo soft rot
d. all of the above
9.ESTs are ________.
PAGE: 499
488 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
a. generated after a cDNA library is made
b. unique sequences in the genome a. is currently possible
c. useful for mapping using sequence b. could lead to legal issues regarding
information discrimination and privacy
d. all of the above c. could help make informed choices about
medical treatment
10.Linkage analysis ________.
d. all of the above
a. is used to create a physical map
b. is based on the natural recombination 17.What is the most challenging issue facing
process genome sequencing?
c. requires radiation hybrid mapping a. the inability to develop fast and accurate
d. involves breaking and rejoining of DNA sequencing techniques
artificially b. the ethics of using information from
genomes at the individual level
11.Genetic recombination occurs by which process?
c. the availability and stability of DNA
d. all of the above
a. independent assortment
b. crossing over 18.Genomics can be used in agriculture to:
c. chromosome segregation a. generate new hybrid strains
d. sister chromatids b. improve disease resistance
c. improve yield
12.Individual genetic maps in a given species are:
d. all of the above
a. genetically similar 19.Genomics can be used on a personal level to:
b. genetically identical
c. genetically dissimilar a. decrease transplant rejection
d. not useful in species analysis b. predict genetic diseases that a person may
have inherited
13.Information obtained by microscopic analysis of
c. determine the risks of genetic diseases for
stained chromosomes is used in:
an individual’s children
a. radiation hybrid mapping
d. all of the above
b. sequence mapping
c. RFLP mapping 20.What is a biomarker?
d. cytogenetic mapping a. the color coding of different genes
b. a protein that is uniquely produced in a
14.The chain termination method of sequencing:
diseased state
c. a molecule in the genome or proteome
a. uses labeled ddNTPs
d. a marker that is genetically inherited
b. uses only dideoxynucleotides
c. uses only deoxynucleotides 21.A protein signature is:
d. uses labeled dNTPs a. the path followed by a protein after it is
synthesized in the nucleus
15.Whole-genome sequencing can be used for
b. the path followed by a protein in the
advances in:
cytoplasm
a. the medical field
c. a protein expressed on the cell surface
b. agriculture
d. a unique set of proteins present in a
c. biofuels
diseased state
d. all of the above
16.Sequencing an individual person’s genome
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
22.Describe the process of Southern blotting. able to have answered about yourself?
23.A researcher wants to study cancer cells from a 26.Why is so much effort being poured into genome
patient with breast cancer. Is cloning the cancer cells mapping applications?
an option?
27.How could a genetic map of the human genome
24.How would a scientist introduce a gene for help find a cure for cancer?
herbicide resistance into a plant?
28.Explain why metagenomics is probably the most
25.If you had a chance to get your genome revolutionary application of genomics.
sequenced, what are some questions you might be
29.How can genomics be used to predict disease
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 500
Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics 489
risk and treatment options? detection and treatment?
30.How has proteomics been used in cancer 31.What is personalized medicine?
PAGE: 501
490 Chapter 17 | Biotechnology and Genomics
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 502
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 491
18 | EVOLUTION AND THE
ORIGIN OF SPECIES
Figure18.1Allorganismsareproductsofevolutionadaptedtotheirenvironment.(a)Saguaro(Carnegieagigantea)
cansoakup750litersofwaterinasinglerainstorm,enablingthesecactitosurvivethedryconditionsoftheSonora
desert in Mexico and the Southwestern United States. (b) The Andean semiaquatic lizard (Potamites montanicola)
discovered in Peru in 2010 lives between 1,570 to 2,100 meters in elevation, and, unlike most lizards, is nocturnal
and swims. Scientists still do not know how these cold-blood animals are able to move in the cold (10 to 15°C)
temperatures of the Andean night. (credit a: modification of work by Gentry George, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service;
credit b: modification of work by Germán Chávez and Diego Vásquez,ZooKeys)
Chapter Outline
18.1:Understanding Evolution
18.2:Formation of New Species
18.3:Reconnection and Speciation Rates
Introduction
All living organisms, from bacteria to baboons to blueberries, evolved at some point from a different species.
Althoughitmayseemthatlivingthingstodaystaymuchthesame,thatisnotthecase—evolutionisanongoing
process.
Thetheoryofevolutionistheunifyingtheoryofbiology,meaningitistheframeworkwithinwhichbiologistsask
questionsaboutthelivingworld.Itspoweristhatitprovidesdirectionforpredictionsaboutlivingthingsthatare
borne out in ongoing experiments. The Ukrainian-born American geneticist Theodosius Dobzhansky famously
[1]
wrotethat“nothingmakessenseinbiologyexceptinthelightofevolution.” Hemeantthatthetenetthatalllife
hasevolvedanddiversifiedfromacommonancestoristhefoundationfromwhichweapproachallquestionsin
biology.
1. Theodosius Dobzhansky. “Biology, Molecular and Organismic.”American Zoologist4, no. 4 (1964): 449.
PAGE: 503
492 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
18.1 | Understanding Evolution
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how scientists developed the present-day theory of evolution
• Define adaptation
• Explain convergent and divergent evolution
• Describe homologous and vestigial structures
• Discuss misconceptions about the theory of evolution
Evolution by natural selection describes a mechanism for how species change over time. Scientists,
philosophers, researchers, andothershadmadesuggestions anddebated thistopicwellbeforeDarwinbegan
to explore this idea. Classical Greek philosopher Plato emphasized in his writings that species were static
and unchanging, yet there were also ancient Greeks who expressed evolutionary ideas. In the eighteenth
century, naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc Comte de Buffon reintroduced ideas about the evolution of animals
and observed that various geographic regions have different plant and animal populations, even when the
environments are similar. Some at this time also accepted that there were extinct species.
Alsoduringtheeighteenthcentury,JamesHutton,aScottishgeologistandnaturalist,proposedthatgeological
change occurred gradually by accumulating small changes from processes operating like they are today over
long periods of time. This contrasted with the predominant view that the planet's geology was a consequence
of catastrophic events occurring during a relatively brief past. Nineteenth century geologist Charles Lyell
popularized Hutton's view. A friend to Darwin. Lyell’s ideas were influential on Darwin’s thinking: Lyell’s notion
ofthegreaterageofEarthgavemoretimeforgradualchangeinspecies,andtheprocessofchangeprovided
an analogy for this change. In the early nineteenth century, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck published a book that
detailed a mechanism for evolutionary change. We now refer to this mechanism as an inheritance of acquired
characteristicsbywhichtheenvironmentcausesmodificationsinanindividual,oroffspringcoulduseordisuse
of a structure during its lifetime, and thus bring about change in a species. While many discredited this
mechanism for evolutionary change, Lamarck’s ideas were an important influence on evolutionary thought.
Charles Darwin and Natural Selection
In the mid-nineteenth century, two naturalists, Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace, independently
conceived and described the actual mechanism for evolution. Importantly, each naturalist spent time exploring
thenaturalworldonexpeditionstothetropics.From1831to1836,DarwintraveledaroundtheworldonH.M.S.
Beagle, including stops in South America, Australia, and the southern tip of Africa. Wallace traveled to Brazil
to collect insects in the Amazon rainforest from 1848 to 1852 and to the Malay Archipelago from 1854 to
1862. Darwin’s journey, like Wallace’s later journeys to the Malay Archipelago, included stops at several island
chains, the last being the Galápagos Islands west of Ecuador. On these islands, Darwin observed species of
organisms on different islands that were clearly similar, yet had distinct differences. For example, the ground
finches inhabiting the Galápagos Islands comprised several species with a unique beak shape (Figure 18.2).
The species on the islands had a graded series of beak sizes and shapes with very small differences between
themostsimilar.HeobservedthatthesefinchescloselyresembledanotherfinchspeciesontheSouthAmerican
mainland.Darwinimaginedthattheislandspeciesmightbespeciesmodifiedfromoneoftheoriginalmainland
species.Uponfurtherstudy,herealizedthateachfinch'svariedbeakshelpedthebirdsacquireaspecifictypeof
food.Forexample,seed-eatingfincheshadstronger,thickerbeaksforbreakingseeds,andinsect-eatingfinches
had spear-like beaks for stabbing their prey.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 504
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 493
Figure18.2Darwinobservedthatbeakshapevariesamongfinchspecies.Hepostulatedthatancestralspecies'beaks
had adapted over time to equip the finches to acquire different food sources.
Wallace and Darwin both observed similar patterns in other organisms and they independently developed the
same explanation for how and why such changes could take place. Darwin called this mechanism natural
selection. Natural selection, or “survival of the fittest,” is the more prolific reproduction of individuals with
favorable traits that survive environmental change because of those traits. This leads to evolutionary change.
Forexample,DarwinobservedapopulationofgianttortoisesintheGalápagosArchipelagotohavelongernecks
than those that lived on other islands with dry lowlands. These tortoises were “selected” because they could
reach more leaves and access more food than those with short necks. In times of drought when fewer leaves
would be available, those that could reach more leaves had a better chance to eat and survive than those that
couldn’t reach the food source. Consequently, long-necked tortoises would be more likely to be reproductively
successful and pass the long-necked trait to their offspring. Over time, only long-necked tortoises would be
present in the population.
Natural selection, Darwin argued, was an inevitable outcome of three principles that operated in nature. First,
most characteristics of organisms are inherited, or passed from parent to offspring. Although no one, including
Darwin and Wallace, knew how this happened at the time, it was a common understanding. Second, more
offspring are produced than are able to survive, so resources for survival and reproduction are limited. The
capacityforreproductioninallorganismsoutstripstheavailabilityofresourcestosupporttheirnumbers.Thus,
there is competition for those resources in each generation. Both Darwin and Wallace’s understanding of this
principlecamefromreadingeconomistThomasMalthus'essaythatexplainedthisprincipleinrelationtohuman
populations. Third, offspring vary among each other in regard to their characteristics and those variations are
inherited. Darwin and Wallace reasoned that offspring with inherited characteristics which allow them to best
competeforlimitedresourceswillsurviveandhavemoreoffspringthanthoseindividualswithvariationsthatare
less able to compete. Because characteristics are inherited, these traits will be better represented in the next
generation.ThiswillleadtochangeinpopulationsovergenerationsinaprocessthatDarwincalleddescentwith
modification. Ultimately, natural selection leads to greater adaptation of the population to its local environment.
It is the only mechanism known for adaptive evolution.
In 1858, Darwin and Wallace (Figure 18.3) presented papers at the Linnean Society in London that discussed
the idea of natural selection. The following year Darwin’s book, On the Origin of Species, was published. His
book outlined in considerable detail his arguments for evolution by natural selection.
PAGE: 505
494 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
Figure 18.3 Both (a) Charles Darwin and (b) Alfred Wallace wrote scientific papers on natural selection that they
presented together at the Linnean Society in 1858.
It is difficult and time-consuming to document and present examples of evolution by natural selection. The
Galápagos finches are an excellent example. Peter and Rosemary Grant and their colleagues have studied
Galápagosfinchpopulationseveryyearsince1976andhaveprovidedimportantevidenceofnaturalselection.
The Grants found changes from one generation to the next in beak shape distribution with the medium ground
finchontheGalápagosislandofDaphneMajor.Thebirdshaveinheritedavariationintheirbillshapewithsome
having wide deep bills and others having thinner bills. During a period in which rainfall was higher than normal
because of an El Niño, there was a lack of large hard seeds of which the large-billed birds ate; however, there
was an abundance of the small soft seeds which the small-billed birds ate. Therefore, the small-billed birds
wereabletosurviveandreproduce.Intheyearsfollowing thisElNiño,theGrantsmeasuredbeaksizesinthe
population and found that the average bill size was smaller. Since bill size is an inherited trait, parents with
smaller bills had more offspring and the bill evolved into a much smaller size. As conditions improved in 1987
and larger seeds became more available, the trend toward smaller average bill size ceased.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 506
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 495
Field Biologist
Many people hike, explore caves, scuba dive, or climb mountains for recreation. People often participate
in these activities hoping to see wildlife. Experiencing the outdoors can be incredibly enjoyable and
invigorating.Whatifyourjobentailedworkinginthewilderness?Fieldbiologistsbydefinitionworkoutdoors
in the “field.” The term field in this case refers to any location outdoors, even under water. A field biologist
typically focuses research on a certain species, group of organisms, or a single habitat (Figure 18.4).
Figure 18.4A field biologist tranquilizes a polar bear for study. (credit: Karen Rhode)
One objective of many field biologists includes discovering new, unrecorded species. Not only do such
findingsexpandourunderstandingofthenaturalworld,buttheyalsoleadtoimportantinnovationsinfields
suchasmedicineandagriculture.Plantandmicrobialspecies,inparticular,canrevealnewmedicinaland
nutritive knowledge. Other organisms can play key roles in ecosystems or if rare require protection. When
discovered, researchers can use these important species as evidence for environmental regulations and
laws.
Processes and Patterns of Evolution
Natural selection can only take place if there is variation, or differences, among individuals in a population.
Importantly,thesedifferencesmusthavesomegeneticbasis;otherwise,theselectionwillnotleadtochangein
thenextgeneration.Thisiscriticalbecausenongeneticreasonscancausevariationamongindividualssuchas
an individual's height because of better nutrition rather than different genes.
Geneticdiversityinapopulationcomesfromtwomainmechanisms:mutationandsexualreproduction.Mutation,
achangeinDNA,istheultimatesourceofnewalleles,ornewgeneticvariationinanypopulation.Thegenetic
changes that mutation causes can have one of three outcomes on the phenotype. A mutation affects the
organism's phenotype in a way that gives it reduced fitness—lower likelihood of survival or fewer offspring. A
mutation may produce a phenotype with a beneficial effect on fitness. Many mutations will also have no effect
on the phenotype's fitness. We call these neutral mutations. Mutations may also have a whole range of effect
sizes on the organism's fitness that expresses them in their phenotype, from a small effect to a great effect.
Sexualreproductionalsoleadstogeneticdiversity:whentwoparentsreproduce,uniquecombinationsofalleles
assemble to produce the unique genotypes and thus phenotypes in each offspring.
We call a heritable trait that helps an organism's survival and reproduction in its present environment an
adaptation. Scientists describe groups of organisms adapting to their environment when a genetic variation
occurs over time that increases or maintains the population's “fit” to its environment. A platypus's webbed feet
areanadaptationforswimming.Asnowleopard'sthickfurisanadaptationforlivinginthecold.Acheetah'sfast
speed is an adaptation for catching prey.
PAGE: 507
496 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
Whether or not a trait is favorable depends on the current environmental conditions. The same traits are not
alwaysselectedbecauseenvironmentalconditionscanchange.Forexample,consideraplantspeciesthatgrew
in a moist climate and did not need to conserve water. Large leaves were selected because they allowed the
planttoobtainmoreenergyfromthesun.Largeleavesrequiremorewatertomaintainthansmallleaves,andthe
moist environment provided favorable conditions to support large leaves. After thousands of years, the climate
changed, and the area no longer had excess water. The direction of natural selection shifted so that plants
with small leaves were selected because those populations were able to conserve water to survive the new
environmental conditions.
The evolution of species has resulted in enormous variation in form and function. Sometimes, evolution gives
risetogroupsoforganismsthatbecometremendouslydifferentfromeachother.Wecalltwospeciesthatevolve
in diverse directions from a common point divergent evolution. We can see such divergent evolution in the
formsofthereproductiveorgansoffloweringplantswhichsharethesamebasicanatomies;however,theycan
lookverydifferentasaresultofselectionindifferentphysicalenvironmentsandadaptationtodifferentkindsof
pollinators (Figure 18.5).
Figure18.5Floweringplantsevolvedfromacommonancestor.Noticethatthe(a)denseblazingstar(Liatrusspicata)
and the (b) purple coneflower (Echinacea purpurea) vary in appearance, yet both share a similar basic morphology.
(credit a: modification of work by Drew Avery; credit b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
In other cases, similar phenotypes evolve independently in distantly related species. For example, flight has
evolved in both bats and insects, and they both have structures we refer to as wings, which are adaptations
to flight. However, bat and insect wings have evolved from very different original structures. We call this
phenomenon convergent evolution, where similar traits evolve independently in species that do not share a
common ancestry. The two species came to the same function, flying, but did so separately from each other.
These physical changes occur over enormous time spans and help explain how evolution occurs. Natural
selectionactsonindividualorganisms,whichcanthenshapeanentirespecies.Althoughnaturalselectionmay
workinasinglegenerationonanindividual,itcantakethousandsorevenmillionsofyearsforanentirespecies'
genotype to evolve. It is over these large time spans that life on earth has changed and continues to change.
Evidence of Evolution
Theevidenceforevolutioniscompellingandextensive.Lookingateveryleveloforganizationinlivingsystems,
biologistsseethesignatureofpastandpresentevolution.Darwindedicatedalargeportionofhisbook,Onthe
Origin of Species, to identifying patterns in nature that were consistent with evolution, and since Darwin, our
understanding has become clearer and broader.
Fossils
Fossilsprovidesolidevidencethatorganismsfromthepastarenotthesameasthosetoday,andfossilsshow
aprogressionofevolution.Scientistsdeterminetheageoffossilsandcategorizethemfromallovertheworldto
determinewhentheorganismslivedrelativetoeachother.Theresultingfossilrecordtellsthestoryofthepast
and shows the evolution of form over millions of years (Figure 18.6). For example, scientists have recovered
highly detailed records showing the evolution of humans and horses (Figure 18.6). The whale flipper shares
a similar morphology to bird and mammal appendages (Figure 18.7) indicating that these species share a
common ancestor.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 508
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 497
Figure18.6Inthis(a)display,fossilhominidsarearrangedfromoldest(bottom)tonewest(top).Ashominidsevolved,
the skull's shape changed. An artist’s rendition of (b) extinct species of the genus Equus reveals that these ancient
species resembled the modern horse (Equus ferus) but varied in size.
Anatomy and Embryology
Anothertypeofevidenceforevolutionisthepresenceofstructuresinorganismsthatsharethesamebasicform.
For example, the bones in human, dog, bird, and whale appendages all share the same overall construction
(Figure 18.7) resulting from their origin in a common ancestor's appendages. Over time, evolution led to
changes in the bones' shapes and sizes different species, but they have maintained the same overall layout.
Scientists call these synonymous partshomologous structures.
Figure 18.7The similar construction of these appendages indicates that these organisms share a common ancestor.
Somestructuresexistinorganismsthathavenoapparentfunctionatall,andappeartoberesidualpartsfroma
pastcommonancestor.Wecalltheseunusedstructureswithoutfunctionvestigialstructures.Otherexamples
of vestigial structures are wings on flightless birds, leaves on some cacti, and hind leg bones in whales.
Visit this interactive site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/bone_structures) to guess which bone structures
are homologous and which are analogous, and see examples of evolutionary adaptations to illustrate these
concepts.
Another evidence of evolution is the convergence of form in organisms that share similar environments. For
example, species of unrelated animals, such as the arctic fox and ptarmigan, living in the arctic region have
beenselectedforseasonalwhitephenotypesduringwintertoblendwiththesnowandice(Figure18.8).These
PAGE: 509
498 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
similaritiesoccurnotbecauseofcommonancestry,butbecauseofsimilarselectionpressures—thebenefitsof
predators not seeing them.
Figure 18.8 The white winter coat of the (a) arctic fox and the (b) ptarmigan’s plumage are adaptations to their
environments. (credit a: modification of work by Keith Morehouse)
Embryology, the study of the anatomy of an organism's development to its adult form, also provides evidence
ofrelatednessbetweennowwidelydivergentgroupsoforganisms.Mutationaltweakingintheembryocanhave
suchmagnifiedconsequencesintheadultthattendstoconserveembryoformation.Asaresult,structuresthat
are absent in some groups often appear in their embryonic forms and disappear when they reach the adult or
juvenileform.Forexample,allvertebrateembryos,includinghumans,exhibitgillslitsandtailsatsomepointin
their early development. These disappear in the adults of terrestrial groups but adult forms of aquatic groups
such as fish and some amphibians maintain them. Great ape embryos, including humans, have a tail structure
during their development that they lose when they are born.
Biogeography
The geographic distribution of organisms on the planet follows patterns that we can explain best by evolution
in conjunction with tectonic plate movement over geological time. Broad groups that evolved before the
supercontinentPangaeabrokeup(about200millionyearsago)aredistributedworldwide.Groupsthatevolved
since the breakup appear uniquely in regions of the planet, such as the unique flora and fauna of northern
continents that formed from the supercontinent Laurasia and of the southern continents that formed from the
supercontinent Gondwana. The presence of members of the plant family Proteaceae in Australia, southern
Africa, and South America was most predominant prior to the southern supercontinent Gondwana breaking up.
Marsupial diversification in Australia and the absence of other mammals reflect Australia’s long isolation.
Australia has an abundance of endemic species—species found nowhere else—which is typical of islands
whose isolation by expanses of water prevents species to migrate. Over time, these species diverge
evolutionarily into new species that look very different from their ancestors that may exist on the mainland.
Australia'smarsupials,theGalápagos'finches,andmanyspeciesontheHawaiianIslandsarealluniquetotheir
one point of origin, yet they display distant relationships to ancestral species on mainlands.
Molecular Biology
Like anatomical structures, the molecular structures of life reflect descent with modification. DNA's universality
reflects evidence of a common ancestor for all of life. Fundamental divisions in life between the genetic code,
DNAreplication,andexpressionarereflectedinmajorstructuraldifferencesinotherwiseconservativestructures
suchasribosomecomponentsandmembranestructures.Ingeneral,therelatednessofgroupsoforganismsis
reflected in the similarity of their DNA sequences—exactly the pattern that we would expect from descent and
diversification from a common ancestor.
DNAsequenceshavealsoshedlightonsomeofthemechanismsofevolution.Forexample,itisclearthatthe
evolutionofnewfunctionsforproteinscommonlyoccursaftergeneduplicationeventsthatallowfreelymodifying
one copy bymutation, selection, ordrift (changes in apopulation’sgene pool resulting from chance), while the
second copy continues to produce a functional protein.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 510
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 499
Misconceptions of Evolution
Although the theory of evolution generated some controversy when Darwin first proposed it, biologists almost
universally accepted it, particularly younger biologists, within 20 years after publication of On the Origin of
Species. Nevertheless, the theory of evolution is a difficult concept and misconceptions about how it works
abound.
This site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/misconceptions) addresses some of the main misconceptions
associated with the theory of evolution.
Evolution Is Just a Theory
Critics of the theory of evolution dismiss its importance by purposefully confounding the everyday usage of
the word “theory” with the way scientists use the word. In science, we understand a “theory” to be a body of
thoroughlytestedandverifiedexplanationsforasetofobservationsofthenaturalworld.Scientistshaveatheory
of the atom, a theory of gravity, and the theory of relativity, each which describes understood facts about the
world.Inthesameway,thetheoryofevolutiondescribesfactsaboutthelivingworld.Assuch,atheoryinscience
hassurvivedsignificanteffortstodiscredititbyscientists.Incontrast,a“theory”incommonvernacularisaword
meaningaguessorsuggestedexplanation.Thismeaningismoreakintothescientificconceptof“hypothesis.”
When critics of evolution say it is “just a theory,” they are implying that there is little evidence supporting it and
that it is still in the process of rigorous testing. This is a mischaracterization.
Individuals Evolve
Evolutionisthechangeinapopulation's geneticcompositionovertime,specificallyovergenerations,resulting
from differential reproduction of individuals with certain alleles. Individuals do change over their lifetime,
obviously,butthisisdevelopmentandinvolveschangesprogrammedbythesetofgenestheindividualacquired
atbirthincoordinationwiththeindividual’senvironment.Whenthinkingabouttheevolutionofacharacteristic,it
isprobablybesttothinkaboutthechangeoftheaveragevalueofthecharacteristicinthepopulationovertime.
Forexample,whennaturalselectionleadstobill-sizechangeinmediumgroundfinchesintheGalápagos, this
does not mean that individual bills on the finches are changing. If one measures the average bill size among
all individuals in the population at one time and then measures them in the population several years later, this
averagevaluewillbedifferentasaresultofevolution.Althoughsomeindividualsmaysurvivefromthefirsttime
tothesecond,theywillstillhavethesamebillsize;however,therewillbemanynewindividualswhocontribute
to the shift in average bill size.
Evolution Explains the Origin of Life
Itisacommonmisunderstandingthatevolutionincludesanexplanationoflife’sorigins.Conversely,someofthe
theory’scriticsbelievethatitcannotexplaintheoriginoflife.Thetheorydoesnottrytoexplaintheoriginoflife.
Thetheoryofevolutionexplainshowpopulationschangeovertimeandhowlifediversifiestheoriginofspecies.
Itdoesnotshedlightonthebeginningsoflifeincludingtheoriginsofthefirstcells,whichdefinelife.Importantly,
biologists believe that the presence of life on Earth precludes the possibility that the events that led to life on
Earthcanrepeatthemselvesbecausetheintermediatestageswouldimmediatelybecomefoodforexistingliving
things.
However,onceamechanismof inheritance wasinplaceinthe form of amoleculelikeDNA either within acell
orpre-cell,theseentitieswouldbesubjecttotheprincipleofnaturalselection.Moreeffectivereproducerswould
increaseinfrequencyattheexpenseofinefficientreproducers.Whileevolutiondoesnotexplaintheoriginoflife,
it may have something to say about some of the processes operating once pre-living entities acquired certain
properties.
Organisms Evolve on Purpose
Statements such as “organisms evolve in response to a change in an environment” are quite common, but
suchstatementscanleadtotwotypesofmisunderstandings.First,donotinterpretthestatementtomeanthat
PAGE: 511
500 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
individual organisms evolve. The statement is shorthand for “a population evolves in response to a changing
environment.” However, a second misunderstanding may arise by interpreting the statement to mean that
the evolution is somehow intentional. A changed environment results in some individuals in the population,
those with particular phenotypes, benefiting and therefore producing proportionately more offspring than other
phenotypes. This results in change in the population if the characteristics are genetically determined.
It is also important to understand that the variation that natural selection works on is already in a population
anddoesnotariseinresponsetoanenvironmentalchange.Forexample,applyingantibioticstoapopulationof
bacteria will, over time, select a population of bacteria that are resistant to antibiotics. The resistance, which a
genecauses,didnotarisebymutationbecauseofapplyingtheantibiotic.Thegeneforresistancewasalready
presentinthebacteria'sgenepool,likelyatalowfrequency.Theantibiotic,whichkillsthebacterialcellswithout
the resistance gene, strongly selects individuals that are resistant, since these would be the only ones that
survivedanddivided.Experimentshavedemonstratedthatmutationsforantibioticresistancedonotariseasa
result of antibiotic.
In a larger sense, evolution is not goal directed. Species do not become “better” over time. They simply track
their changing environment with adaptations that maximize their reproduction in a particular environment at a
particulartime.Evolutionhasnogoalofmakingfaster,bigger,morecomplex,orevensmarterspecies,despite
the commonness of this kind of language in popular discourse. What characteristics evolve in a species are a
functionofthevariationpresentandtheenvironment,bothofwhichareconstantlychanginginanondirectional
way. A trait that fits in one environment at one time may well be fatal at some point in the future. This holds
equally well for insect and human species.
18.2 | Formation of New Species
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define species and describe how scientists identify species as different
• Describe genetic variables that lead to speciation
• Identify prezygotic and postzygotic reproductive barriers
• Explain allopatric and sympatric speciation
• Describe adaptive radiation
Althoughalllifeonearthsharesvariousgeneticsimilarities,onlycertainorganismscombinegeneticinformation
bysexualreproductionandhaveoffspringthatcanthensuccessfullyreproduce.Scientistscallsuchorganisms
members of the same biological species.
Species and the Ability to Reproduce
A species is a group of individual organisms that interbreed and produce fertile, viable offspring. According to
thisdefinition,onespeciesisdistinguishedfromanotherwhen,innature,itisnotpossibleformatingsbetween
individuals from each species to produce fertile offspring.
Members of the same species share both external and internal characteristics, which develop from their
DNA. The closer relationship two organisms share, the more DNA they have in common, just like people
and their families. People’s DNA is likely to be more like their father or mother’s DNA than their cousin or
grandparent’s DNA. Organisms of the same species have the highest level of DNA alignment and therefore
share characteristics and behaviors that lead to successful reproduction.
Species’ appearance can be misleading in suggesting an ability or inability to mate. For example, even though
domesticdogs(Canislupusfamiliaris)displayphenotypicdifferences,suchassize,build,andcoat,mostdogs
can interbreed and produce viable puppies that can mature and sexually reproduce (Figure 18.9).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 512
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 501
Figure 18.9 The (a) poodle and (b) cocker spaniel can reproduce to produce a breed known as (c) the cockapoo.
(credita:modificationofworkbySallyEller,TomReese;creditb:modificationofworkbyJeremyMcWilliams;creditc:
modification of work by Kathleen Conklin)
Inothercases,individualsmayappearsimilaralthoughtheyarenotmembersofthesamespecies.Forexample,
eventhoughbaldeagles(Haliaeetusleucocephalus)andAfricanfisheagles(Haliaeetusvocifer)arebothbirds
and eagles, each belongs to a separate species group (Figure 18.10). If humans were to artificially intervene
and fertilize a bald eagle's egg with an African fish eagle's sperm and a chick did hatch, that offspring, called
a hybrid (a cross between two species), would probably be infertile—unable to successfully reproduce after it
reached maturity. Different species may have different genes that are active in development; therefore, it may
notbepossibletodevelopaviableoffspringwithtwodifferentsetsofdirections.Thus,eventhoughhybridization
may take place, the two species still remain separate.
Figure18.10The(a)Africanfisheagleissimilarinappearancetothe(b)baldeagle,butthetwobirdsaremembersof
differentspecies.(credita:modificationofworkbyNigelWedge;creditb:modificationofworkbyU.S.FishandWildlife
Service)
Populations of species share a gene pool: a collection of all the gene variants in the species. Again, the
basis to any changes in a group or population of organisms must be genetic for this is the only way to share
and pass on traits. When variations occur within a species, they can only pass to the next generation along
two main pathways: asexual reproduction or sexual reproduction. The change will pass on asexually simply if
the reproducing cell possesses the changed trait. For the changed trait to pass on by sexual reproduction, a
gamete, such as a sperm or egg cell, must possess the changed trait. In other words, sexually-reproducing
organisms can experience several genetic changes in their body cells, but if these changes do not occur in
a sperm or egg cell, the changed trait will never reach the next generation. Only heritable traits can evolve.
Therefore, reproduction plays a paramount role for genetic change to take root in a population or species. In
short, organisms must be able to reproduce with each other to pass new traits to offspring.
Speciation
The biological definition of species, which works for sexually reproducing organisms, is a group of actual or
potentialinterbreedingindividuals.Thereareexceptionstothisrule.Manyspeciesaresimilarenoughthathybrid
offspringarepossibleandmayoftenoccurinnature,butforthemajorityofspeciesthisrulegenerallyholds.The
presence in nature of hybrids between similar species suggests that they may have descended from a single
interbreeding species, and the speciation process may not yet be completed.
Given the extraordinary diversity of life on the planet there must be mechanisms for speciation: the formation
oftwospeciesfromoneoriginalspecies.Darwinenvisionedthisprocessasabranchingeventanddiagrammed
PAGE: 513
502 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
the process in the only illustration in On the Origin of Species (Figure 18.11a). Compare this illustration to the
diagramofelephantevolution(Figure18.11),whichshowsthatasonespecieschangesovertime,itbranches
toformmorethanonenewspecies,repeatedly,aslongasthepopulationsurvivesoruntiltheorganismbecomes
extinct.
Figure 18.11 The only illustration in Darwin's On the Origin of Species is (a) a diagram showing speciation events
leading to biological diversity. The diagram shows similarities to phylogenetic charts that today illustrate the
relationshipsofspecies.(b)ModernelephantsevolvedfromthePalaeomastodon,aspeciesthatlivedinEgypt35–50
million years ago.
For speciation to occur, two new populations must form from one original population and they must evolve in
such a way that it becomes impossible for individuals from the two new populations to interbreed. Biologists
haveproposedmechanismsbywhichthiscouldoccurthatfallintotwobroadcategories.Allopatricspeciation
(allo- = "other"; -patric = "homeland") involves geographic separation of populations from a parent species
and subsequent evolution. Sympatric speciation (sym- = "same"; -patric = "homeland") involves speciation
occurring within a parent species remaining in one location.
Biologiststhinkofspeciationeventsasthesplittingofoneancestralspeciesintotwodescendantspecies.There
is no reason why more than two species might not form at one time except that it is less likely and we can
conceptualize multiple events as single splits occurring close in time.
Allopatric Speciation
A geographically continuous population has a gene pool that is relatively homogeneous. Gene flow, the
movementofallelesacrossaspecies'range,isrelativelyfreebecauseindividualscanmoveandthenmatewith
individuals in their new location. Thus, an allele's frequency at one end of a distribution will be similar to the
allele'sfrequencyattheotherend.Whenpopulationsbecomegeographicallydiscontinuous,itpreventsalleles'
free-flow.Whenthatseparationlastsforaperiodoftime,thetwopopulationsareabletoevolvealongdifferent
trajectories. Thus, their allele frequencies at numerous genetic loci gradually become increasingly different as
new alleles independently arise by mutation in each population. Typically, environmental conditions, such as
climate, resources, predators, and competitors for the two populations will differ causing natural selection to
favor divergent adaptations in each group.
Isolation of populations leading to allopatric speciation can occur in a variety of ways: a river forming a new
branch, erosion creating a new valley, a group of organisms traveling to a new location without the ability to
return, or seeds floating over the ocean to an island. The nature of the geographic separation necessary to
isolatepopulationsdependsentirelyontheorganism'sbiologyanditspotentialfordispersal.Iftwoflyinginsect
populationstookupresidenceinseparatenearbyvalleys,chancesare,individualsfromeachpopulationwould
fly back and forth continuing gene flow. However, if a new lake divided two rodent populations continued gene
flow would be unlikely; therefore, speciation would be more likely.
Biologists group allopatric processes into two categories: dispersal and vicariance. Dispersal is when a few
members of a species move to a new geographical area, and vicariance is when a natural situation arises to
physically divide organisms.
Scientistshavedocumentednumerouscasesofallopatricspeciationtakingplace.Forexample,alongthewest
coastoftheUnitedStates,twoseparatespottedowlsubspeciesexist.Thenorthernspottedowlhasgeneticand
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 514
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 503
phenotypic differences from its close relative: the Mexican spotted owl, which lives in the south (Figure 18.12).
Figure 18.12 The northern spotted owl and the Mexican spotted owl inhabit geographically separate locations with
different climates and ecosystems. The owl is an example of allopatric speciation. (credit "northern spotted owl":
modificationofworkbyJohnandKarenHollingsworth;credit"Mexicanspottedowl":modificationofworkbyBillRadke)
Additionally, scientists have found that the further the distance between two groups that once were the same
species,themorelikelyitisthatspeciationwilloccur.Thisseemslogicalbecauseasthedistanceincreases,the
various environmental factors would likely have less in common than locations in close proximity. Consider the
twoowls:inthenorth,theclimateiscoolerthaninthesouth.Thetypesoforganismsineachecosystemdiffer,
as do their behaviors and habits. Also, the hunting habits and prey choices of the southern owls vary from the
northern owls. These variances can lead to evolved differences in the owls, and speciation likely will occur.
Adaptive Radiation
In some cases, a population of one species disperses throughout an area, and each finds a distinct niche
or isolated habitat. Over time, the varied demands of their new lifestyles lead to multiple speciation events
originating from a single species. We call this adaptive radiation because many adaptations evolve from a
single point of origin; thus, causing the species to radiate into several new ones. Island archipelagos like the
Hawaiian Islands provide an ideal context for adaptive radiation events because water surrounds each island
whichleadstogeographicalisolationformanyorganisms.TheHawaiianhoneycreeperillustratesoneexample
ofadaptiveradiation.Fromasinglespecies,thefounderspecies,numerousspecieshaveevolved,includingthe
six inFigure 18.13.
PAGE: 515
504 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
Figure 18.13 The honeycreeper birds illustrate adaptive radiation. From one original species of bird, multiple others
evolved, each with its own distinctive characteristics.
Notice the differences in the species’ beaks in Figure 18.13. Evolution in response to natural selection based
on specific food sources in each new habitat led to evolution of a different beak suited to the specific food
source.Theseed-eatingbirdhasathicker,strongerbeakwhichissuitedtobreakhardnuts.Thenectar-eating
birds have long beaks to dip into flowers to reach the nectar. The insect-eating birds have beaks like swords,
appropriateforstabbingandimpalinginsects.Darwin’sfinchesareanotherexampleofadaptiveradiationinan
archipelago.
Click through this interactive site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/bird_evolution) to see how island birds
evolved in evolutionary increments from 5 million years ago to today.
Sympatric Speciation
Can divergence occur if no physical barriers are in place to separate individuals who continue to live and
reproduce in the same habitat? The answer is yes. We call the process of speciation within the same space
sympatric. The prefix “sym” means same, so “sympatric” means “same homeland” in contrast to “allopatric”
meaning “other homeland.” Scientists have proposed and studied many mechanisms.
Oneformofsympatricspeciationcanbeginwithaseriouschromosomalerrorduringcelldivision.Inanormalcell
division event chromosomes replicate, pair up, and then separate so that each new cell has the same number
of chromosomes. However, sometimes the pairs separate and the end cell product has too many or too few
individual chromosomes in a condition that we callaneuploidy(Figure 18.14).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 516
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 505
Figure18.14Aneuploidyresultswhenthegameteshavetoomanyortoofewchromosomesduetonondisjunction
during meiosis. In this example, the resulting offspring will have 2n+1 or 2n-1 chromosomes.
Which is most likely to survive, offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes or offspring with 2n-1 chromosomes?
Polyploidyisaconditioninwhichacellororganismhasanextraset,orsets,ofchromosomes.Scientistshave
identified two main types of polyploidy that can lead to reproductive isolation of an individual in the polyploidy
state. Reproductive isolation isthe inability tointerbreed. Insomecases, apolyploid individual willhavetwo or
more complete sets of chromosomes from its own species in a condition that we call autopolyploidy (Figure
18.15). The prefix “auto-” means “self,” so the term means multiple chromosomes from one’s own species.
Polyploidy results from an error in meiosis in which all of the chromosomes move into one cell instead of
separating.
Figure 18.15Autopolyploidy results when mitosis is not followed by cytokinesis.
Forexample,ifaplantspecieswith2n=6producesautopolyploidgametesthatarealsodiploid(2n=6,when
they should be n = 3), the gametes now have twice as many chromosomes as they should have. These new
gametes will be incompatible with the normal gametes that this plant species produces. However, they could
eitherself-pollinateorreproducewithotherautopolyploidplantswithgameteshavingthesamediploidnumber.
In this way, sympatric speciation can occur quickly by forming offspring with 4n that we call a tetraploid. These
individualswouldimmediatelybeabletoreproduceonlywiththoseofthisnewkindandnotthoseoftheancestral
species.
The other form of polyploidy occurs when individuals of two different species reproduce to form a viable
offspring that we call an allopolyploid. The prefix “allo-” means “other” (recall from allopatric): therefore, an
allopolyploid occurs when gametes from two different species combine. Figure 18.16 illustrates one possible
PAGE: 517
506 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
way an allopolyploid can form. Notice how it takes two generations, or two reproductive acts, before the viable
fertile hybrid results.
Figure18.16Alloploidyresultswhentwospeciesmatetoproduceviableoffspring.Inthisexample,anormalgamete
fromonespeciesfuseswithapolyploidygametefromanother.Twomatingsarenecessarytoproduceviableoffspring.
The cultivated forms of wheat, cotton, and tobacco plants are all allopolyploids. Although polyploidy occurs
occasionallyinanimals,ittakesplacemostcommonlyinplants.(Animalswithanyofthetypesofchromosomal
aberrations that we describe here are unlikely to survive and produce normal offspring.) Scientists have
discoveredmorethanhalfofallplantspeciesstudiedrelatebacktoaspeciesevolvedthroughpolyploidy.With
such a high rate of polyploidy in plants, some scientists hypothesize that this mechanism takes place more as
an adaptation than as an error.
Reproductive Isolation
Given enough time, the genetic and phenotypic divergence between populations will affect characters that
influence reproduction: if individuals of the two populations were brought together, mating would be less likely,
but if mating occurred, offspring would be nonviable or infertile. Many types of diverging characters may affect
thereproductive isolation, the ability to interbreed, of the two populations.
Reproductiveisolationcantakeplaceinavarietyofways.Scientistsorganizethemintotwogroups:prezygotic
barriers and postzygotic barriers. Recall that a zygote is a fertilized egg: the first cell of an organism's
developmentthatreproducessexually.Therefore,aprezygoticbarrierisamechanismthatblocksreproduction
from taking place. This includes barriers that prevent fertilization when organisms attempt reproduction. A
postzygotic barrier occurs after zygote formation. This includes organisms that don’t survive the embryonic
stage and those that are born sterile.
Sometypesofprezygoticbarrierspreventreproductionentirely.Manyorganismsonlyreproduceatcertaintimes
oftheyear,oftenjustannually.Differencesinbreedingschedules,whichwecalltemporalisolation,canactas
aformofreproductiveisolation.Forexample,twofrogspeciesinhabitthesamearea,butonereproducesfrom
January to March; whereas, the other reproduces from March to May (Figure 18.17).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 518
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 507
Figure18.17Thesetworelatedfrogspeciesexhibittemporalreproductiveisolation.(a)Ranaaurorabreedsearlierin
the year than (b) Rana boylii. (credit a: modification of work by Mark R. Jennings, USFWS; credit b: modification of
work by Alessandro Catenazzi)
In some cases, populations of a species move or are moved to a new habitat and take up residence in a
placethatnolongeroverlapswiththesamespecies'otherpopulations.Wecallthissituationhabitatisolation.
Reproductionwiththeparentspeciesceases,andanewgroupexiststhatisnowreproductivelyandgenetically
independent.Forexample,acricketpopulationthatwasdividedafterafloodcouldnolongerinteractwitheach
other.Overtime,naturalselectionforces,mutation,andgeneticdriftwilllikelyresultinthetwogroupsdiverging
(Figure 18.18).
Figure18.18Speciationcanoccurwhentwopopulationsoccupydifferenthabitats.Thehabitatsneednotbefarapart.
Thecricket(a)Grylluspennsylvanicuspreferssandysoil,andthecricket(b)Gryllusfirmusprefersloamysoil.Thetwo
species can live in close proximity, but because of their different soil preferences, they became genetically isolated.
Behavioral isolation occurs when the presence or absence of a specific behavior prevents reproduction. For
example, male fireflies use specific light patterns to attract females. Various firefly species display their lights
differently.Ifamaleofonespeciestriedtoattractthefemaleofanother,shewouldnotrecognizethelightpattern
and would not mate with the male.
Otherprezygoticbarriersworkwhendifferencesintheirgametecells(eggsandsperm)preventfertilizationfrom
takingplace.Wecallthisagameticbarrier.Similarly,insomecasescloselyrelatedorganismstrytomate,but
their reproductive structures simply do not fit together. For example, damselfly males of different species have
differentlyshapedreproductiveorgans.Ifonespeciestriestomatewiththefemaleofanother,theirbodyparts
simply do not fit together. (Figure 18.19).
Figure18.19Theshapeofthemalereproductiveorganvariesamongmaledamselflyspecies,andisonlycompatible
with the female of that species. Reproductive organ incompatibility keeps the species reproductively isolated.
In plants, certain structures aimed to attract one type of pollinator simultaneously prevent a different pollinator
fromaccessingthepollen.Thetunnelthroughwhichananimalmustaccessnectarcanvarywidelyinlengthand
PAGE: 519
508 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
diameter, which prevents the plant from cross-pollinating with a different species (Figure 18.20).
Figure 18.20 Some flowers have evolved to attract certain pollinators. The (a) wide foxglove flower is adapted for
pollinationbybees,whilethe(b)long,tube-shapedtrumpetcreeperflowerisadaptedforpollinationbyhummingbirds.
When fertilization takes place and a zygote forms, postzygotic barriers can prevent reproduction. Hybrid
individuals in many cases cannot form normally in the womb and simply do not survive past the embryonic
stages. We call this hybrid inviability because the hybrid organisms simply are not viable. In another
postzygotic situation, reproduction leads to hybrid birth and growth that is sterile. Therefore, the organisms are
unable to reproduce offspring of their own. We call this hybrid sterility.
Habitat Influence on Speciation
Sympatric speciation may also take place in ways other than polyploidy. For example, consider a fish species
thatlivesinalake.Asthepopulationgrows,competitionforfoodincreases.Underpressuretofindfood,suppose
thatagroupofthesefishhadthegeneticflexibilitytodiscoverandfeedoffanotherresourcethatotherfishdid
not use. What if this new food source was located at a different depth of the lake? Over time, those feeding
onthesecondfoodsourcewouldinteractmorewitheachotherthantheotherfish;therefore,theywouldbreed
togetheraswell.Offspringofthesefishwouldlikelybehaveastheirparents:feedingandlivinginthesamearea
and keeping separate from the original population. If this group of fish continued to remain separate from the
firstpopulation,eventuallysympatricspeciationmightoccurasmoregeneticdifferencesaccumulatedbetween
them.
This scenario does play out in nature, as do others that lead to reproductive isolation. One such place is
Lake Victoria in Africa, famous for its sympatric speciation of cichlid fish. Researchers have found hundreds of
sympatricspeciationeventsinthesefish,whichhavenotonlyhappenedingreatnumber,butalsooverashort
period of time. Figure 18.21 shows this type of speciation among a cichlid fish population in Nicaragua. In this
locale,twotypesofcichlidsliveinthesamegeographiclocationbuthavecometohavedifferentmorphologies
that allow them to eat various food sources.
Figure 18.21 Cichlid fish from Lake Apoyeque, Nicaragua, show evidence of sympatric speciation. Lake Apoyeque,
a crater lake, is 1800 years old, but genetic evidence indicates that a single population of cichlid fish populated the
lakeonly100yearsago.Nevertheless,twopopulationswithdistinctmorphologiesanddietsnowexistinthelake,and
scientists believe these populations may be in an early stage of speciation.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 520
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 509
18.3 | Reconnection and Speciation Rates
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe pathways of species evolution in hybrid zones
• Explain the two major theories on rates of speciation
Speciation occurs over a span of evolutionary time, so when a new species arises, there is a transition period
during which the closely related species continue to interact.
Reconnection
After speciation, two species may recombine or even continue interacting indefinitely. Individual organisms will
mate with any nearby individual with whom they are capable of breeding. We call an area where two closely
related species continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids a hybrid zone. Over time, the hybrid zone
maychangedependingonthefitnessofthehybridsandthereproductivebarriers(Figure18.22).Ifthehybrids
arelessfitthantheparents,speciationreinforcementoccurs,andthespeciescontinuetodivergeuntiltheycan
nolongermateandproduceviableoffspring.Ifreproductivebarriersweaken,fusionoccursandthetwospecies
becomeone.Barriersremainthesameifhybridsarefitandreproductive: stability mayoccurandhybridization
continues.
Figure 18.22 After speciation has occurred, the two separate but closely related species may continue to
produceoffspringinanareacalledthehybridzone.Reinforcement,fusion,orstabilitymayresult,dependingon
reproductive barriers and the relative fitness of the hybrids.
If two species eat a different diet but one of the food sources is eliminated and both species are forced to
eat the same foods, what change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?
Hybrids can be either less fit than the parents, more fit, or about the same. Usually hybrids tend to be less fit;
therefore, such reproduction diminishes over time, nudging the two species to diverge further in a process we
callreinforcement.Scientistsusethistermbecausethehybrids'lowsuccessreinforcestheoriginalspeciation.
If the hybrids are as fit or more fit than the parents, the two species may fuse back into one species (Figure
18.23). Scientists have also observed that sometimes two species will remain separate but also continue to
interact to produce some individuals. Scientists classify this as stability because no real net change is taking
place.
PAGE: 521
510 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
Varying Rates of Speciation
Scientists around the world study speciation, documenting observations both of living organisms and those
foundinthefossilrecord.Astheirideastakeshapeandasresearchrevealsnewdetailsabouthowlifeevolves,
theydevelopmodelstohelpexplainspeciationrates.Intermsofhowquicklyspeciationoccurs,wecanobserve
two current patterns: gradual speciation model and punctuated equilibrium model.
In the gradual speciation model, species diverge gradually over time in small steps. In the punctuated
equilibrium model, a new species undergoes changes quickly from the parent species, and then remains
largelyunchangedforlongperiodsoftimeafterward(Figure18.23).Wecallthisearlychangemodelpunctuated
equilibrium, because it begins with a punctuated or periodic change and then remains in balance afterward.
While punctuated equilibrium suggests a faster tempo, it does not necessarily exclude gradualism.
Figure18.23In(a)gradualspeciation,speciesdivergeataslow,steadypaceastraitschangeincrementally.In
(b) punctuated equilibrium, species diverge quickly and then remain unchanged for long periods of time.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Punctuatedequilibriumismostlikelytooccurinasmallpopulationthatexperiencesarapidchangein
its environment.
b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to occur in a large population that lives in a stable climate.
c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur in species that live in a stable climate.
d. Gradual speciation and punctuated equilibrium both result in the divergence of species.
Theprimaryinfluencingfactoronchangesinspeciationrateisenvironmentalconditions.Undersomeconditions,
selectionoccursquicklyorradically.Consideraspeciesofsnailsthathadbeenlivingwiththesamebasicform
formanythousandsofyears.Layersoftheirfossilswouldappearsimilarforalongtime.Whenachangeinthe
environmenttakesplace—suchasadropinthewaterlevel—asmallnumberoforganismsareseparatedfrom
therestinabriefperiodoftime,essentiallyformingonelargeandonetinypopulation.Thetinypopulationfaces
newenvironmentalconditions.Becauseitsgenepoolquicklybecamesosmall,anyvariationthatsurfacesand
that aids in surviving the new conditions becomes the predominant form.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 522
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 511
Visitthis website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/snails)to continue the speciation story of the snails.
PAGE: 523
512 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
KEY TERMS
adaptation heritable trait or behavior in an organism that aids in its survival and reproduction in its present
environment
adaptive radiation speciation when one species radiates to form several other species
allopatric speciation speciation that occurs via geographic separation
allopolyploid polyploidy formed between two related, but separate species
aneuploidy condition of a cell having an extra chromosome or missing a chromosome for its species
autopolyploid polyploidy formed within a single species
behavioral isolation typeofreproductiveisolationthatoccurswhenaspecificbehaviororlackofoneprevents
reproduction from taking place
convergent evolution process by which groups of organisms independently evolve to similar forms
dispersal allopatricspeciationthatoccurswhenafewmembersofaspeciesmovetoanewgeographicalarea
divergent evolution process by which groups of organisms evolve in diverse directions from a common point
gametic barrier prezygotic barrier occurring when closely related individuals of different species mate, but
differences in their gamete cells (eggs and sperm) prevent fertilization from taking place
gradual speciation model model that shows how species diverge gradually over time in small steps
habitat isolation reproductive isolation resulting when species' populations move or are moved to a new
habitat, taking up residence in a place that no longer overlaps with the same species' other populations
homologous structures parallel structures in diverse organisms that have a common ancestor
hybrid offspring of two closely related individuals, not of the same species
hybrid zone area where two closely related species continue to interact and reproduce, forming hybrids
natural selection reproduction of individuals with favorable genetic traits that survive environmental change
because of those traits, leading to evolutionary change
postzygotic barrier reproductive isolation mechanism that occurs after zygote formation
prezygotic barrier reproductive isolation mechanism that occurs before zygote formation
punctuated equilibrium model for rapid speciation that can occur when an event causes a small portion of a
population to be cut off from the rest of the population
reinforcement continued speciation divergence between two related species due to low fitness of hybrids
between them
reproductive isolation situationthatoccurswhenaspeciesisreproductivelyindependentfromotherspecies;
behavior, location, or reproductive barriers may cause this to happen
speciation formation of a new species
species group of populations that interbreed and produce fertile offspring
sympatric speciation speciation that occurs in the same geographic space
temporal isolation differences in breeding schedules that can act as a form of prezygotic barrier leading to
reproductive isolation
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 524
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 513
variation genetic differences among individuals in a population
vestigial structure physicalstructurepresentinanorganismbutthathasnoapparentfunctionandappearsto
be from a functional structure in a distant ancestor
vicariance allopatric speciation that occurs when something in the environment separates organisms of the
same species into separate groups
CHAPTER SUMMARY
18.1Understanding Evolution
Evolution is the process of adaptation through mutation which allows more desirable characteristics to pass to
the next generation. Over time, organisms evolve more characteristics that are beneficial to their survival. For
living organisms to adapt and change to environmental pressures, genetic variation must be present. With
genetic variation, individuals have differences in form and function that allow some to survive certain conditions
better than others. These organisms pass their favorable traits to their offspring. Eventually, environments
change, and what was once a desirable, advantageous trait may become an undesirable trait and organisms
may further evolve. Evolution may be convergent with similar traits evolving in multiple species or divergent
with diverse traits evolving in multiple species that came from a common ancestor. We can observe evidence of
evolution by means of DNA code and the fossil record, and also by the existence of homologous and vestigial
structures.
18.2Formation of New Species
Speciation occurs along two main pathways: geographic separation (allopatric speciation) and through
mechanisms that occur within a shared habitat (sympatric speciation). Both pathways isolate a population
reproductively in some form. Mechanisms of reproductive isolation act as barriers between closely related
species, enabling them to diverge and exist as genetically independent species. Prezygotic barriers block
reproduction prior to formation of a zygote; whereas, postzygotic barriers block reproduction after fertilization
occurs. For a new species to develop, something must cause a breach in the reproductive barriers. Sympatric
speciation can occur through errors in meiosis that form gametes with extra chromosomes (polyploidy).
Autopolyploidy occurs within a single species; whereas, allopolyploidy occurs between closely related species.
18.3Reconnection and Speciation Rates
Speciation is not a precise division: overlap between closely related species can occur in areas called hybrid
zones. Organisms reproduce with other similar organisms. The fitness of these hybrid offspring can affect the
two species' evolutionary path. Scientists propose two models for the rate of speciation: one model illustrates
how a species can change slowly over time. The other model demonstrates how change can occur quickly from
a parent generation to a new species. Both models continue to follow natural selection patterns.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 18.14Which is most likely to survive, a. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to
offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes or offspring with occur in a small population that experiences
2n-1 chromosomes? a rapid change in its environment.
b. Punctuated equilibrium is most likely to
2.Figure 18.22If two species eat a different diet but
occur in a large population that lives in a
one of the food sources is eliminated and both
stable climate.
species are forced to eat the same foods, what
c. Gradual speciation is most likely to occur in
change in the hybrid zone is most likely to occur?
species that live in a stable climate.
3.Figure 18.23Which of the following statements is d. Gradual speciation and punctuated
false? equilibrium both result in the evolution of
new species.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which scientific concept did Charles Darwin and Alfred Wallace independently discover?
PAGE: 525
514 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
a. mutation 11.What is the main difference between
b. natural selection autopolyploid and allopolyploid?
c. overbreeding a. the number of chromosomes
d. sexual reproduction b. the functionality of the chromosomes
c. the source of the extra chromosomes
5.Which of the following situations will lead to natural
d. the number of mutations in the extra
selection?
chromosomes
a. The seeds of two plants land near each
other and one grows larger than the other. 12.Which reproductive combination produces
b. Two types of fish eat the same kind of food, hybrids?
and one is better able to gather food than a. when individuals of the same species in
the other. different geographical areas reproduce
c. Male lions compete for the right to mate with b. when any two individuals sharing the same
females, with only one possible winner. habitat reproduce
d. all of the above c. when members of closely related species
reproduce
6.Which description is an example of a phenotype?
d. when offspring of the same parents
reproduce
a. A certain duck has a blue beak.
b. A mutation occurred to a flower. 13.Which condition is the basis for a species to be
c. Most cheetahs live solitary lives. reproductively isolated from other members?
d. both a and c
a. It does not share its habitat with related
7.Which situation is most likely an example of
species.
convergent evolution?
b. It does not exist out of a single habitat.
a. Squid and humans have eyes similar in
c. It does not exchange genetic information
structure.
with other species.
b. Worms and snakes both move without legs.
d. It does not undergo evolutionary changes
c. Some bats and birds have wings that allow
for a significant period of time.
them to fly.
d. all of the above 14.Which situation isnotan example of a prezygotic
barrier?
8.Which situation would most likely lead to allopatric
a. Two species of turtles breed at different
speciation?
times of the year.
a. Flood causes the formation of a new lake.
b. Two species of flowers attract different
b. A storm causes several large trees to fall
pollinators.
down.
c. Two species of birds display different mating
c. A mutation causes a new trait to develop.
dances.
d. An injury causes an organism to seek out a
d. Two species of insects produce infertile
new food source.
offspring.
9.What is the main difference between dispersal and
15.Which term is used to describe the continued
vicariance?
divergence of species based on the low fitness of
a. One leads to allopatric speciation, whereas
hybrid offspring?
the other leads to sympatric speciation.
a. reinforcement
b. One involves the movement of the
b. fusion
organism, and the other involves a change
c. stability
in the environment.
d. punctuated equilibrium
c. One depends on a genetic mutation
occurring, and the other does not. 16.Which components of speciation would be least
d. One involves closely related organisms, and likely to be a part of punctuated equilibrium?
the other involves only individuals of the
same species. a. a division of populations
b. a change in environmental conditions
10.Which variable increases the likelihood of
c. ongoing gene flow among all individuals
allopatric speciation taking place more quickly?
d. a large number of mutations taking place at
once
a. lower rate of mutation
b. longer distance between divided groups
c. increased instances of hybrid formation
d. equivalent numbers of individuals in each
population
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 526
Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species 515
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
17.If a person scatters a handful of garden pea plant sympatric speciation. The males of each species had
seeds in one area, how would natural selection work a different coloring through which the females could
in this situation? identify and choose a partner from her own species.
After some time, pollution made the lake so cloudy
18.Why do scientists consider vestigial structures
that it was hard for females to distinguish colors.
evidence for evolution?
What might take place in this situation?
19.How does the scientific meaning of “theory” differ
23.Why can polyploidy individuals lead to speciation
from the common vernacular meaning?
fairly quickly?
20.Explain why the statement that a monkey is more
24.What do both rate of speciation models have in
evolved than a mouse is incorrect.
common?
21.Why do island chains provide ideal conditions for
25.Describe a situation where hybrid reproduction
adaptive radiation to occur?
would cause two species to fuse into one.
22.Two species of fish had recently undergone
PAGE: 527
516 Chapter 18 | Evolution and the Origin of Species
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 528
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 517
19 | THE EVOLUTION OF
POPULATIONS
Figure19.1Livingthingsmaybesingle-celledorcomplex,multicellularorganisms.Theymaybeplants,animals,fungi,
bacteria, or archaea. This diversity results from evolution. (credit "wolf": modification of work by Gary Kramer; credit
"coral": modification of work by William Harrigan, NOAA; credit "river": modification of work by Vojtěch Dostál; credit
"fish" modification of work by Christian Mehlführer; credit "mushroom": modification of work by Cory Zanker; credit
"tree": modification of work by Joseph Kranak; credit "bee": modification of work by Cory Zanker)
Chapter Outline
19.1:Population Evolution
19.2:Population Genetics
19.3:Adaptive Evolution
Introduction
All life on Earth is related. Evolutionary theory states that humans, beetles, plants, and bacteria all share
a common ancestor, but that millions of years of evolution have shaped each of these organisms into the
forms we see today. Scientists consider evolution a key concept to understanding life. It is one of the most
dominantevolutionaryforces.Naturalselectionactstopromotetraitsandbehaviorsthatincreaseanorganism’s
chances of survival and reproduction, while eliminating those traits and behaviors that are detrimental to the
organism. However, natural selection can only, as its name implies, select—it cannot create. We can attribute
novel traits and behaviors to another evolutionary force—mutation. Mutation and other sources of variation
among individuals, as well as the evolutionary forces that act upon them, alter populations and species. This
combination of processes has led to the world of life we see today.
PAGE: 529
518 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
19.1 | Population Evolution
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define population genetics and describe how scientists use population genetics in studying population
evolution
• Define the Hardy-Weinberg principle and discuss its importance
People did not understand the mechanisms of inheritance, or genetics, at the time Charles Darwin and Alfred
Russel Wallace were developing their idea of natural selection. This lack of knowledge was a stumbling block
to understanding many aspects of evolution. The predominant (and incorrect) genetic theory of the time,
blending inheritance, made it difficult to understand how natural selection might operate. Darwin and Wallace
were unaware of the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel's 1866 publication "Experiments in Plant Hybridization",
which came out not long after Darwin's book, On the Origin of Species. Scholars rediscovered Mendel’s
work in the early twentieth century at which time geneticists were rapidly coming to an understanding of the
basics of inheritance. Initially, the newly discovered particulate nature of genes made it difficult for biologists
to understand how gradual evolution could occur. However, over the next few decades scientists integrated
genetics and evolution in what became known as the modern synthesis—the coherent understanding of the
relationship between natural selection and genetics that took shape by the 1940s. Generally, this concept is
generallyacceptedtoday.Inshort,themodernsynthesisdescribeshowevolutionaryprocesses,suchasnatural
selection, can affect a population’s genetic makeup, and, in turn, how this can result in the gradual evolution
of populations and species. The theory also connects population change over time (microevolution), with the
processes that gave rise to new species and higher taxonomic groups with widely divergent characters, called
(macroevolution).
Evolution and Flu Vaccines
Everyfall,themediastartsreportingonfluvaccinationsandpotentialoutbreaks.Scientists,healthexperts,
andinstitutionsdeterminerecommendationsfordifferentpartsofthepopulation,predictoptimalproduction
andinoculationschedules,createvaccines,andsetupclinicstoprovideinoculations.Youmaythinkofthe
annual flu shot as media hype, an important health protection, or just a briefly uncomfortable prick in your
arm. However, do you think of it in terms of evolution?
Themediahypeofannualflushotsisscientificallygroundedinourunderstandingofevolution.Eachyear,
scientists across the globe strive to predict the flu strains that they anticipate as most widespread and
harmfulinthecomingyear.Theybasethisknowledgeonhowflustrainshaveevolvedovertimeandover
thepastfewfluseasons.Scientiststhenworktocreatethemosteffectivevaccinetocombatthoseselected
strains. Pharmaceutical companies produce hundreds of millions of doses in a short period in order to
provide vaccinations to key populations at the optimal time.
Because viruses, like the flu, evolve very quickly (especially in evolutionary time), this poses quite a
challenge.Virusesmutateandreplicateatafastrate,sothevaccinedevelopedtoprotectagainstlastyear’s
flu strain may not provide the protection one needs against the coming year’s strain. Evolution of these
viruses means continued adaptions to ensure survival, including adaptations to survive previous vaccines.
Population Genetics
Recall that a gene for a particular character may have several alleles, or variants, that code for different traits
associated with that character. For example, in the ABO blood type system in humans, three alleles determine
the particular blood-type protein on the surface of red blood cells. Each individual in a population of diploid
organismscanonlycarrytwoallelesforaparticulargene,butmorethantwomaybepresentintheindividuals
thatcomprisethepopulation.Mendelfollowedallelesastheywereinheritedfromparenttooffspring.Intheearly
twentieth century, biologists in the area of population genetics began to study how selective forces change a
population through changes in allele and genotypic frequencies.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 530
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 519
Theallelefrequency(orgenefrequency)istherateatwhichaspecificalleleappearswithinapopulation.Until
nowwehavediscussedevolutionasachangeinthecharacteristicsofapopulationoforganisms,butbehindthat
phenotypicchangeisgeneticchange.Inpopulationgenetics,scientistsdefinethetermevolutionasachangein
theallele'sfrequencyinapopulation.UsingtheABObloodtypesystemasanexample,thefrequencyofoneof
A
thealleles,I ,isthenumberofcopiesofthatalleledividedbyallthecopiesoftheABOgeneinthepopulation.
[1] A B 0
For example, a study in Jordan found a frequency of I to be 26.1 percent. The I and I alleles comprise
13.4percentand60.5percentoftheallelesrespectively,andallofthefrequenciesaddedupto100percent.A
change in this frequency over time would constitute evolution in the population.
The allele frequency within a given population can change depending on environmental factors; therefore,
certain alleles become more widespread than others during the natural selection process. Natural selection
can alter the population’s genetic makeup. An example is if a given allele confers a phenotype that allows an
individualtobettersurviveorhavemoreoffspring.Becausemanyofthoseoffspringwillalsocarrythebeneficial
allele,andoftenthecorrespondingphenotype,theywillhavemoreoffspringoftheirownthatalsocarrytheallele,
thus,perpetuatingthecycle.Overtime,theallelewillspreadthroughoutthepopulation.Somealleleswillquickly
become fixed in this way, meaning that every individual of the population will carry the allele, while detrimental
mutationsmaybeswiftlyeliminatedifderivedfromadominantallelefromthegenepool.Thegenepoolisthe
sum of all the alleles in a population.
Sometimes, allele frequencies within a population change randomly with no advantage to the population over
existing allele frequencies. We call this phenomenon genetic drift. Natural selection and genetic drift usually
occursimultaneouslyinpopulationsandarenotisolatedevents.Itishardtodeterminewhichprocessdominates
becauseitisoftennearlyimpossibletodeterminethecauseofchangeinallelefrequenciesateachoccurrence.
Wecallaneventthatinitiatesanallelefrequencychangeinanisolatedpartofthepopulation,whichisnottypical
of the original population, the founder effect. Natural selection, random drift, and founder effects can lead to
significant changes in a population's genome.
Hardy-Weinberg Principle of Equilibrium
In the early twentieth century, English mathematician Godfrey Hardy and German physician Wilhelm Weinberg
statedtheprincipleofequilibriumtodescribethepopulation'sgeneticmakeup.Thetheory,whichlaterbecame
knownastheHardy-Weinbergprincipleofequilibrium,statesthatapopulation’salleleandgenotypefrequencies
are inherently stable— unless some kind of evolutionary force is acting upon the population, neither the
allele nor the genotypic frequencies would change. The Hardy-Weinberg principle assumes conditions with no
mutations,migration,emigration,orselectivepressurefororagainstgenotype,plusaninfinitepopulation.While
no population can satisfy those conditions, the principle offers a useful model against which to compare real
population changes.
Working under this theory, population geneticists represent different alleles as different variables in their
mathematicalmodels.Thevariablep,forexample,oftenrepresentsthefrequencyofaparticularallele,sayYfor
thetraitofyellowinMendel’speas,whilethevariableqrepresentsthefrequencyofyallelesthatconferthecolor
green.Ifthesearetheonlytwopossibleallelesforagivenlocusinthepopulation,p+q=1.Inotherwords,all
the p alleles and all the q alleles comprise all of the alleles for that locus in the population.
However,whatultimatelyinterestsmostbiologistsisnotthefrequenciesofdifferentalleles,butthefrequencies
of the resulting genotypes, known as the population’s genetic structure, from which scientists can surmise
phenotype distribution. If we observe the phenotype, we can know only the homozygous recessive allele's
genotype. The calculations provide an estimate of the remaining genotypes. Since each individual carries two
alleles per gene, if we know the allele frequencies (p and q), predicting the genotypes' frequencies is a simple
mathematical calculation to determine the probability of obtaining these genotypes if we draw two alleles at
randomfromthegenepool.Intheabovescenario,anindividualpeaplantcouldbepp(YY),andthusproduce
yellow peas; pq (Yy), also yellow; or qq (yy), and thus produce green peas (Figure 19.2). In other words,
2
the frequency of pp individuals is simply p ; the frequency of pq individuals is 2pq; and the frequency of qq
2
individuals is q . Again, if p and q are the only two possible alleles for a given trait in the population, these
2 2
genotypes frequencies will sum to one: p + 2pq + q = 1.
1. Sahar S. Hanania, Dhia S. Hassawi, and Nidal M. Irshaid, “Allele Frequency and Molecular Genotypes of ABO Blood Group System in a
Jordanian Population,”Journal of Medical Sciences7 (2007): 51-58, doi:10.3923/jms.2007.51.58.
PAGE: 531
520 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
Figure 19.2 When populations are in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, the allelic frequency is stable from
generation to generation and we can determine the allele distribution from the Hardy-Weinberg equation. If the
allelicfrequencymeasuredinthefielddiffersfromthepredictedvalue,scientistscanmakeinferencesaboutwhat
evolutionary forces are at play.
In plants, violet flower color (V) is dominant over white (v). If p = 0.8 and q = 0.2 in a population of 500
plants, howmanyindividuals wouldyouexpect tobehomozygousdominant (VV), heterozygous (Vv), and
homozygous recessive (vv)? How many plants would you expect to have violet flowers, and how many
would have white flowers?
In theory, if a population is at equilibrium—that is, there are no evolutionary forces acting upon it—generation
after generation would have the same gene pool and genetic structure, and these equations would all hold
true all of the time. Of course, even Hardy and Weinberg recognized that no natural population is immune
to evolution. Populations in nature are constantly changing in genetic makeup due to drift, mutation, possibly
migration, and selection. As a result, the only way to determine the exact distribution of phenotypes in a
populationistogooutandcountthem.However,theHardy-Weinbergprinciplegivesscientistsamathematical
baseline of a non-evolving population to which they can compare evolving populations and thereby infer what
evolutionary forces might be at play. If the frequencies of alleles orgenotypes deviate from the value expected
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 532
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 521
from the Hardy-Weinberg equation, then the population is evolving.
Use this online calculator (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/hardy-weinberg) to determine a population's
genetic structure.
19.2 | Population Genetics
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the different types of variation in a population
• Explain why only natural selection can act upon heritable variation
• Describe genetic drift and the bottleneck effect
• Explain how each evolutionary force can influence a population's allele frequencies
A population's individuals often display different phenotypes, or express different alleles of a particular gene,
which scientists refer to as polymorphisms. We call populations with two or more variations of particular
characteristics polymorphic. A number of factors, including the population’s genetic structure and the
environment (Figure 19.3) influence population variation, the distribution of phenotypes among individuals.
Understanding phenotypic variation sources in a population is important for determining how a population will
evolve in response to different evolutionary pressures.
Figure 19.3The distribution of phenotypes in this litter of kittens illustrates population variation. (credit: Pieter Lanser)
Genetic Variance
Naturalselectionandsomeoftheotherevolutionaryforcescanonlyactonheritabletraits,namelyanorganism’s
geneticcode.Becauseallelesarepassedfromparenttooffspring,thosethatconferbeneficialtraitsorbehaviors
may be selected, while deleterious alleles may not. Acquired traits, for the most part, are not heritable. For
example,ifanathleteworksoutinthegymeveryday,buildingupmusclestrength,theathlete’soffspringwillnot
necessarilygrowuptobeabodybuilder.Ifthereisageneticbasisfortheabilitytorunfast,ontheotherhand,
a parent may pass this to a child.
PAGE: 533
522 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
BeforeDarwinianevolutionbecametheprevailingtheoryofthefield,FrenchnaturalistJean-BaptisteLamarck
theorized that organisms could inherit acquired traits. While the majority of scientists have not supported
this hypothesis, some have recently begun to realize that Lamarck was not completely wrong. Visit this site
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/epigenetic)to learn more.
Heritabilityisthefractionofphenotypevariationthatwecanattributetogeneticdifferences,orgeneticvariance,
among individuals in a population. The greater the heritability of a population’s phenotypic variation, the more
susceptible it is to the evolutionary forces that act on heritable variation.
Wecallthediversityofallelesandgenotypeswithinapopulationgeneticvariance.Whenscientistsareinvolved
in the breeding of a species, such as with animals in zoos and nature preserves, they try to increase a
population’sgeneticvariancetopreserveasmuchofthephenotypicdiversityaspossible.Thisalsohelpsreduce
associatedrisksofinbreeding,thematingofcloselyrelatedindividuals,whichcanhavetheundesirableeffect
ofbringingtogetherdeleteriousrecessivemutationsthatcancauseabnormalitiesandsusceptibilitytodisease.
For example, a disease that is caused by a rare, recessive allele might exist in a population, but it will only
manifestitselfwhenanindividualcarriestwocopiesoftheallele.Becausethealleleisrareinanormal,healthy
populationwithunrestrictedhabitat,thechancethattwocarrierswillmateislow,andeventhen,only25percent
oftheiroffspringwillinheritthediseaseallelefrombothparents.Whileitislikelytohappenatsomepoint,itwill
nothappenfrequentlyenoughfornaturalselectiontobeabletoswiftlyeliminatetheallelefromthepopulation,
and as a result, the allele maintains itself at low levels in the gene pool. However, if a family of carriers begins
tointerbreedwitheachother,thiswilldramaticallyincreasethelikelihoodoftwocarriersmatingandeventually
producing diseased offspring, a phenomenon that scientists callinbreeding depression.
Changes in allele frequencies that we identify in a population can shed light on how it is evolving. In addition
to natural selection, there are other evolutionary forces that could be in play: genetic drift, gene flow, mutation,
nonrandom mating, and environmental variances.
Genetic Drift
Thetheoryofnaturalselectionstemsfromtheobservationthatsomeindividualsinapopulationaremorelikely
to survive longer and have more offspring than others; thus, they will pass on more of their genes to the next
generation.Abig,powerfulmalegorilla,forexample,ismuchmorelikelythanasmaller,weakeronetobecome
thepopulation’ssilverback, thepack’sleaderwhomatesfarmorethan theother malesofthegroup. Thepack
leaderwillfathermoreoffspring,whosharehalfofhisgenes,andarelikelytoalsogrowbiggerandstrongerlike
theirfather.Overtime,thegenesforbiggersizewillincreaseinfrequencyinthepopulation,andthepopulation
will,asaresult,growlargeronaverage.Thatis,thiswouldoccurifthisparticularselectionpressure,ordriving
selectiveforce,weretheonlyoneactingonthepopulation.Inotherexamples,bettercamouflageorastronger
resistance to drought might pose a selection pressure.
Another way a population’s allele and genotype frequencies can change is genetic drift (Figure 19.4), which
issimplytheeffectofchance.Bychance,someindividualswillhavemoreoffspringthanothers—notduetoan
advantageconferredbysomegenetically-encodedtrait,butjustbecauseonemalehappenedtobeintheright
place at the right time (when the receptive female walked by) or because the other one happened to be in the
wrong place at the wrong time (when a fox was hunting).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 534
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 523
Figure 19.4 Genetic drift in a population can lead to eliminating an allele from a population by chance. In this
example,rabbitswiththebrowncoatcolorallele(B)aredominantoverrabbitswiththewhitecoatcolorallele(b).
In the first generation, the two alleles occur with equal frequency in the population, resulting in p and q values
of .5. Only half of the individuals reproduce, resulting in a second generation with p and q values of .7 and
.3, respectively. Only two individuals in the second generation reproduce, and by chance these individuals are
homozygous dominant for brown coat color. As a result, in the third generation the recessiveballele is lost.
Do you think genetic drift would happen more quickly on an island or on the mainland?
Small populations are more susceptible to the forces of genetic drift. Large populations, alternatively, are
buffered against the effects of chance. If one individual of a population of 10 individuals happens to die at a
PAGE: 535
524 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
young age before it leaves any offspring to the next generation, all of its genes—1/10 of the population’s gene
pool—willbesuddenlylost.Inapopulationof100,that’sonly1percentoftheoverallgenepool;therefore,itis
much less impactful on the population’s genetic structure.
Go to this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/genetic_drift) to watch an animation of random sampling and
genetic drift in action.
Natural events, such as an earthquake disaster that kills—at random—a large portion of the population, can
magnify genetic drift. Known as the bottleneck effect, it results in suddenly wiping out a large portion of
the genome (Figure 19.5). At once, the survivors' genetic structure becomes the entire population's genetic
structure, which may be very different from the pre-disaster population.
Figure 19.5A chance event or catastrophe can reduce the genetic variability within a population.
Anotherscenarioinwhichpopulationsmightexperienceastronginfluenceofgeneticdriftisifsomeportionofthe
populationleavestostartanewpopulationinanewlocationorifaphysicalbarrierdividesapopulation.Inthis
situation, those individuals are an unlikely representation of the entire population, which results in the founder
effect. The founder effect occurs when the genetic structure changes to match that of the new population’s
foundingfathersandmothers.Researchersbelievethatthefoundereffectwasakeyfactorinthegenetichistory
of the Afrikaner population of Dutch settlers in South Africa, as evidenced by mutations that are common in
Afrikaners but rare in most other populations. This is probably because a higher-than-normal proportion of the
founding colonists carried these mutations. As a result, the population expresses unusually high incidences of
Huntington’s disease (HD) and Fanconi anemia (FA), a genetic disorder known to cause blood marrow and
[2]
congenital abnormalities—even cancer.
2. A. J. Tipping et al., “Molecular and Genealogical Evidence for a Founder Effect in Fanconi Anemia Families of the Afrikaner Population of
South Africa,”PNAS98, no. 10 (2001): 5734-5739, doi: 10.1073/pnas.091402398.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 536
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 525
Watch this short video to learn more about the founder and bottleneck effects. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66524/1.3/#eip-id1164438765350)
Testing the Bottleneck Effect
Question:How do natural disasters affect a population's genetic structure?
Background: When an earthquake or hurricane suddenly wipes out much of a population, the surviving
individualsareusuallyarandomsamplingoftheoriginalgroup.Asaresult,thepopulation'sgeneticmakeup
can change dramatically. We call this phenomenon the bottleneck effect.
Hypothesis: Repeated natural disasters will yield different population genetic structures; therefore, each
time one runs this experiment the results will vary.
Test the hypothesis: Count out the original population using different colored beads. For example, red,
blue, and yellow beads might represent red, blue, and yellow individuals. After recording the number of
eachindividualintheoriginalpopulation,placethemallinabottlewithanarrowneckthatwillonlyallowa
few beads out at a time. Then, pour 1/3 of the bottle’s contents into a bowl. This represents the surviving
individualsafteranaturaldisasterkillsamajorityofthepopulation.Countthenumberofthedifferentcolored
beadsinthebowl, andrecordit. Then, placeallofthebeadsbackinthebottle andrepeat theexperiment
four more times.
Analyze the data: Compare the five populations that resulted from the experiment. Do the populations all
contain the same number of different colored beads, or do they vary? Remember, these populations all
came from the same exact parent population.
Formaconclusion:Mostlikely,thefiveresultingpopulationswilldifferquitedramatically.Thisisbecause
natural disasters are not selective—they kill and spare individuals at random. Now think about how this
mightaffectarealpopulation.WhathappenswhenahurricanehitstheMississippiGulfCoast?Howdothe
seabirds that live on the beach fare?
Gene Flow
Another important evolutionary force is gene flow: the flow of alleles in and out of a population due to the
migration of individuals or gametes (Figure 19.6). While some populations are fairly stable, others experience
more flux. Many plants, for example, send their pollen far and wide, by wind or by bird, to pollinate other
populations of the same species some distance away. Even apopulation that mayinitially appear to be stable,
suchasaprideoflions,canexperienceitsfairshareofimmigrationandemigrationasdevelopingmalesleave
theirmotherstoseekoutanewpridewithgeneticallyunrelatedfemales.Thisvariableflowofindividualsinand
outofthegroupnotonlychangesthepopulation'sgenestructure,butitcanalsointroducenewgeneticvariation
to populations in different geological locations and habitats.
PAGE: 537
526 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
Figure 19.6Gene flow can occur when an individual travels from one geographic location to another.
Mutation
Mutations are changes to an organism’s DNA and are an important driver of diversity in populations. Species
evolve because of mutations accumulating over time. The appearance of new mutations is the most common
waytointroducenovelgenotypicandphenotypicvariance.Somemutationsareunfavorableorharmfulandare
quickly eliminated from the population by natural selection. Others are beneficial and will spread through the
population. Whether or not a mutation is beneficial or harmful is determined by whether it helps an organism
survive to sexual maturity and reproduce. Some mutations do not do anything and can linger, unaffected by
natural selection, in the genome. Some can have a dramatic effect on a gene and the resulting phenotype.
Nonrandom Mating
If individuals nonrandomly mate with their peers, the result can be a changing population. There are many
reasons nonrandom mating occurs. One reason is simple mate choice. For example, female peahens may
preferpeacockswithbigger,brightertails.Naturalselectionpickstraitsthatleadtomorematingselectionsforan
individual. One common form of mate choice, called assortative mating, is an individual’s preference to mate
with partners who are phenotypically similar to themselves.
Anothercauseofnonrandommatingisphysicallocation.Thisisespeciallytrueinlargepopulationsspreadover
vastgeographicdistanceswherenotallindividualswillhaveequalaccesstooneanother.Somemightbemiles
apart through woods or over rough terrain, while others might live immediately nearby.
Environmental Variance
Genes are not the only players involved in determining population variation. Other factors, such as the
environment (Figure 19.7) also influence phenotypes. A beachgoer is likely to have darker skin than a city
dweller, for example, due to regular exposure to the sun, an environmental factor. For some species, the
environment determines some major characteristics, such as gender. For example, some turtles and other
reptileshavetemperature-dependent sexdetermination(TSD).TSDmeansthatindividualsdevelopintomales
if their eggs are incubated within a certain temperature range, or females at a different temperature range.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 538
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 527
Figure 19.7 The temperature at which the eggs are incubated determine the American alligator's (Alligator
mississippiensis)sex.Eggsincubatedat30°Cproducefemales,andeggsincubatedat33°Cproducemales.(credit:
Steve Hillebrand, USFWS)
Geographic separation between populations can lead to differences in the phenotypic variation between those
populations. We see such geographical variation between most populations and it can be significant. We
can observe one type of geographic variation, a cline, as given species' populations vary gradually across an
ecological gradient. Species of warm-blooded animals, for example, tend to have larger bodies in the cooler
climatesclosertotheearth’spoles,allowingthemtobetterconserveheat.Thisisalatitudinalcline.Alternatively,
floweringplantstendtobloomatdifferenttimesdependingonwheretheyarealongamountainslope.Thisisan
altitudinal cline.
If there is gene flow between the populations, the individuals will likely show gradual differences in phenotype
along the cline. Restricted gene flow, alternatively can lead to abrupt differences, even speciation.
19.3 | Adaptive Evolution
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the different ways natural selection can shape populations
• Describe how these different forces can lead to different outcomes in terms of the population variation
Naturalselectiononlyactsonthepopulation’sheritabletraits:selectingforbeneficialallelesandthusincreasing
their frequency in the population, while selecting against deleterious alleles and thereby decreasing their
frequency. Scientists call this process adaptive evolution. Natural selection does not act on individual alleles,
but on entire organisms. An individual may carry a very beneficial genotype with a resulting phenotype that,
for example, increases the ability to reproduce (fecundity), but if that same individual also carries an allele that
results in a fatal childhood disease, that fecundity phenotype will not pass to the next generation because the
individual will not live to reach reproductive age. Natural selection acts at the individual's level. It selects for
individuals with greater contributions to the gene pool of the next generation. Scientists call this an organism’s
evolutionary (Darwinian) fitness.
Fitnessisoftenquantifiableandismeasuredbyscientistsinthefield.However,itisnotanindividual'sabsolute
fitness that counts, but rather how it compares to the other organisms in the population. Scientists call this
concept relative fitness, which allows researchers to determine which individuals are contributing additional
offspring to the next generation, and thus, how the population might evolve.
There are several ways selection can affect population variation: stabilizing selection, directional selection,
diversifying selection, frequency-dependent selection, and sexual selection. As natural selection influences
the allele frequencies in a population, individuals can either become more or less genetically similar and the
phenotypes can become more similar or more disparate.
PAGE: 539
528 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
Stabilizing Selection
Ifnaturalselectionfavorsanaveragephenotype,selectingagainstextremevariation,thepopulationwillundergo
stabilizingselection(Figure19.8).Inamousepopulationthatliveinthewoods,forexample,naturalselection
is likely to favor mice that best blend in with the forest floor and are less likely for predators to spot. Assuming
the ground is a fairly consistent shade of brown, those mice whose fur is most closely matched to that color
willbemostlikelytosurviveandreproduce,passingontheirgenesfortheirbrowncoat.Micethatcarryalleles
that make them a bit lighter or a bit darker will stand out against the ground and be more likely to fall victim to
predation. As a result of this selection, the population’s genetic variance will decrease.
Directional Selection
When the environment changes, populations will often undergo directional selection (Figure 19.8), which
selectsforphenotypesatoneendofthespectrumofexistingvariation.Aclassicexampleofthistypeofselection
is the evolution of the peppered moth in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century England. Prior to the Industrial
Revolution, the moths were predominately light in color, which allowed them to blend in with the light-colored
treesandlichensintheirenvironment.However,assootbeganspewingfromfactories,thetreesdarkened,and
thelight-coloredmothsbecameeasierforpredatorybirdstospot.Overtime,thefrequencyofthemoth'smelanic
formincreasedbecausetheyhadahighersurvivalrateinhabitatsaffectedbyairpollutionbecausetheirdarker
coloration blended with the sooty trees. Similarly, the hypothetical mouse population may evolve to take on a
differentcolorationifsomethingweretocausetheforestfloorwheretheylivetochangecolor.Theresultofthis
type of selection is a shift in the population’s genetic variance toward the new, fit phenotype.
In science, we sometimes believe some things are true, and then new information becomes available
that changes our understanding. The peppered moth story is an example: some scientists recently have
questionedthefactsbehindtheselectiontowarddarkermoths.Readthisarticle(http://openstaxcollege.org/
l/peppered_moths)to learn more.
Diversifying Selection
Sometimes two or more distinct phenotypes can each have their advantages for natural selection, while the
intermediate phenotypes are, on average, less fit. Scientists call this diversifying selection (Figure 19.8)
We see this in many animal populations that have multiple male forms. Large, dominant alpha males use
brute force to obtain mates, while small males can sneak in for furtive copulations with the females in an
alpha male’s territory. In this case, both the alpha males and the “sneaking” males will be selected for, but
medium-sized males, who can’t overtake the alpha males and are too big to sneak copulations, are selected
against. Diversifying selection can also occur when environmental changes favor individuals on either end of
the phenotypic spectrum. Imagine a mouse population living at the beach where there is light-colored sand
interspersed with patches of tall grass. In this scenario, light-colored mice that blend in with the sand would be
favored, as well as dark-colored mice that can hide in the grass. Medium-colored mice, alternatively would not
blendinwitheitherthegrassorthesand,andthuspredatorswouldmostlikelyeatthem.Theresultofthistype
of selection is increased genetic variance as the population becomes more diverse.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 540
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 529
Figure19.8Differenttypesofnaturalselectioncanimpactthedistributionofphenotypeswithinapopulation.In
(a)stabilizingselection,anaveragephenotypeisfavored.In(b)directionalselection,achangeintheenvironment
shifts the spectrum of observed phenotypes. In (c) diversifying selection, two or more extreme phenotypes are
selected for, while the average phenotype is selected against.
Inrecentyears,factorieshavebecomecleaner,andreleaselesssootintotheenvironment.Whatimpactdo
you think this has had on the distribution of moth color in the population?
Frequency-Dependent Selection
Anothertypeofselection,frequency-dependentselection,favorsphenotypesthatareeithercommon(positive
frequency-dependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection). We can observe an
interestingexampleofthistypeofselectioninauniquegroupofPacificNorthwestlizards.Malecommonside-
blotchedlizardscomeinthreethroat-colorpatterns:orange,blue,andyellow.Eachoftheseformshasadifferent
reproductive strategy: orange males are the strongest and can fight other males for access to their females.
Blue males are medium-sized and form strong pair bonds with their mates. Yellow males (Figure 19.9) are
the smallest, and look a bit like females, which allows them to sneak copulations. Like a game of rock-paper-
scissors,orangebeatsblue,bluebeatsyellow,andyellowbeatsorangeinthecompetitionforfemales.Thatis,
thebig,strongorangemalescanfightoffthebluemalestomatewiththeblue’spair-bondedfemales,theblue
males are successful at guarding their mates against yellow sneaker males, and the yellow males can sneak
copulations from the potential mates of the large, polygynous orange males.
PAGE: 541
530 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
Figure 19.9 A yellow-throated side-blotched lizard is smaller than either the blue-throated or orange-throated males
and appears a bit like the females of the species, allowing it to sneak copulations. (credit: “tinyfroglet”/Flickr)
In this scenario, natural selection favors orange males when blue males dominate the population. Blue males
will thrive when the population is mostly yellow males, and yellow males will be selected for when orange
males are the most populous. As a result, populations of side-blotched lizards cycle in the distribution of these
phenotypes—inonegeneration,orangemightpredominate,andthenyellowmaleswillbegintoriseinfrequency.
Onceyellowmalescompriseamajorityofthepopulation,bluemaleswillbeselected.Finally,whenbluemales
become common, orange males once again will be favored.
Negative frequency-dependent selection serves to increase the population’s genetic variance by selecting
for rare phenotypes; whereas, positive frequency-dependent selection usually decreases genetic variance by
selecting for common phenotypes.
Sexual Selection
Malesandfemalesofcertainspeciesareoftenquitedifferentfromoneanotherinwaysbeyondthereproductive
organs. Males are often larger, for example, and display many elaborate colors and adornments, like the
peacock’s tail, while females tend to be smaller and duller in decoration. We call such differences sexual
dimorphisms (Figure 19.10), which arise in many populations, particularly animal populations, where there
is more variance in the male's reproductive success than that of the females. That is, some males—often the
bigger, stronger, or more decorated males—obtain the vast majority of the total matings, while others receive
none.Thiscanoccurbecausethemalesarebetteratfightingoffothermales,orbecausefemaleswillchooseto
matewiththebiggerormoredecoratedmales.Ineithercase,thisvariationinreproductivesuccessgeneratesa
strongselectionpressureamongmalestoobtainthosematings,resultingintheevolutionofbiggerbodysizeand
elaborate ornaments to attract the females’ attention. Females, however, tend to achieve a handful of selected
matings; therefore, they are more likely to select more desirable males.
Sexualdimorphismvarieswidelyamongspecies,andsomespeciesareevensex-rolereversed.Insuchcases,
females tend to have a greater variance in their reproductive success than males and are correspondingly
selected for the bigger body size and elaborate traits usually characteristic of males.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 542
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 531
Figure19.10Sexualdimorphismin(a)peacocksandpeahens,(b)Argiopeappensaspiders(thefemalespideristhe
large one), and in (c) wood ducks. (credit “spiders”: modification of work by “Sanba38”/Wikimedia Commons; credit
“duck”: modification of work by Kevin Cole)
We call the selection pressures on males and females to obtain matings sexual selection. It can result in
developing secondary sexual characteristics that do not benefit the individual’s likelihood of survival but help
to maximize its reproductive success. Sexual selection can be so strong that it selects traits that are actually
detrimental to the individual’s survival. Think, once again, about the peacock’s tail. While it is beautiful and the
malewiththelargest,mostcolorfultailismorelikelytowinthefemale,itisnotthemostpracticalappendage.In
addition to greater visibility to predators, it makes the males slower in their attempted escapes. There is some
evidence that this risk is why females like the big tails in the first place. The speculation is that large tails carry
risk,andonlythebestmalessurvivethatrisk:thebiggerthetail,themorefitthemale.Wecallthisthehandicap
principle.
The good genes hypothesis states that males develop these impressive ornaments to show off their efficient
metabolismortheirabilitytofightdisease.Femalesthenchoosemaleswiththemostimpressivetraitsbecause
it signals their genetic superiority, which they will then pass on to their offspring. Although one may argue that
femalesshouldnotbepickybecauseitwilllikelyreducetheirnumberofoffspring,ifbettermalesfathermorefit
offspring,itmaybebeneficial.Fewer,healthieroffspringmayincreasethechancesofsurvivalmorethanmany,
weaker offspring.
In1915,biologistRonaldFisherproposedanothermodelofsexualselection:theFisherian runawaymodel
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sexual_select) , which suggests that selection of certain traits is a result of
sexual preference.
Inboththehandicapprincipleandthegoodgeneshypothesis,thetraitisanhonestsignalofthemales’quality,
thus giving females a way to find the fittest mates— males that will pass the best genes to their offspring.
No Perfect Organism
Natural selection is a driving force in evolution and can generate populations that are better adapted to
surviveandsuccessfullyreproduceintheirenvironments.However,naturalselectioncannotproducetheperfect
organism. Natural selection can only select on existing variation in the population. It does not create anything
from scratch. Thus, it is limited by a population’s existing genetic variance and whatever new alleles arise
through mutation and gene flow.
Natural selection is also limited because it works at the individual, not allele level, and some alleles are
linked due to their physical proximity in the genome, making them more likely to pass on together (linkage
disequilibrium). Any given individual may carry some beneficial and some unfavorable alleles. It is the alleles'
net effect, or the organism’s fitness, upon which natural selection can act. As a result, good alleles can be lost
ifindividualswhocarrythemalsohaveseveraloverwhelminglybadalleles.Likewise,badallelescanbekeptif
individuals who have enough good alleles to result in an overall fitness benefit carry them.
PAGE: 543
532 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
Furthermore, natural selection can be constrained by the relationships between different polymorphisms. One
morphmayconferahigherfitnessthananother,butmaynotincreaseinfrequencybecausegoingfromtheless
beneficialtothemorebeneficialtraitwouldrequiregoingthroughalessbeneficialphenotype.Thinkbacktothe
micethatliveatthebeach.Somearelight-coloredandblendinwiththesand,whileothersaredarkandblendin
withthepatchesofgrass.Thedark-coloredmicemaybe,overall,morefitthanthelight-coloredmice,andatfirst
glance,onemightexpectthelight-coloredmicetobeselectedforadarkercoloration.However,rememberthat
the intermediate phenotype, a medium-colored coat, is very bad for the mice—they cannot blend in with either
thesandorthegrassandpredatorsaremorelikelytoeatthem.Asaresult,thelight-coloredmicewouldnotbe
selectedforadarkcolorationbecausethoseindividualswhobeganmovinginthatdirection(beganselectionfor
a darker coat) would be less fit than those that stayed light.
Finally, it is important to understand that not all evolution is adaptive. While natural selection selects the fittest
individualsandoftenresultsinamorefitpopulationoverall,otherforcesofevolution,includinggeneticdriftand
geneflow,oftendotheopposite:introducingdeleteriousallelestothepopulation’sgenepool.Evolutionhasno
purpose—itisnotchangingapopulationintoapreconceivedideal.Itissimplythesumofthevariousforcesthat
we have described in this chapter and how they influence the population's genetic and phenotypic variance.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 544
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 533
KEY TERMS
adaptive evolution increase in frequency of beneficial alleles and decrease in deleterious alleles due to
selection
allele frequency (also, gene frequency) rate at which a specific allele appears within a population
assortative mating when individuals tend to mate with those who are phenotypically similar to themselves
bottleneck effect magnification of genetic drift as a result of natural events or catastrophes
cline gradual geographic variation across an ecological gradient
directional selection selection that favors phenotypes at one end of the spectrum of existing variation
diversifying selection selection that favors two or more distinct phenotypes
evolutionary fitness (also, Darwinian fitness) individual’s ability to survive and reproduce
founder effect eventthatinitiatesanallelefrequencychangeinpartofthepopulation,whichisnottypicalofthe
original population
frequency-dependent selection selectionthatfavorsphenotypesthatareeithercommon(positivefrequency-
dependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection)
gene flow flow of alleles in and out of a population due to the individual or gamete migration
gene pool all the alleles that the individuals in the population carry
genetic drift effect of chance on a population’s gene pool
genetic structure distribution of the different possible genotypes in a population
genetic variance diversity of alleles and genotypes in a population
geographical variation differences in the phenotypic variation between populations that are separated
geographically
good genes hypothesis theory of sexual selection that argues individuals develop impressive ornaments to
show off their efficient metabolism or ability to fight disease
handicap principle theory of sexual selection that argues only the fittest individuals can afford costly traits
heritability fraction of population variation that can be attributed to its genetic variance
honest signal trait that gives a truthful impression of an individual’s fitness
inbreeding mating of closely related individuals
inbreeding depression increase in abnormalities and disease in inbreeding populations
macroevolution broader scale evolutionary changes that scientists see over paleontological time
microevolution changes in a population’s genetic structure
modern synthesis overarching evolutionary paradigm that took shape by the 1940s and scientists generally
accept today
nonrandom mating changes in a population’s gene pool due to mate choice or other forces that cause
individuals to mate with certain phenotypes more than others
population genetics study of how selective forces change the allele frequencies in a population over time
PAGE: 545
534 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
population variation distribution of phenotypes in a population
relative fitness individual’s ability to survive and reproduce relative to the rest of the population
selective pressure environmental factor that causes one phenotype to be better than another
sexual dimorphism phenotypic difference between a population's males and females
stabilizing selection selection that favors average phenotypes
CHAPTER SUMMARY
19.1Population Evolution
The modern synthesis of evolutionary theory grew out of the cohesion of Darwin’s, Wallace’s, and Mendel’s
thoughts on evolution and heredity, along with the more modern study of population genetics. It describes the
evolution of populations and species, from small-scale changes among individuals to large-scale changes over
paleontological time periods. To understand how organisms evolve, scientists can track populations’ allele
frequencies over time. If they differ from generation to generation, scientists can conclude that the population is
not in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and is thus evolving.
19.2Population Genetics
Both genetic and environmental factors can cause phenotypic variation in a population. Different alleles can
confer different phenotypes, and different environments can also cause individuals to look or act differently.
Only those differences encoded in an individual’s genes, however, can pass to its offspring and, thus, be a
target of natural selection. Natural selection works by selecting for alleles that confer beneficial traits or
behaviors, while selecting against those for deleterious qualities. Genetic drift stems from the chance
occurrence that some individuals in the gene line have more offspring than others. When individuals leave or
join the population, allele frequencies can change as a result of gene flow. Mutations to an individual’s DNA
may introduce new variation into a population. Allele frequencies can also alter when individuals do not
randomly mate with others in the group.
19.3Adaptive Evolution
Because natural selection acts to increase the frequency of beneficial alleles and traits while decreasing the
frequency of deleterious qualities, it is adaptive evolution. Natural selection acts at the individual level, selecting
for those that have a higher overall fitness compared to the rest of the population. If the fit phenotypes are
those that are similar, natural selection will result in stabilizing selection, and an overall decrease in the
population’s variation. Directional selection works to shift a population’s variance toward a new, fit phenotype,
as environmental conditions change. In contrast, diversifying selection results in increased genetic variance by
selecting for two or more distinct phenotypes.
Other types of selection include frequency-dependent selection, in which individuals with either common
(positive frequency-dependent selection) or rare (negative frequency-dependent selection) are selected.
Finally, sexual selection results from one sex having more variance in the reproductive success than the other.
As a result, males and females experience different selective pressures, which can often lead to the evolution
of phenotypic differences, or sexual dimorphisms, between the two.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 19.2In plants, violet flower color (V) is 2.Figure 19.4Do you think genetic drift would
dominant over white (v). If p = .8 and q = 0.2 in a happen more quickly on an island or on the
population of 500 plants, how many individuals would mainland?
you expect to be homozygous dominant (VV),
3.Figure 19.8In recent years, factories have
heterozygous (Vv), and homozygous recessive (vv)?
become cleaner, and less soot is released into the
How many plants would you expect to have violet
environment. What impact do you think this has had
flowers, and how many would have white flowers?
on the distribution of moth color in the population?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 546
Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations 535
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.What is the difference between micro- and
macroevolution? a. natural selection and genetic drift
a. Microevolution describes the evolution of b. mutation and gene flow
small organisms, such as insects, while c. natural selection and nonrandom mating
macroevolution describes the evolution of d. mutation and genetic drift
large organisms, like people and elephants.
10.What is assortative mating?
b. Microevolution describes the evolution of
a. when individuals mate with those who are
microscopic entities, such as molecules and
similar to themselves
proteins, while macroevolution describes the
b. when individuals mate with those who are
evolution of whole organisms.
dissimilar to themselves
c. Microevolution describes the evolution of
c. when individuals mate with those who are
organisms in populations, while
the most fit in the population
macroevolution describes the evolution of
d. when individuals mate with those who are
species over long periods of time.
least fit in the population
d. Microevolution describes the evolution of
organisms over their lifetimes, while 11.When closely related individuals mate with each
macroevolution describes the evolution of other, or inbreed, the offspring are often not as fit as
organisms over multiple generations. the offspring of two unrelated individuals. Why?
5.Population genetics is the study of:
a. Close relatives are genetically incompatible.
a. how selective forces change the allele
b. The DNA of close relatives reacts negatively
frequencies in a population over time
in the offspring.
b. the genetic basis of population-wide traits
c. Inbreeding can bring together rare,
c. whether traits have a genetic basis
deleterious mutations that lead to harmful
d. the degree of inbreeding in a population
phenotypes.
6.Which of the following populations is not in Hardy- d. Inbreeding causes normally silent alleles to
Weinberg equilibrium? be expressed.
a. a population with 12 homozygous recessive
12.What is a cline?
individuals (yy), 8 homozygous dominant
a. the slope of a mountain where a population
individuals (YY), and 4 heterozygous
lives
individuals (Yy)
b. the degree to which a mutation helps an
b. a population in which the allele frequencies
individual survive
do not change over time
c. the number of individuals in the population
2 2
c. p + 2pq + q = 1 d. gradual geographic variation across an
d. a population undergoing natural selection ecological gradient
7.One of the original Amish colonies rose from a 13.Which type of selection results in greater genetic
ship of colonists that came from Europe. The ship’s variance in a population?
captain, who had polydactyly, a rare dominant trait, a. stabilizing selection
was one of the original colonists. Today, we see a b. directional selection
much higher frequency of polydactyly in the Amish c. diversifying selection
population. This is an example of: d. positive frequency-dependent selection
a. natural selection
14.When males and females of a population look or
b. genetic drift
act differently, it is referred to as ________.
c. founder effect
a. sexual dimorphism
d. b and c
b. sexual selection
8.When male lions reach sexual maturity, they leave c. diversifying selection
their group in search of a new pride. This can alter d. a cline
the allele frequencies of the population through which
15.The good genes hypothesis is a theory that
of the following mechanisms?
explains what?
a. natural selection
b. genetic drift
c. gene flow
d. random mating
9.Which of the following evolutionary forces can
introduce new genetic variation into a population?
PAGE: 547
536 Chapter 19 | The Evolution of Populations
a. why more fit individuals are more likely to
have more offspring
b. why alleles that confer beneficial traits or
behaviors are selected for by natural
selection
c. why some deleterious mutations are
maintained in the population
d. why individuals of one sex develop
impressive ornamental traits
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Solve for the genetic structure of a population 19.Describe a situation in which a population would
with 12 homozygous recessive individuals (yy), 8 undergo the bottleneck effect and explain what
homozygous dominant individuals (YY), and 4 impact that would have on the population’s gene
heterozygous individuals (Yy). pool.
17.Explain the Hardy-Weinberg principle of 20.Describe natural selection and give an example
equilibrium theory. of natural selection at work in a population.
18.Imagine you are trying to test whether a 21.Explain what a cline is and provide examples.
population of flowers is undergoing evolution. You
22.Give an example of a trait that may have evolved
suspect there is selection pressure on the color of the
as a result of the handicap principle and explain your
flower: bees seem to cluster around the red flowers
reasoning.
more often than the blue flowers. In a separate
experiment, you discover blue flower color is 23.List the ways in which evolution can affect
dominant to red flower color. In a field, you count 600 population variation and describe how they influence
blue flowers and 200 red flowers. What would you allele frequencies.
expect the genetic structure of the flowers to be?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 548
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 537
20 | PHYLOGENIES AND
THE HISTORY OF LIFE
Figure20.1Abee'slifeisverydifferentfromaflower's,butthetwoorganismsarerelated.Botharemembersofthe
domainEukaryaandhavecellscontainingmanysimilarorganelles,genes,andproteins.(credit:modificationofwork
by John Beetham)
Chapter Outline
20.1:Organizing Life on Earth
20.2:Determining Evolutionary Relationships
20.3:Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
Introduction
ThisbeeandEchinaceaflower(Figure20.1)couldnotlookmoredifferent,yettheyarerelated,asareallliving
organisms on Earth. By following pathways of similarities and changes—both visible and genetic—scientists
seek to map the evolutionary past of how life developed from single-celled organisms to the tremendous
collection of creatures that have germinated, crawled, floated, swum, flown, and walked on this planet.
20.1 | Organizing Life on Earth
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the need for a comprehensive classification system
• List the different levels of the taxonomic classification system
• Describe how systematics and taxonomy relate to phylogeny
• Discuss a phylogenetic tree's components and purpose
Inscientificterms,phylogenyistheevolutionaryhistoryandrelationshipofanorganismorgroupoforganisms.
A phylogeny describes the organisim's relationships, such as from which organisms it may have evolved, or to
PAGE: 549
538 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
which species it is most closely related. Phylogenetic relationships provide information on shared ancestry but
not necessarily on how organisms are similar or different.
Phylogenetic Trees
Scientists use a tool called a phylogenetic tree to show the evolutionary pathways and connections among
organisms. A phylogenetic tree is a diagram used to reflect evolutionary relationships among organisms or
groups of organisms. Scientists consider phylogenetic trees to be a hypothesis of the evolutionary past since
one cannot go back to confirm the proposed relationships. In other words, we can construct a “tree of life” to
illustrate when different organisms evolved and to show the relationships among different organisms (Figure
20.2).
Unlike a taxonomic classification diagram, we can read a phylogenetic tree like a map of evolutionary history.
Manyphylogenetictreeshaveasinglelineageatthebaserepresentingacommonancestor.Scientistscallsuch
treesrooted,whichmeansthereisasingleancestrallineage(typicallydrawnfromthebottomorleft)towhich
allorganismsrepresentedinthediagramrelate.Noticeintherootedphylogenetictreethatthethreedomains—
Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya—diverge from a single point and branch off. The small branch that plants and
animals(includinghumans)occupyinthisdiagramshowshowrecentandminisculethesegroupsarecompared
withotherorganisms.Unrootedtreesdonotshowacommonancestorbutdoshowrelationshipsamongspecies.
Figure 20.2 Both of these phylogenetic trees show the relationship of the three domains of life—Bacteria, Archaea,
and Eukarya—but the (a) rooted tree attempts to identify when various species diverged from a common ancestor
while the (b) unrooted tree does not. (credit a: modification of work by Eric Gaba)
Inarootedtree,thebranchingindicatesevolutionaryrelationships(Figure20.3).Thepointwhereasplitoccurs,
abranchpoint,representswhereasinglelineageevolvedintoadistinctnewone.Wecallalineagethatevolved
early from the root that remains unbranched a basal taxon. We call two lineages stemming from the same
branch point sister taxa. A branch with more than two lineages is a polytomy and serves to illustrate where
scientistshavenotdefinitivelydeterminedalloftherelationships.Notethatalthoughsistertaxaandpolytomydo
shareanancestor,itdoesnotmeanthatthegroupsoforganismssplitorevolvedfromeachother.Organismsin
two taxa may have split at a specific branch point, but neither taxon gave rise to the other.
Figure 20.3 A phylogenetic tree's root indicates that an ancestral lineage gave rise to all organisms on the tree. A
branchpointindicateswheretwolineagesdiverged.Alineagethatevolvedearlyandremainsunbranchedisabasal
taxon.Whentwolineagesstemfromthesamebranchpoint,theyaresistertaxa.Abranchwithmorethantwolineages
is a polytomy.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 550
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 539
The diagrams above can serve as a pathway to understanding evolutionary history. We can trace the pathway
fromtheoriginoflifetoanyindividualspeciesbynavigatingthroughtheevolutionarybranchesbetweenthetwo
points.Also,bystartingwithasinglespeciesandtracingbacktowardsthe"trunk"ofthetree,onecandiscover
species' ancestors, as well as where lineages share a common ancestry. In addition, we can use the tree to
study entire groups of organisms.
Another point to mention on phylogenetic tree structure is that rotation at branch points does not change
the information. For example, if a branch point rotated and the taxon order changed, this would not alter the
information because each taxon's evolution from the branch point was independent of the other.
Manydisciplineswithinthestudyofbiologycontributetounderstandinghowpastandpresentlifeevolvedover
time;thesedisciplinestogethercontributetobuilding,updating,andmaintainingthe“treeoflife.”Systematicsis
thefieldthatscientistsusetoorganizeandclassifyorganismsbasedonevolutionaryrelationships.Researchers
may use data from fossils, from studying the body part structures, or molecules that an organism uses, and
DNA analysis. By combining data from many sources, scientists can construct an organism's phylogeny Since
phylogenetic trees are hypotheses, they will continue to change as researchers discover new types of life and
learn new information.
Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees
Itmaybeeasytoassumethatmorecloselyrelatedorganismslookmorealike,andwhilethisisoftenthecase,
itisnotalwaystrue.Iftwocloselyrelatedlineagesevolvedundersignificantlyvariedsurroundings,itispossible
for the two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related. For example, the
phylogenetictreeinFigure20.4showsthatlizardsandrabbitsbothhaveamnioticeggs;whereas,frogsdonot.
Yet lizards and frogs appear more similar than lizards and rabbits.
Figure20.4Anorganismthatlackedavertebralcolumnrootsthisladder-likephylogenetictreeofvertebrates.Ateach
branch point, scientists place organisms with different characters in different groups based on shared characteristics.
Anotheraspectofphylogenetictreesisthat,unlessotherwiseindicated,thebranchesdonotaccountforlength
oftime,onlytheevolutionaryorder.Inotherwords,abranch'slengthdoesnottypicallymeanmoretimepassed,
nordoesashortbranchmeanlesstimepassed—unlessspecifiedonthediagram.Forexample,inFigure20.4,
the tree does not indicate how much time passed between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the
treedoesshowistheorderinwhichthingstookplace.AgainusingFigure20.4,thetreeshowsthattheoldest
trait is the vertebral column, followed by hinged jaws, and so forth. Remember that any phylogenetic tree is a
partofthegreaterwhole,andlikearealtree,itdoesnotgrowinonlyonedirectionafteranewbranchdevelops.
Thus,fortheorganismsinFigure20.4,justbecauseavertebralcolumnevolveddoesnotmeanthatinvertebrate
evolutionceased.Itonlymeansthatanewbranchformed.Also,groupsthatarenotcloselyrelated,butevolve
under similar conditions, may appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a close relative.
PAGE: 551
540 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Head to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/tree_of_life) to see interactive exercises that allow you
to explore the evolutionary relationships among species.
Classification Levels
Taxonomy (which literally means “arrangement law”) is the science of classifying organisms to construct
internationally shared classification systems with each organism placed into increasingly more inclusive
groupings. Think about a grocery store's organization. One large space is divided into departments, such as
produce, dairy, and meats. Then each department further divides into aisles, then each aisle into categories
and brands, and then finally a single product. We call this organization from larger to smaller, more specific
categories a hierarchical system.
The taxonomic classification system (also called the Linnaean system after its inventor, Carl Linnaeus, a
Swedishbotanist,zoologist,andphysician)usesahierarchicalmodel.Movingfromthepointoforigin,thegroups
becomemorespecific,untilonebranchendsasasinglespecies.Forexample,afterthecommonbeginningof
alllife, scientists divideorganismsinto three largecategories calleddomains: Bacteria, Archaea, andEukarya.
Within each domain is a second category called a kingdom. After kingdoms, the subsequent categories of
increasing specificity are:phylum,class,order,family,genus, andspecies(Figure 20.5).
Figure 20.5 The taxonomic classification system uses a hierarchical model to organize living organisms into
increasinglyspecificcategories.Thecommondog,Canislupusfamiliaris,isasubspeciesofCanislupus,whichalso
includes the wolf and dingo. (credit “dog”: modification of work by Janneke Vreugdenhil)
The kingdom Animalia stems from the Eukarya domain. Figure 20.5 above shows the classification for the
common dog. Therefore, the full name of an organism technically has eight terms. For the dog it is: Eukarya,
Animalia, Chordata, Mammalia, Carnivora, Canidae, Canis, and lupus. Notice that each name is capitalized
except for species, and the genus and species names are italicized. Scientists generally refer to an organism
onlybyitsgenusandspecies,whichisitstwo-wordscientificname,orbinomialnomenclature.Therefore,the
scientific name of the dog is Canis lupus. The name at each level is also a taxon. In other words, dogs are in
order Carnivora. Carnivora is the name of the taxon at the order level; Canidae is the taxon at the family level,
and so forth. Organisms also have a common name that people typically use, in this case, dog. Note that the
dogisadditionallyasubspecies:the“familiaris”inCanislupusfamiliaris.Subspeciesaremembersofthesame
species that are capable of mating and reproducing viable offspring, but they are separate subspecies due to
geographic or behavioral isolation or other factors.
Figure 20.6 shows how the levels move toward specificity with other organisms. Notice how the dog shares a
domainwiththewidestdiversityoforganisms,includingplantsandbutterflies.Ateachsublevel,theorganisms
become more similar because they are more closely related. Historically, scientists classified organisms using
characteristics, but as DNA technology developed, they have determined more precise phylogenies.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 552
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 541
Figure 20.6 At each sublevel in the taxonomic classification system, organisms become more similar. Dogs
and wolves are the same species because they can breed and produce viable offspring, but they are different
enough to be classified as different subspecies. (credit “plant”: modification of work by "berduchwal"/Flickr;
credit “insect”: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit “fish”: modification of work by Christian Mehlführer;
credit “rabbit”: modification of work by Aidan Wojtas; credit “cat”: modification of work by Jonathan Lidbeck;
credit “fox”: modification of work by Kevin Bacher, NPS; credit “jackal”: modification of work by Thomas A.
Hermann,NBII,USGS;credit“wolf”:modificationofworkbyRobertDewar;credit“dog”:modificationofworkby
"digital_image_fan"/Flickr)
At what levels are cats and dogs part of the same group?
Visitthiswebsite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/classify_life)toclassifythreeorganisms—bear,orchid,and
sea cucumber—from kingdom to species. To launch the game, under Classifying Life, click the picture of the
bear or the Launch Interactive button.
PAGE: 553
542 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Recent genetic analysis and other advancements have found that some earlier phylogenetic classifications do
notalignwiththeevolutionarypast;therefore,researchersmustmakechangesandupdatesasnewdiscoveries
occur. Recall that phylogenetic trees are hypotheses and are modified as data becomes available. In addition,
classification historically has focused on grouping organisms mainly by shared characteristics and does not
necessarilyillustratehowthevariousgroupsrelatetoeachotherfromanevolutionaryperspective.Forexample,
despitethefactthatahippopotamusresemblesapigmorethanawhale,thehippopotamusmaybethewhale's
closest living relative.
20.2 | Determining Evolutionary Relationships
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare homologous and analogous traits
• Discuss the purpose of cladistics
• Describe maximum parsimony
Scientists must collect accurate information that allows them to make evolutionary connections among
organisms.Similartodetectivework,scientistsmustuseevidencetouncoverthefacts.Inthecaseofphylogeny,
evolutionary investigations focus on two types of evidence: morphologic (form and function) and genetic.
Two Options for Similarities
Ingeneral,organismsthatsharesimilarphysicalfeaturesandgenomesaremorecloselyrelatedthanthosethat
do not. We refer to such features that overlap both morphologically (in form) and genetically as homologous
structures. They stem from developmental similarities that are based on evolution. For example, the bones in
bat and bird wings have homologous structures (Figure 20.7).
Figure20.7Batandbirdwingsarehomologousstructures,indicatingthatbatsandbirdsshareacommonevolutionary
past. (credit a: modification of work by Steve Hillebrand, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by U.S. DOI BLM)
Noticeitisnotsimplyasinglebone,butratheragroupingofseveralbonesarrangedinasimilarway.Themore
complex the feature, the more likely any kind of overlap is due to a common evolutionary past. Imagine two
peoplefromdifferentcountriesbothinventingacarwithallthesamepartsandinexactlythesamearrangement
without any previous or shared knowledge. That outcome would be highly improbable. However, if two people
both invented a hammer, we can reasonably conclude that both could have the original idea without the help
oftheother.Thesamerelationshipbetweencomplexityandsharedevolutionaryhistoryistrueforhomologous
structures in organisms.
Misleading Appearances
Some organisms may be very closely related, even though a minor genetic change caused a major
morphological difference to make them look quite different. Similarly, unrelated organisms may be distantly
related,butappearverymuchalike.Thisusuallyhappensbecausebothorganismswereincommonadaptations
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 554
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 543
that evolved within similar environmental conditions. When similar characteristics occur because of
environmental constraints and not due to a close evolutionary relationship, it is an analogy or homoplasy. For
example,insectsusewingstoflylikebatsandbirds,butthewingstructureandembryonicoriginiscompletely
different. These are analogous structures (Figure 20.8).
Similartraitscanbeeitherhomologousoranalogous.Homologousstructuresshareasimilarembryonicorigin.
Analogousorganshaveasimilarfunction. Forexample,thebonesinawhale'sfrontflipperarehomologousto
thebonesinthehumanarm.Thesestructuresarenotanalogous.Abutterflyorbird'swingsareanalogousbut
nothomologous.Somestructuresarebothanalogousandhomologous:birdandbatwingsarebothhomologous
andanalogous. Scientists mustdetermine whichtypeofsimilarity afeature exhibits todeciphertheorganisms'
phylogeny.
Figure20.8The(c)wingofahoneybeeissimilarinshapetoa(b)birdwingand(a)batwing,anditservesthesame
function.However,thehoneybeewingisnotcomposedofbonesandhasadistinctlydifferentstructureandembryonic
origin. These wing types (insect versus bat and bird) illustrate an analogy—similar structures that do not share an
evolutionaryhistory.(credita:modificationofworkbyU.S.DOIBLM;creditb:modificationofworkbySteveHillebrand,
USFWS; credit c: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Thiswebsite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/relationships)hasseveralexamplestoshowhowappearances
can be misleading in understanding organisms' phylogenetic relationships.
Molecular Comparisons
TheadvancementofDNAtechnologyhasgivenrisetomolecularsystematics,whichisuseofmoleculardata
in taxonomy and biological geography (biogeography). New computer programs not only confirm many earlier
classified organisms, but also uncover previously made errors. As with physical characteristics, even the DNA
sequence can be tricky to read in some cases. For some situations, two very closely related organisms can
appearunrelatedifamutationoccurredthatcausedashiftinthegeneticcode.Insertingordeletingamutation
would move each nucleotide base over one place, causing two similar codes to appear unrelated.
Sometimes two segments of DNA code in distantly related organisms randomly share a high percentage of
PAGE: 555
544 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
basesinthesamelocations,causingtheseorganismstoappearcloselyrelatedwhentheyarenot.Forbothof
thesesituations,computertechnologieshelpidentifytheactualrelationships,and,ultimately,thecoupleduseof
both morphologic and molecular information is more effective in determining phylogeny.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 556
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 545
Why Does Phylogeny Matter?
Evolutionary biologists could list many reasons why understanding phylogeny is important to everyday life
in human society. For botanists, phylogeny acts as a guide to discovering new plants that can be used to
benefitpeople.Thinkofallthewayshumansuseplants—food,medicine,andclothingareafewexamples.
Ifaplantcontainsacompoundthatiseffectiveintreatingcancer,scientistsmightwanttoexamineallofthe
compounds for other useful drugs.
A research team in China identified a DNA segment that they thought to be common to some medicinal
plantsinthefamilyFabaceae(thelegumefamily).Theyworkedtoidentifywhichspecieshadthissegment
(Figure 20.9). After testing plant species in this family, the team found a DNA marker (a known location
on a chromosome that enabled them to identify the species) present. Then, using the DNA to uncover
phylogeneticrelationships,theteamcouldidentifywhetheranewlydiscoveredplantwasinthisfamilyand
assess its potential medicinal properties.
Figure 20.9 Dalbergia sissoo (D. sissoo) is in the Fabaceae, or legume family. Scientists found that D. sissoo
shares a DNA marker with species within the Fabaceae family that have antifungal properties. Subsequently,
researchersfoundthatD.sissoohadfungicidalactivity,supportingtheideathatDNAmarkersareusefultoscreen
plants with potential medicinal properties.
PAGE: 557
546 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Building Phylogenetic Trees
Howdoscientistsconstructphylogenetictrees?Aftertheysortthehomologousandanalogoustraits,scientists
often organize the homologous traits using cladistics. This system sorts organisms into clades: groups of
organisms that descended from a single ancestor. For example, in Figure 20.10, all the organisms in the
orangeregionevolvedfromasingleancestorthathadamnioticeggs.Consequently,theseorganismsalsohave
amnioticeggsandmakeasingleclade,oramonophyleticgroup.Cladesmustincludealldescendantsfroma
branch point.
Figure20.10Lizards,rabbits,andhumansalldescendfromacommonancestorthathadanamnioticegg.Thus,
lizards, rabbits, and humans all belong to the clade Amniota. Vertebrata is a larger clade that also includes fish
and lamprey.
Which animals in this figure belong to a clade that includes animals with hair? Which evolved first, hair or
the amniotic egg?
Clades can vary in size depending on which branch point one references. The important factor is that all
organisms in the clade or monophyletic group stem from a single point on the tree. You can remember
this because monophyletic breaks down into “mono,” meaning one, and “phyletic,” meaning evolutionary
relationship. Figure 20.11 shows various clade examples. Notice how each clade comes from a single point;
whereas, the non-clade groups show branches that do not share a single point.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 558
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 547
Figure20.11Alltheorganismswithinacladestemfromasinglepointonthetree.Aclademaycontainmultiple
groups, as in the case of animals, fungi and plants, or a single group, as in the case of flagellates. Groups that
diverge at a different branch point, or that do not include all groups in a single branch point, are not clades.
What is the largest clade in this diagram?
Shared Characteristics
Organisms evolve from common ancestors and then diversify. Scientists use the phrase “descent with
modification”becauseeventhoughrelatedorganismshavemanyofthesamecharacteristicsandgeneticcodes,
changes occur. This pattern repeats as one goes through the phylogenetic tree of life:
1. A change in an organism's genetic makeup leads to a new trait which becomes prevalent in the group.
2. Many organisms descend from this point and have this trait.
3. New variations continue to arise: some are adaptive and persist, leading to new traits.
4. With new traits, a new branch point is determined (go back to step 1 and repeat).
If a characteristic is found in the ancestor of a group, it is considered a shared ancestral character because
all of the organisms in the taxon or clade have that trait. The vertebrate in Figure 20.10 is a shared ancestral
character. Now consider the amniotic egg characteristic in the same figure. Only some of the organisms in
Figure 20.10 have this trait, and to those that do, it is called a shared derived character because this trait
derived at some point but does not include all of the ancestors in the tree.
The tricky aspect to shared ancestral and shared derived characters is that these terms are relative. We can
consider the same trait one or the other depending on the particular diagram that we use. Returning to Figure
20.10, note that the amniotic egg is a shared ancestral character for the Amniota clade, while having hair is
a shared derived character for some organisms in this group. These terms help scientists distinguish between
clades in building phylogenetic trees.
PAGE: 559
548 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Choosing the Right Relationships
Imaginebeingthepersonresponsiblefororganizingalldepartmentstoreitemsproperly—anoverwhelmingtask.
Organizing the evolutionary relationships of all life on Earth proves much more difficult: scientists must span
enormous blocks of time and work with information from long-extinct organisms. Trying to decipher the proper
connections,especiallygiventhepresenceofhomologiesandanalogies,makesthetaskofbuildinganaccurate
tree of life extraordinarily difficult. Add to that advancing DNA technology, which now provides large quantities
ofgeneticsequencesforresearcherstouseandanalzye.Taxonomyisasubjectivediscipline:manyorganisms
have more than one connection to each other, so each taxonomist will decide the order of connections.
Toaidinthetremendoustaskofdescribingphylogeniesaccurately,scientistsoftenusetheconceptofmaximum
parsimony, which means that events occurred in the simplest, most obvious way. For example, if a group of
peopleenteredaforestpreservetohike,basedontheprincipleofmaximumparsimony,onecouldpredictthat
most would hike on established trails rather than forge new ones.
For scientists deciphering evolutionary pathways, the same idea is used: the pathway of evolution probably
includes the fewest major events that coincide with the evidence at hand. Starting with all of the homologous
traitsinagroupoforganisms,scientistslookforthemostobviousandsimpleorderofevolutionaryeventsthat
led to the occurrence of those traits.
Head to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/using_parsimony) to learn how researchers use
maximum parsimony to create phylogenetic trees.
These tools and concepts are only a few strategies scientists use to tackle the task of revealing the
evolutionaryhistoryoflifeonEarth.Recently,newertechnologieshaveuncoveredsurprisingdiscoverieswith
unexpectedrelationships,suchasthefactthatpeopleseemtobemorecloselyrelatedtofungithanfungiare
toplants.Soundunbelievable?AstheinformationaboutDNAsequencesgrows,scientistswillbecomecloser
to mapping the evolutionary history of all life on Earth.
20.3 | Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe horizontal gene transfer
• Illustrate how prokaryotes and eukaryotes transfer genes horizontally
• Identify the web and ring models of phylogenetic relationships and describe how they differ from the
original phylogenetic tree concept
Phylogenetic modeling concepts are constantly changing. It is one of the most dynamic fields of study in all
biology.Overthelastseveraldecades,newresearchhaschallengedscientists’ideasabouthoworganismsare
related. The scientific community has proposed new models of these relationships.
Many phylogenetic trees are models of the evolutionary relationship among species. Phylogenetic trees
originated with Charles Darwin, who sketched the first phylogenetic tree in 1837 (Figure 20.12a). This served
asaprototypeforsubsequentstudiesformorethanacentury.Thephylogenetictreeconceptwithasingletrunk
representingacommonancestor,withthebranchesrepresentingthedivergenceofspeciesfromthisancestor,
fits well with the structure of many common trees, such as the oak (Figure 20.12b). However, evidence from
modern DNA sequence analysis and newly developed computer algorithms has caused skepticism about the
standard tree model's validity in the scientific community.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 560
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 549
Figure20.12The(a)conceptofthe“treeoflife”datestoan1837CharlesDarwinsketch.Likean(b)oaktree,the“tree
of life” has a single trunk and many branches. (credit b: modification of work by "Amada44"/Wikimedia Commons)
Limitations to the Classic Model
Classicalthinkingaboutprokaryoticevolution,includedintheclassictreemodel,isthatspeciesevolveclonally.
That is, they produce offspring themselves with only random mutations causing the descent into the variety
of modern-day and extinct species known to science. This view is somewhat complicated in eukaryotes that
reproducesexually,butthelawsofMendeliangeneticsexplainthevariationinoffspring,again,tobearesultof
a mutation within the species. Scientists did not consider the concept of genes transferring between unrelated
species as a possibility until relatively recently. Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), or lateral gene transfer, is the
transfer of genes between unrelated species. HGT is an ever-present phenomenon, with many evolutionists
postulating a major role for this process in evolution, thus complicating the simple tree model. Genes pass
betweenspecieswhichareonlydistantlyrelatedusingstandardphylogeny,thusaddingalayerofcomplexityto
understanding phylogenetic relationships.
The various ways that HGT occurs in prokaryotes is important to understanding phylogenies. Although at
present some do not view HGT as important to eukaryotic evolution, HGT does occur in this domain as well.
Finally, as an example of the ultimate gene transfer, some scientists have proposed genome fusion theories
between symbiotic or endosymbiotic organisms to explain an event of great importance—the evolution of the
first eukaryotic cell, without which humans could not have come into existence.
Horizontal Gene Transfer
Horizontalgenetransfer(HGT)istheintroductionofgeneticmaterialfromonespeciestoanotherspeciesby
mechanismsotherthantheverticaltransmissionfromparent(s)tooffspring.Thesetransfersallowevendistantly
related species to share genes, influencing their phenotypes. Scientists believe that HGT is more prevalent in
prokaryotes,butthatthisprocesstransfersonlyabout2%oftheprokaryoticgenome.Someresearchersbelieve
suchestimatesarepremature:wemustviewtheactualimportanceofHGTtoevolutionaryprocessesasawork
in progress. As scientists investigate this phenomenon more thoroughly, they may reveal more HGT transfer.
Many scientists believe that HGT and mutation are (especially in prokaryotes) a significant source of genetic
variation,whichistherawmaterialinthenaturalselectionprocess.Thesetransfersmayoccurbetweenanytwo
species that share an intimate relationship (Table 20.1).
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic HGT Mechanisms Summary
Mechanism Mode of Transmission Example
Prokaryotes transformation DNA uptake many prokaryotes
transduction bacteriophage (virus) bacteria
Table 20.1
PAGE: 561
550 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic HGT Mechanisms Summary
Mechanism Mode of Transmission Example
conjugation pilus many prokaryotes
gene transfer agents phage-like particles purple non-sulfur bacteria
Eukaryotes from food organisms unknown aphid
jumping genes transposons rice and millet plants
epiphytes/parasites unknown yew tree fungi
from viral infections
Table 20.1
HGT in Prokaryotes
HGT mechanisms are quite common in the Bacteria and Archaea domains, thus significantly changing the
way scientists view their evolution. The majority of evolutionary models, such as in the Endosymbiont Theory,
propose that eukaryotes descended from multiple prokaryotes, which makes HGT all the more important
to understanding the phylogenetic relationships of all extant and extinct species. The Endosymbiont Theory
purportsthattheeukaryotes'mitochondriaandthegreenplants'chloroplastsandflagellatesoriginatedasfree-
livingprokaryotesthatinvadedprimitiveeukaryoticcellsandbecomeestablishedaspermanentsymbiontsinthe
cytoplasm.
Microbiology students are well aware that genes transfer among common bacteria. These gene transfers
between species are the major mechanism whereby bacteria acquire resistance to antibiotics. Classically,
scientists believe that three different mechanisms drive such transfers.
1. Transformation: bacteria takes up naked DNA
2. Transduction: a virus transfers the genes
3. Conjugation: a hollow tube, or pilus transfers genes between organisms
Morerecently,scientistshavediscoveredafourthgenetransfermechanismbetweenprokaryotes.Small,virus-
likeparticles,orgenetransferagents(GTAs)transferrandomgenomicsegmentsfromoneprokaryotespecies
to another. GTAs are responsible for genetic changes, sometimes at a very high frequency compared to other
evolutionary processes. Scientists characterized the first GTA in 1974 using purple, non-sulfur bacteria. These
GTAs, which are most likely bacteriophages that lost the ability to reproduce on their own, carry random DNA
piecesfromoneorganismtoanother.ControlledstudiesusingmarinebacteriahavedemonstratedGTAs'ability
toactwithhighfrequency.Scientistshaveestimatedgenetransfereventsinmarineprokaryotes,eitherbyGTAs
13
or by viruses, to be as high as 10 per year in the Mediterranean Sea alone. GTAs and viruses are efficient
HGT vehicles with a major impact on prokaryotic evolution.
As a consequence of this modern DNA analysis, the idea that eukaryotes evolved directly from Archaea has
fallen out of favor. While eukaryotes share many features that are absent in bacteria, such as the TATA box
(locatedinmanygenes'promoterregion),thediscoverythatsomeeukaryoticgenesweremorehomologouswith
bacterial DNA than Archaea DNA made this idea less tenable. Furthermore, scientists have proposed genome
fusion from Archaea and Bacteria by endosymbiosis as the ultimate event in eukaryotic evolution.
HGT in Eukaryotes
Although it is easy to see how prokaryotes exchange genetic material by HGT, scientists initially thought that
this process was absent in eukaryotes. After all, prokaryotes are but single cells exposed directly to their
environment; whereas, the multicellular organisms' sex cells are usually sequestered in protected parts of the
body.Itfollowsfromthisideathatthegenetransfersbetweenmulticellulareukaryotesshouldbemoredifficult.
Scientists believe this process is rarer in eukaryotes and has a much smaller evolutionary impact than in
prokaryotes. In spite of this, HGT between distantly related organisms is evident in several eukaryotic species,
and it is possible that scientists will discover more examples in the future.
In plants, researchers have observed gene transfer in species that cannot cross-pollinate by normal means.
Transposons or “jumping genes” have shown a transfer between rice and millet plant species. Furthermore,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 562
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 551
fungal species feeding on yew trees, from which the anti-cancer drug TAXOL® is derived from the bark, have
acquired the ability to make taxol themselves, a clear example of gene transfer.
In animals, a particularly interesting example of HGT occurs within the aphid species (Figure 20.13). Aphids
are insects that vary in color based on carotenoid content. Carotenoids are pigments that a variety of plants,
fungi,andmicrobesproduce,andtheyserveavarietyoffunctionsinanimals,whoobtainthesechemicalsfrom
theirfood.HumansrequirecarotenoidstosynthesizevitaminA,andweobtainthembyeatingorangefruitsand
vegetables: carrots, apricots, mangoes, and sweet potatoes. Alternatively, aphids have acquired the ability to
make the carotenoids on their own. According to DNA analysis, this ability is due to fungal genes transferring
intotheinsectbyHGT,presumablyastheinsectconsumedfungiforfood.Acarotenoidenzyme,ordesaturase,
isresponsiblefortheredcolorationincertainaphids,andwhenmutationactivatesthisgene,theaphidsrevert
to their more common green color (Figure 20.13).
Figure20.13(a)Redaphidsgettheircolorfromredcarotenoidpigment.Genesnecessarytomakethispigmentare
presentincertainfungi,andscientistsspeculatethataphidsacquiredthesegenesthroughHGTafterconsumingfungi
forfood.Ifmutationinactivatesthegenesformakingcarotenoids,theaphidsrevertbackto(b)theirgreencolor.Red
colorationmakestheaphidsconsiderablymoreconspicuoustopredators,butevidencesuggeststhatredaphidsare
moreresistanttoinsecticidesthangreenones.Thus,redaphidsmaybemorefittosurviveinsomeenvironmentsthan
green ones. (credit a: modification of work by Benny Mazur; credit b: modification of work by Mick Talbot)
Genome Fusion and Eukaryote Evolution
Scientists believe the ultimate in HGT occurs through genome fusion between different prokaryote species
when two symbiotic organisms become endosymbiotic. This occurs when one species is taken inside another
species' cytoplasm, which ultimately results in a genome consisting of genes from both the endosymbiont
and the host. This mechanism is an aspect of the Endosymbiont Theory, which most biologists accept as
the mechanism whereby eukaryotic cells obtained their mitochondria and chloroplasts. However, the role of
endosymbiosisindevelopingthenucleusismorecontroversial.Scientistsbelievethatnuclearandmitochondrial
DNA have different (separate) evolutionary origins, with the mitochondrial DNA derived from the bacteria's
circular genomes ancient prokaryotic cells engulfed. We can regard mitochondrial DNA as the smallest
chromosome.Interestinglyenough,mitochondrialDNAisinheritedonlyfromthemother.ThemitochondrialDNA
degrades in sperm when the sperm degrades in the fertilized egg or in other instances when the mitochondria
located in the sperm's flagellum fails to enter the egg.
Withinthepastdecade,JamesLakeoftheUCLA/NASAAstrobiologyInstituteproposedthatthegenomefusion
process is responsible for the evolution of the first eukaryotic cells (Figure 20.14a). Using DNA analysis and
a new mathematical algorithm, conditioned reconstruction (CR), his laboratory proposed that eukaryotic cells
developedfromanendosymbioticgenefusionbetweentwospecies,oneanArchaeaandtheotheraBacteria.
As mentioned, some eukaryotic genes resemble those of Archaea; whereas, others resemble those from
Bacteria. An endosymbiotic fusion event, such as Lake has proposed, would clearly explain this observation.
Alternatively,thisworkisnewandtheCRalgorithmisrelativelyunsubstantiated,whichcausesmanyscientists
to resist this hypothesis.
Lake's more recent work (Figure 20.14b) proposes that gram-negative bacteria, which are unique within their
domaininthattheycontaintwolipidbilayermembranes,resultedfromanendosymbioticfusionofarchaealand
bacterialspecies.Thedoublemembranewouldbeadirectresultoftheendosymbiosis,withtheendosymbiont
pickingupthesecondmembranefromthehostasitwasinternalized.Scientistshavealsousedthismechanism
to explain the double membranes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Lake’s work is not without skepticism, and
thebiologicalsciencecommunitystilldebateshisideas.InadditiontoLake’shypothesis,thereareseveralother
competingtheoriesastotheoriginofeukaryotes.Howdidtheeukaryoticnucleusevolve?Onetheoryisthatthe
PAGE: 563
552 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
prokaryotic cells produced an additional membrane that surrounded the bacterial chromosome. Some bacteria
have the DNA enclosed by two membranes; however, there is no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear pores.
Otherproteobacteriaalsohavemembrane-boundchromosomes.Iftheeukaryoticnucleusevolvedthisway,we
would expect one of the two types of prokaryotes to be more closely related to eukaryotes.
Figure 20.14 The scientific community now widely accepts the theory that mitochondria and chloroplasts are
endosymbioticinorigin.Morecontroversialistheproposalthat(a)theeukaryoticnucleusresultedfromfusingarchaeal
and bacterial genomes, and that (b) Gram-negative bacteria, which have two membranes, resulted from fusing
Archaea and Gram-positive bacteria, each of which has a single membrane.
Thenucleus-firsthypothesisproposesthatthenucleusevolvedinprokaryotesfirst(Figure20.15a),followedby
alaterfusionoftheneweukaryotewithbacteriathatbecamemitochondria.Themitochondria-firsthypothesis
proposes that mitochondria were first established in a prokaryotic host (Figure 20.15b), which subsequently
acquired a nucleus, by fusion or other mechanisms, to become the first eukaryotic cell. Most interestingly, the
eukaryote-first hypothesis proposes that prokaryotes actually evolved from eukaryotes by losing genes and
complexity (Figure 20.15c). All of these hypotheses are testable. Only time and more experimentation will
determine which hypothesis data best supports.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 564
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 553
Figure20.15Threealternatehypothesesofeukaryoticandprokaryoticevolutionare(a)thenucleus-firsthypothesis,
(b) the mitochondrion-first hypothesis, and (c) the eukaryote-first hypothesis.
Web and Network Models
Recognizing the importance of HGT, especially in prokaryote evolution, has caused some to propose
abandoning the classic “tree of life” model. In 1999, W. Ford Doolittle proposed a phylogenetic model that
resembles a web or a network more than a tree. The hypothesis is that eukaryotes evolved not from a single
prokaryotic ancestor, but from a pool of many species that were sharing genes by HGT mechanisms. As
Figure 20.16a shows, some individual prokaryotes were responsible for transferring the bacteria that caused
mitochondrial development to the new eukaryotes; whereas, other species transferred the bacteria that gave
risetochloroplasts.Scientistsoftencallthismodelthe“weboflife.”Inanefforttosavethetreeanalogy,some
haveproposedusingtheFicustree(Figure20.16b)withitsmultipletrunksasaphylogeneticwaytorepresent
a diminished evolutionary role for HGT.
PAGE: 565
554 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
Figure20.16InW.FordDoolittle's(a)phylogeneticmodel,the“treeoflife”arosefromacommunityofancestralcells,
hasmultipletrunks,andhasconnectionsbetweenbrancheswherehorizontalgenetransferhasoccurred.Visually,this
concept is better represented by (b) the multi-trunked Ficus than by an oak's single trunk similar to Darwin's tree in
Figure 20.12. (credit b: modification of work by "psyberartist"/Flickr)
Ring of Life Models
Others have proposed abandoning any tree-like model of phylogeny in favor of a ring structure, the so-called “
ring of life” (Figure 20.17). This is a phylogenetic model where all three domains of life evolved from a pool
ofprimitiveprokaryotes.Lake,againusingtheconditionedreconstructionalgorithm,proposesaring-likemodel
in which species of all three domains—Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya—evolved from a single pool of gene-
swapping prokaryotes. His laboratory proposes that this structure is the best fit for data from extensive DNA
analyses performed in his laboratory, and that the ring model is the only one that adequately takes HGT and
genomic fusion into account. However, other phylogeneticists remain highly skeptical of this model.
Figure20.17Accordingtothe“ringoflife”phylogeneticmodel,thethreedomainsoflifeevolvedfromapoolofprimitive
prokaryotes.
In summary, we must modify Darwin's “tree of life” model to include HGT. Does this mean abandoning the
tree model completely? Even Lake argues that scientists should attempt to modify the tree model to allow it to
accurately fit his data, and only the inability to do so will sway people toward his ring proposal.
This doesn’t mean a tree, web, or a ring will correlate completely to an accurate description of phylogenetic
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 566
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 555
relationships of life. A consequence of the new thinking about phylogenetic models is the idea that Darwin’s
original phylogenetic tree concept is too simple, but made sense based on what scientists knew at the time.
However, the search for a more useful model moves on: each model serves as hypotheses to test with
the possibility of developing new models. This is how science advances. Researchers use these models as
visualizations to help construct hypothetical evolutionary relationships and understand the massive amount of
data that requires analysis.
PAGE: 567
556 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
KEY TERMS
analogy (also,homoplasy)characteristicthatissimilarbetweenorganismsbyconvergentevolution,notdueto
the same evolutionary path
basal taxon branch on a phylogenetic tree that has not diverged significantly from the root ancestor
binomial nomenclature system of two-part scientific names for an organism, which includes genus and
species names
branch point node on a phylogenetic tree where a single lineage splits into distinct new ones
cladistics system to organize homologous traits to describe phylogenies
class division of phylum in the taxonomic classification system
eukaryote-first hypothesis proposal that prokaryotes evolved from eukaryotes
family division of order in the taxonomic classification system
gene transfer agent (GTA) bacteriophage-like particle that transfers random genomic segments from one
species of prokaryote to another
genome fusion fusion of two prokaryotic genomes, presumably by endosymbiosis
genus division of family in the taxonomic classification system; the first part of the binomial scientific name
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) (also, lateral gene transfer) transfer of genes between unrelated species
kingdom domain division in the taxonomic classification system
maximum parsimony applying the simplest, most obvious way with the least number of steps
mitochondria-first hypothesis proposal that prokaryotes acquired a mitochondrion first, followed by nuclear
development
molecular systematics technique using molecular evidence to identify phylogenetic relationships
monophyletic group (also, clade) organisms that share a single ancestor
nucleus-first hypothesis proposal that prokaryotes acquired a nucleus first, and then the mitochondrion
order class division in the taxonomic classification system
phylogenetic tree diagram that reflects the evolutionary relationships among organisms or groups of
organisms
phylogeny evolutionary history and relationship of an organism or group of organisms
phylum (plural: phyla) kingdom division in the taxonomic classification system
polytomy branch on a phylogenetic tree with more than two groups or taxa
ring of life phylogenetic model where all three domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive prokaryotes
rooted singleancestrallineageonaphylogenetictreetowhichallorganismsrepresentedinthediagramrelate
shared ancestral character describes a characteristic on a phylogenetic tree that all organisms on the tree
share
shared derived character describes a characteristic on a phylogenetic tree that only a certain clade of
organisms share
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 568
Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life 557
sister taxa two lineages that diverged from the same branch point
systematics field of organizing and classifying organisms based on evolutionary relationships
taxon (plural: taxa) single level in the taxonomic classification system
taxonomy science of classifying organisms
web of life phylogenetic model that attempts to incorporate the effects of horizontal gene transfer on evolution
CHAPTER SUMMARY
20.1Organizing Life on Earth
Scientists continually gain new information that helps understand the evolutionary history of life on Earth. Each
group of organisms went through its own evolutionary journey, or its phylogeny. Each organism shares
relatedness with others, and based on morphologic and genetic evidence, scientists attempt to map the
evolutionary pathways of all life on Earth. Historically, scientists organized organisms into a taxonomic
classification system. However, today many scientists build phylogenetic trees to illustrate evolutionary
relationships.
20.2Determining Evolutionary Relationships
To build phylogenetic trees, scientists must collect accurate information that allows them to make evolutionary
connections between organisms. Using morphologic and molecular data, scientists work to identify homologous
characteristics and genes. Similarities between organisms can stem either from shared evolutionary history
(homologies) or from separate evolutionary paths (analogies). Scientists can use newer technologies to help
distinguish homologies from analogies. After identifying homologous information, scientists use cladistics to
organize these events as a means to determine an evolutionary timeline. They then apply the concept of
maximum parsimony, which states that the order of events probably occurred in the most obvious and simple
way with the least amount of steps. For evolutionary events, this would be the path with the least number of
major divergences that correlate with the evidence.
20.3Perspectives on the Phylogenetic Tree
The phylogenetic tree, which Darwin first used, is the classic “tree of life” model describing phylogenetic
relationships among species, and the most common model that scientists use today. New ideas about HGT
and genome fusion have caused some to suggest revising the model to resemble webs or rings.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 20.6At what levels are cats and dogs evolved first, hair or the amniotic egg?
considered part of the same group?
3.Figure 20.11What is the largest clade in this
2.Figure 20.10Which animals in this figure belong diagram?
to a clade that includes animals with hair? Which
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.What is used to determine phylogeny? 6.Which statement about the taxonomic
a. mutations classification system is correct?
b. DNA a. There are more domains than kingdoms.
c. evolutionary history b. Kingdoms are the top category of
d. organisms on earth classification.
c. Classes are divisions of orders.
5.What do scientists in the field of systematics
d. Subspecies are the most specific category
accomplish?
of classification.
a. discover new fossil sites
b. organize and classify organisms 7.On a phylogenetic tree, which term refers to
c. name new species lineages that diverged from the same place?
d. communicate among field biologists
PAGE: 569
558 Chapter 20 | Phylogenies and the History of Life
a. sister taxa a. to decipher accurate phylogenies
b. basal taxa b. to eliminate analogous traits
c. rooted taxa c. to identify mutations in DNA codes
d. dichotomous taxa d. to locate homoplasies
8.Which statement about analogies is correct? 12.The transfer of genes by a mechanism not
involving asexual reproduction is called:
a. They occur only as errors. a. meiosis
b. They are synonymous with homologous b. web of life
traits. c. horizontal gene transfer
c. They are derived by similar environmental d. gene fusion
constraints.
13.Particles that transfer genetic material from one
d. They are a form of mutation.
species to another, especially in marine prokaryotes:
9.What do scientists use to apply cladistics?
a. horizontal gene transfer
a. homologous traits b. lateral gene transfer
b. homoplasies c. genome fusion device
c. analogous traits d. gene transfer agents
d. monophyletic groups
14.What does the trunk of the classic phylogenetic
10.What is true about organisms that are a part of tree represent?
the same clade? a. single common ancestor
a. They all share the same basic b. pool of ancestral organisms
characteristics. c. new species
b. They evolved from a shared ancestor. d. old species
c. They usually fall into the same classification
15.Which phylogenetic model proposes that all three
taxa.
domains of life evolved from a pool of primitive
d. They have identical phylogenies.
prokaryotes?
11.Why do scientists apply the concept of maximum a. tree of life
parsimony? b. web of life
c. ring of life
d. network model
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.How does a phylogenetic tree relate to the 20.Why is it so important for scientists to distinguish
passing of time? between homologous and analogous characteristics
before building phylogenetic trees?
17.Some organisms that appear very closely related
on a phylogenetic tree may not actually be closely 21.Describe maximum parsimony.
related. Why is this?
22.Compare three different ways that eukaryotic
18.List the different levels of the taxonomic cells may have evolved.
classification system.
23.Describe how aphids acquired the ability to
19.Dolphins and fish have similar body shapes. Is change color.
this feature more likely a homologous or analogous
trait?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 570
Chapter 21 | Viruses 559
21 | VIRUSES
Figure21.1Thetobaccomosaicvirus,seenherebytransmissionelectronmicroscopy(left),wasthefirstvirustobe
discovered. The virus causes disease in tobacco and other plants, such as the orchid (right). (credit a: USDA ARS;
credit b: modification of work by USDA Forest Service, Department of Plant Pathology Archive North Carolina State
University; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
21.1:Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
21.2:Virus Infections and Hosts
21.3:Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
21.4:Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids
Introduction
Virusesarenoncellularparasiticentitiesthatcannotbeclassifiedwithinanykingdom.Theycaninfectorganisms
as diverse as bacteria, plants, and animals. In fact, viruses exist in a sort of netherworld between a living
organism and a nonliving entity. Living things grow, metabolize, and reproduce. In contrast, viruses are not
cellular, do not have a metabolism or grow, and cannot divide by cell division. Viruses can copy, or replicate
themselves;however,theyareentirelydependentonresourcesderivedfromtheirhostcellstoproduceprogeny
viruses—which are assembled in their mature form. No one knows exactly when or how viruses evolved or
fromwhatancestralsourcebecauseviruseshavenotleftafossilrecord.Somevirologistscontendthatmodern
viruses are a mosaic of bits and pieces of nucleic acids picked up from various sources along their respective
evolutionary paths.
21.1 | Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how viruses were first discovered and how they are detected
• Discuss three hypotheses about how viruses evolved
• Describe the general structure of a virus
• Recognize the basic shapes of viruses
• Understand past and emerging classification systems for viruses
• Describe the basis for the Baltimore classification system
Viruses are diverse entities: They vary in structure, methods of replication, and the hosts they infect. Nearly all
formsoflife—fromprokaryoticbacteriaandarchaeans,toeukaryotessuchasplants,animals,andfungi—have
virusesthatinfectthem.Whilemostbiologicaldiversitycanbeunderstoodthroughevolutionaryhistory(suchas
PAGE: 571
560 Chapter 21 | Viruses
how species have adapted to changing environmental conditions and how different species are related to one
another through common descent), much about virus origins and evolution remains unknown.
Discovery and Detection
Viruses were first discovered after the development of a porcelain filter—the Chamberland-Pasteur filter—that
couldremoveallbacteriavisibleinthemicroscopefromanyliquidsample.In1886,AdolphMeyerdemonstrated
that a disease of tobacco plants— tobacco mosaic disease—could be transferred from a diseased plant to a
healthyonevialiquidplantextracts.In1892,DmitriIvanowskishowedthatthisdiseasecouldbetransmittedin
thiswayevenaftertheChamberland-Pasteurfilterhadremovedallviablebacteriafromtheextract.Still,itwas
manyyearsbeforeitwasprovedthatthese“filterable”infectiousagentswerenotsimplyverysmallbacteriabut
were a new type of very small, disease-causing particle.
Mostvirions,orsinglevirusparticles,areverysmall,about20to250nanometersindiameter.However,some
recentlydiscoveredvirusesfromamoebaerangeupto1000nmindiameter.Withtheexceptionoflargevirions,
likethepoxvirusandotherlargeDNAviruses,virusescannotbeseenwithalightmicroscope.Itwasnotuntilthe
developmentoftheelectronmicroscopeinthelate1930sthatscientistsgottheirfirstgoodviewofthestructure
ofthetobaccomosaicvirus(TMV)(Figure21.1),discussedabove,andotherviruses(Figure21.2).Thesurface
structure of virions can be observed by both scanning and transmission electron microscopy, whereas the
internal structures of the virus can only be observed in images from a transmission electron microscope. The
useofelectronmicroscopyandothertechnologieshasallowedforthediscoveryofmanyvirusesofalltypesof
living organisms.
Figure21.2Mostvirusparticlesarevisibleonlybyelectronmicroscopy.Inthesetransmissionelectronmicrographs,
(a) a virus is as dwarfed by the bacterial cell it infects, as (b) these E. coli cells are dwarfed by cultured colon cells.
(credita:modificationofworkbyU.S.Dept.ofEnergy,OfficeofScience,LBL,PBD;creditb:modificationofworkby
J.P. Nataro and S. Sears, unpub. data, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Evolution of Viruses
Although biologists have a significant amount of knowledge about how present-day viruses mutate and adapt,
much less is known about how viruses originated in the first place. When exploring the evolutionary history
of most organisms, scientists can look at fossil records and similar historic evidence. However, viruses do not
fossilize,asfarasweknow,soresearchersmustextrapolatefrominvestigationsofhowtoday’svirusesevolve
and by using biochemical and genetic information to create speculative virus histories.
Most scholars agree that viruses don’t have a single common ancestor, nor is there a single reasonable
hypothesis about virus origins. There are current evolutionary scenarios that may explain the origin of viruses.
One such hypothesis, the “devolution” or the regressive hypothesis, suggests that viruses evolved from free-
living cells, or from intracellular prokaryotic parasites. However, many components of how this process might
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 572
Chapter 21 | Viruses 561
have occurred remain a mystery. A second hypothesis, the escapist or the progressive hypothesis, suggests
that viruses originated from RNA and DNA molecules that escaped from a host cell. A third hypothesis, the
self-replicating hypothesis, suggests that viruses may have originated from self-replicating entities similar to
transposonsorothermobilegeneticelements.Inallcases,virusesareprobablycontinuingtoevolvealongwith
the cells on which they rely on as hosts.
As technology advances, scientists may develop and refine additional hypotheses to explain the origins of
viruses. The emerging field called virus molecular systematics attempts to do just that through comparisons
of sequenced genetic material. These researchers hope one day to better understand the origin of viruses—a
discovery that could lead to advances in the treatments for the ailments they produce.
Viral Morphology
Virusesarenoncellular,meaningtheyarebiologicalentitiesthatdonothaveacellularstructure.Theytherefore
lack most of the components of cells, such as organelles, ribosomes, and the plasma membrane. A virion
consistsofanucleicacidcore,anouterproteincoatingorcapsid,andsometimesanouterenvelopemadeof
protein and phospholipid membranes derived from the host cell. Viruses may also contain additional proteins,
such as enzymes, within the capsid or attached to the viral genome. The most obvious difference between
members of different viral families is the variation in their morphology, which is quite diverse. An interesting
feature of viral complexity is that the complexity of the host does not necessarily correlate with the complexity
ofthevirion.Infact,someofthemostcomplexvirionstructuresarefoundinthebacteriophages—virusesthat
infect the simplest living organisms, bacteria.
Morphology
Viruses come in many shapes and sizes, but these features are consistent for each viral family. As we have
seen, all virions have a nucleic acid genome covered by a protective capsid. The proteins of the capsid are
encodedintheviralgenome,andarecalledcapsomeres.Someviralcapsidsaresimplehelicesorpolyhedral
“spheres,” whereas others are quite complex in structure (Figure 21.3).
Figure 21.3 Viral capsids can be (a) helical, (b) polyhedral, or (c) have a complex shape. (credit a “micrograph”:
modification of work by USDA ARS; credit b “micrograph”: modification of work by U.S. Department of Energy)
Ingeneral,thecapsidsofvirusesareclassifiedintofourgroups:helical,icosahedral,enveloped,andhead-and-
tail. Helicalcapsidsarelongandcylindrical. Manyplant virusesarehelical, including TMV.Icosahedral viruses
PAGE: 573
562 Chapter 21 | Viruses
have shapes that are roughly spherical, such as those of poliovirus or herpesviruses. Enveloped viruses have
membranes derived from the host cell that surrounds the capsids. Animal viruses, such as HIV, are frequently
enveloped.Head-and-tailvirusesinfectbacteriaandhaveaheadthatissimilartoicosahedralvirusesandatail
shaped like helical viruses.
Many viruses use some sort of glycoprotein to attach to their host cells via molecules on the cell called viral
receptors. For these viruses, attachment is required for later penetration of the cell membrane; only after
penetrationtakesplacecantheviruscompleteitsreplicationinsidethecell.Thereceptorsthatvirusesuseare
molecules that are normally found on cell surfaces and have their own physiological functions. It appears that
viruses have simply evolved to make use of these molecules for their own replication. For example, HIV uses
the CD4 molecule on T lymphocytes as one of its receptors (Figure 21.4). CD4 is a type of molecule called a
celladhesionmolecule,whichfunctionstokeepdifferenttypesofimmunecellsincloseproximitytoeachother
during the generation of a T lymphocyte immune response.
Figure 21.4 A virus and its host receptor protein. The HIV virus binds the CD4 receptor on the surface of human
cells.CD4receptorshelpwhitebloodcellstocommunicatewithothercellsoftheimmunesystemwhenproducingan
immune response. (credit: modification of work by NIAID, NIH)
One of the most complex virions known, the T4 bacteriophage (which infects the Escherichia coli) bacterium,
has a tail structure that the virus uses to attach to host cells and a head structure that houses its DNA.
Adenovirus,anon-envelopedanimalvirusthatcausesrespiratoryillnessesinhumans,usesglycoproteinspikes
protrudingfromitscapsomerestoattachtohostcells.Non-envelopedvirusesalsoincludethosethatcausepolio
(poliovirus), plantar warts (papillomavirus), and hepatitis A (hepatitis A virus).
Envelopedvirions,suchastheinfluenzavirus,consistofnucleicacid(RNAinthecaseofinfluenza)andcapsid
proteins surrounded by a phospholipid bilayer envelope that contains virus-encoded proteins. Glycoproteins
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 574
Chapter 21 | Viruses 563
embeddedintheviralenvelopeareusedtoattachtohostcells.Otherenvelopeproteinsarethematrixproteins
that stabilize the envelope and often play a role in the assembly of progeny virions. Chicken pox, HIV, and
mumps are other examples of diseases caused by viruses with envelopes. Because of the fragility of the
envelope,non-envelopedvirusesaremoreresistanttochangesintemperature,pH,andsomedisinfectantsthan
enveloped viruses.
Overall, the shape of the virion and the presence or absence of an envelope tell us little about what disease
the virus may cause or what species it might infect, but they are still useful means to begin viral classification
(Figure 21.5).
Figure21.5ComplexViruses.Virusescanbeeithercomplexorrelativelysimpleinshape.Thisfigureshowsthree
relatively complex virions: the bacteriophage T4, with its DNA-containing head group and tail fibers that attach
to host cells; adenovirus, which uses spikes from its capsid to bind to host cells; and the influenza virus, which
uses glycoproteins embedded in its envelope to bind to host cells. The influenza virus also has matrix proteins,
internaltotheenvelope,whichhelpstabilizethevirion’sshape.(credit“bacteriophage,adenovirus”:modification
ofworkbyNCBI,NIH;credit"influenzavirus":modificationofworkbyDanHiggins,CentersforDiseaseControl
and Prevention)
Which of the following statements about virus structure is true?
a. All viruses are encased in a viral membrane.
b. The capsomere is made up of small protein subunits called capsids.
c. DNA is the genetic material in all viruses.
d. Glycoproteins help the virus attach to the host cell.
Types of Nucleic Acid
Unlike nearly all living organisms that use DNA as their genetic material, viruses may use either DNA or RNA.
The virus core contains the genome—the total genetic content of the virus. Viral genomes tend to be small,
containing only those genes that encode proteins which the virus cannot get from the host cell. This genetic
materialmaybesingle-ordouble-stranded.Itmayalsobelinearorcircular.Whilemostvirusescontainasingle
nucleic acid, others have genomes divided into several segments. The RNA genome of the influenza virus is
PAGE: 575
564 Chapter 21 | Viruses
segmented,whichcontributestoitsvariabilityandcontinuousevolution,andexplainswhyitisdifficulttodevelop
a vaccine against it.
In DNA viruses, the viral DNA directs the host cell’s replication proteins to synthesize new copies of the viral
genomeandtotranscribeandtranslatethatgenomeintoviralproteins.HumandiseasescausedbyDNAviruses
include chickenpox, hepatitis B, and adenoviruses. Sexually transmitted DNA viruses include the herpes virus
and the human papilloma virus (HPV), which has been associated with cervical cancer and genital warts.
RNA viruses contain only RNA as their genetic material. To replicate their genomes in the host cell, the RNA
virusesmustencodetheirownenzymesthatcanreplicateRNAintoRNAor,intheretroviruses,intoDNA.These
RNA polymerase enzymes are more likely to make copying errors than DNA polymerases, and therefore often
make mistakes during transcription. For this reason, mutations in RNA viruses occur more frequently than in
DNAviruses.Thiscausesthemtochangeandadaptmorerapidlytotheirhost.HumandiseasescausedbyRNA
viruses include influenza, hepatitis C, measles, and rabies. The HIV virus, which is sexually transmitted, is an
RNA retrovirus.
The Challenge of Virus Classification
Because most viruses probably evolved from different ancestors, the systematic methods that scientists have
usedtoclassifyprokaryoticandeukaryoticcellsarenotveryuseful.Ifvirusesrepresent“remnants”ofdifferent
organisms, then even genomic or protein analysis is not useful. Why?, Because viruses have no common
genomic sequence that they all share. For example, the 16S rRNA sequence so useful for constructing
prokaryotephylogeniesisofnouseforacreaturewithnoribosomes!Biologistshaveusedseveralclassification
systemsinthepast.Viruseswereinitiallygroupedbysharedmorphology.Later,groupsofviruseswereclassified
by the type of nucleic acid they contained, DNA or RNA, and whether their nucleic acid was single- or double-
stranded. However, these earlier classification methods grouped viruses differently, because they were based
on different sets of characters of the virus. The most commonly used classification method today is called the
Baltimoreclassificationscheme,andisbasedonhowmessengerRNA(mRNA)isgeneratedineachparticular
type of virus.
Past Systems of Classification
Viruses contain only a few elements by which they can be classified: the viral genome, the type of capsid, and
the envelope structure for the enveloped viruses. All of these elements have been used in the past for viral
classification (Table 21.1 and Figure 21.6). Viral genomes may vary in the type of genetic material (DNA or
RNA)anditsorganization(single-ordouble-stranded,linearorcircular,andsegmentedornon-segmented).In
some viruses, additional proteins needed for replication are associated directly with the genome or contained
within the viral capsid.
Virus Classification by Genome Structure
Genome Structure Examples
RNA Rabies virus, retroviruses
DNA Herpesviruses, smallpox virus
Single-stranded Rabies virus, retroviruses
Double-stranded Herpesviruses, smallpox virus
Rabies virus, retroviruses, herpesviruses,
Linear
smallpox virus
Circular
Papillomaviruses, many bacteriophages
Non-segmented: genome consists of a single segment of
Parainfluenza viruses
genetic material
Influenza viruses
Segmented: genome is divided into multiple segments
Table 21.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 576
Chapter 21 | Viruses 565
Figure 21.6 Viruses can be classified according to their core genetic material and capsid design. (a) Rabies virus
has a single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) core and an enveloped helical capsid, whereas (b) variola virus, the causative
agent of smallpox, has a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) core and a complex capsid. Rabies transmission occurs
when saliva from an infected mammal enters a wound. The virus travels through neurons in the peripheral nervous
systemtothecentralnervoussystem,whereitimpairsbrainfunction,andthentravelstoothertissues.Theviruscan
infectanymammal,andmostdiewithinweeksofinfection.Smallpoxisahumanvirustransmittedbyinhalationofthe
variolavirus,localizedintheskin,mouth,andthroat,whichcausesacharacteristicrash.Beforeitseradicationin1979,
infection resulted in a 30 to 35 percent mortality rate. (credit “rabies diagram”: modification of work by CDC; “rabies
micrograph”:modificationofworkbyDr.FredMurphy,CDC;credit“smallpoxmicrograph”:modificationofworkbyDr.
Fred Murphy, Sylvia Whitfield, CDC; credit “smallpox photo”: modification of work by CDC; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
Virusescanalsobeclassifiedbythedesignoftheircapsids(Table21.2andFigure21.7).Capsidsareclassified
as naked icosahedral, enveloped icosahedral, enveloped helical, naked helical, and complex. The type of
geneticmaterial(DNAorRNA)anditsstructure(single-ordouble-stranded,linearorcircular,andsegmentedor
non-segmented) are used to classify the virus core structures (Table 21.2).
Virus Classification by Capsid Structure
Capsid Classification Examples
Naked icosahedral Hepatitis A virus, polioviruses
Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, rubella
Enveloped icosahedral
virus, yellow fever virus, HIV-1
Influenza viruses, mumps virus, measles virus,
Enveloped helical
rabies virus
Naked helical Tobacco mosaic virus
Complex with many proteins; some have combinations of Herpesviruses, smallpox virus, hepatitis B virus,
icosahedral and helical capsid structures T4 bacteriophage
Table 21.2
PAGE: 577
566 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Figure21.7Transmissionelectronmicrographsofvariousvirusesshowtheircapsidstructures.Thecapsidofthe(a)
poliovirusisnakedicosahedral;(b)theEpstein-Barrviruscapsidisenvelopedicosahedral;(c)themumpsviruscapsid
isanenvelopedhelix;(d)thetobaccomosaicviruscapsidisnakedhelical;and(e)theherpesviruscapsidiscomplex.
(credita:modificationofworkbyDr.FredMurphy,SylviaWhitfield;creditb:modificationofworkbyLizaGross;credit
c:modificationofworkbyDr.F.A.Murphy,CDC;creditd:modificationofworkbyUSDAARS;credite:modificationof
workbyLindaStannard,DepartmentofMedicalMicrobiology,UniversityofCapeTown,SouthAfrica,NASA;scale-bar
data from Matt Russell)
Baltimore Classification
ThemostcommonlyandcurrentlyusedsystemofvirusclassificationwasfirstdevelopedbyNobelPrize-winning
biologistDavidBaltimoreintheearly1970s.Inadditiontothedifferencesinmorphologyandgeneticsmentioned
above, the Baltimore classification scheme groups viruses according to how the mRNA is produced during the
replicative cycle of the virus.
Group I viruses contain double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as their genome. Their mRNA is produced by
transcription in much the same way as with cellular DNA, using the enzymes of the host cell.
Group II viruses have single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) as their genome. They convert their single-stranded
genomes into a dsDNA intermediate before transcription to mRNA can occur.
GroupIIIvirusesusedsRNAastheirgenome.Thestrandsseparate,andoneofthemisusedasatemplatefor
the generation of mRNA using the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase encoded by the virus.
GroupIVviruseshavessRNAastheirgenomewithapositivepolarity,whichmeansthatthegenomicRNAcan
servedirectlyasmRNA.IntermediatesofdsRNA,calledreplicativeintermediates,aremadeintheprocessof
copyingthegenomicRNA.Multiple,full-lengthRNAstrandsofnegativepolarity(complementarytothepositive-
stranded genomic RNA) are formed from these intermediates, which may then serve as templates for the
production of RNA with positive polarity, including both full-length genomic RNA and shorter viral mRNAs.
Group V viruses contain ssRNA genomes with a negative polarity, meaning that their sequence is
complementary to the mRNA. As with Group IV viruses, dsRNA intermediates are used to make copies of the
genome and produce mRNA. In this case, the negative-stranded genome can be converted directly to mRNA.
Additionally,full-lengthpositiveRNAstrandsaremadetoserveastemplatesfortheproductionofthenegative-
stranded genome.
GroupVIviruseshavediploid(twocopies)ssRNAgenomesthatmustbeconverted,usingtheenzymereverse
transcriptase, to dsDNA; the dsDNA is then transported to the nucleus of the host cell and inserted into the
hostgenome.Then,mRNAcanbeproducedbytranscriptionoftheviralDNAthatwasintegratedintothehost
genome.
GroupVIIviruseshavepartialdsDNAgenomesandmakessRNAintermediatesthatactasmRNA,butarealso
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 578
Chapter 21 | Viruses 567
converted back into dsDNA genomes by reverse transcriptase, necessary for genome replication.
ThecharacteristicsofeachgroupintheBaltimoreclassificationaresummarizedinTable21.3withexamplesof
each group.
Baltimore Classification
Group Characteristics Mode of mRNA Production Example
Double-stranded Herpes simplex
I mRNA is transcribed directly from the DNA template
DNA (herpesvirus)
Canine
Single-stranded DNA is converted to double-stranded form before RNA is
II parvovirus
DNA transcribed
(parvovirus)
Childhood
Double-stranded
III mRNA is transcribed from the RNA genome gastroenteritis
RNA
(rotavirus)
Single stranded Common cold
IV Genome functions as mRNA
RNA (+) (picornavirus)
Single stranded Rabies
V mRNA is transcribed from the RNA genome
RNA (-) (rhabdovirus)
Single stranded
Reverse transcriptase makes DNA from the RNA Human
RNA viruses with
VI genome; DNA is then incorporated in the host genome; immunodeficiency
reverse
mRNA is transcribed from the incorporated DNA virus (HIV)
transcriptase
Double stranded
The viral genome is double-stranded DNA, but viral DNA
DNA viruses with Hepatitis B virus
VII is replicated through an RNA intermediate; the RNA may
reverse (hepadnavirus)
serve directly as mRNA or as a template to make mRNA
transcriptase
Table 21.3
21.2 | Virus Infections and Hosts
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the steps of replication and explain what occurs at each step
• Describe the lytic and lysogenic cycles of virus replication
• Explain the transmission of plant and animal viruses
• Discuss some of the diseases caused by plant and animal viruses
• Discuss the economic impact of plant and animal viruses
Virusesareobligate,intracellularparasites.Avirusmustfirstrecognizeandattachtoaspecificlivingcellpriorto
enteringit.Afterpenetration,theinvadingvirusmustcopyitsgenomeandmanufactureitsownproteins.Finally,
theprogenyvirionsmustescapethehostcellsothattheycaninfectothercells.Virusescaninfectonlycertain
species of hosts and only certain cells within that host. Specific host cells that a virus must occupy and use
to replicate are called permissive. In most cases, the molecular basis for this specificity is due to a particular
surface molecule known as the viral receptor on the host cell surface. A specific viral receptor is required for
thevirustoattach.Inaddition,differencesinmetabolismandhost-cellimmuneresponses(basedondifferential
gene expression) are a likely factor in determining which cells a virus may target for replication.
PAGE: 579
568 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Steps of Virus Infections
Avirusmustuseitshost-cellprocessestoreplicate.Theviralreplicationcyclecanproducedramaticbiochemical
and structural changes in the host cell, which may cause cell damage. These changes, called cytopathic
effects, can change cell functions or even destroy the cell. Some infected cells, such as those infected by the
common cold virus known as rhinovirus, die through lysis (bursting) or apoptosis (programmed cell death or
“cell suicide”), releasing all progeny virions at once. The symptoms of viral diseases result both from such cell
damagecausedbythevirusandfromtheimmuneresponsetothevirus,whichattemptstocontrolandeliminate
the virus from the body.
Many animal viruses, such as HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), leave the infected cells of the immune
system by a process known as budding, where virions leave the cell individually. During the budding process,
the cell does not undergo lysis and is not immediately killed. However, the damage to the cells that the virus
infectsmaymakeitimpossibleforthecellstofunctionnormally,eventhoughthecellsremainaliveforaperiod
oftime.Mostproductiveviralinfectionsfollowsimilarstepsinthevirusreplicationcycle:attachment,penetration,
uncoating, replication, assembly, and release(Figure 21.8).
Attachment
Avirusattachestoaspecificreceptorsiteonthehostcellmembranethroughattachmentproteinsinthecapsid
orviaglycoproteinsembeddedintheviralenvelope.Thespecificityofthisinteractiondeterminesthehost—and
thecellswithinthehost—thatcanbeinfectedbyaparticularvirus.Thiscanbeillustratedbythinkingofseveral
keys and several locks, where each key will fit only one specific lock.
Thisvideo (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/influenza)explains how influenza attacks the body.
Entry
Viruses may enter a host cell either with or without the viral capsid. The nucleic acid of bacteriophages enters
thehostcell“naked,”leavingthecapsidoutsidethecell.Plantandanimalvirusescanenterthroughendocytosis
(as you may recall, the cell membrane surrounds and engulfs the entire virus). Some enveloped viruses enter
the cell when the viral envelope fuses directly with the cell membrane. Once inside the cell, the viral capsid
degrades, and then the viral nucleic acid is released and becomes available for replication and transcription.
Replication and Assembly
The replication mechanism depends on the viral genome. DNA viruses usually use host-cell proteins and
enzymes to replicate the viral DNA and to transcribe viral mRNA, which is then used to direct viral protein
synthesis.RNAvirusesusuallyusetheRNAcoreasatemplateforsynthesisofviralgenomicRNAandmRNA.
TheviralmRNAdirectsthehostcelltosynthesizeviralenzymesandcapsidproteins,andassemblenewvirions.
Of course, there are exceptions to this pattern. If a host cell does not provide the enzymes necessary for viral
replication,viralgenessupplytheinformationtodirectsynthesisofthemissingproteins.Retroviruses,suchas
HIV (group VI of the Baltimore classification scheme), have an RNA genome that must be reverse transcribed
into DNA, which then is incorporated into the host cell genome. To convert RNA into DNA, retroviruses must
contain genes that encode the virus-specific enzyme reverse transcriptase that transcribes an RNA template
to DNA. Reverse transcription never occurs in uninfected host cells—the enzyme reverse transcriptase is only
derivedfromtheexpressionofviralgeneswithintheinfectedhostcells.ThefactthatHIVproducessomeofits
ownenzymesnotfoundinthehosthasallowedresearcherstodevelopdrugsthatinhibittheseenzymeswithout
affecting the host’s metabolism.
This approach has led to the development of a variety of drugs used to treat HIV and has been effective at
reducing the number of infectious virions (copies of viral RNA) in the blood to non-detectable levels in many
HIV-infected individuals.
Egress
Thelaststageofviralreplicationisthereleaseofthenewvirionsproducedinthehostorganism,wheretheyare
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 580
Chapter 21 | Viruses 569
abletoinfectadjacentcellsandrepeatthereplicationcycle.Asyou’velearned,somevirusesarereleasedwhen
thehostcelldies,andothervirusescanleaveinfectedcellsbybuddingthroughthemembranewithoutdirectly
killing the cell.
Figure21.8Theinfluenzareproductivecycle.Ininfluenzavirusinfection,glycoproteinsonthecapsidattachtoa
hostepithelialcell.Followingthis,thevirusisengulfed.RNAandproteinsarethenmadeandassembledintonew
virions.
Influenza virus is packaged in a viral envelope that fuses with the plasma membrane. This way, the virus
can exit the host cell without killing it. What advantage does the virus gain by keeping the host cell alive?
Watch a video (https://www.khanacademy.org/science/biology/her/tree-of-life/v/viruses) on viruses,
identifying structures, modes of transmission, replication, and more.
Different Hosts and Their Viruses
Asyou’velearned,virusesofteninfectveryspecifichosts,aswellasspecificcellswithinthehost.Thisfeature
ofavirusmakesitspecifictooneorafewspeciesoflifeonEarth.Ontheotherhand,somanydifferenttypesof
virusesexist onEarth that nearlyeverylivingorganismhasits ownset of virusestrying to infect its cells. Even
prokaryotes, the smallest and simplest of cells, may be attacked by specific types of viruses. In the following
section, we will look at some of the features of viral infection of prokaryotic cells. As we have learned, viruses
that infect bacteria are calledbacteriophages(Figure 21.9). Archaea have their own similar viruses.
PAGE: 581
570 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Bacteriophages
Figure21.9Bacteriophagesattachedtoahostcell(transmissionelectronmicrograph).Inbacteriophagewithtails,like
the one shown here, the tails serve as a passageway for transmission of the phage genome. (credit: modification of
work by Dr. Graham Beards; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Most bacteriophages are dsDNA viruses, which use host enzymes for DNA replication and RNA transcription.
Phage particles must bind to specific surface receptors and actively insert the genome into the host cell. (The
complex tail structures seen in many bacteriophages are actively involved in getting the viral genome across
the prokaryotic cell wall.) When infection of a cell by a bacteriophage results in the production of new virions,
the infection is said to be productive. If the virions are released by bursting the cell, the virus replicates by
means of a lytic cycle (Figure 21.10). An example of a lytic bacteriophage is T4, which infects Escherichia
coli found in the human intestinal tract. Sometimes, however, a virus can remain within the cell without being
released. For example, when a temperate bacteriophage infects a bacterial cell, it replicates by means of a
lysogenic cycle (Figure 21.10), and the viral genome is incorporated into the genome of the host cell. When
the phage DNA is incorporated into the host-cell genome, it is called a prophage. An example of a lysogenic
bacteriophageistheλ(lambda)virus,whichalsoinfectstheE.colibacterium.Virusesthatinfectplantoranimal
cells may sometimes undergo infections where they are not producing virions for long periods. An example is
theanimalherpesviruses,includingherpessimplexviruses,thecauseoforalandgenitalherpesinhumans.Ina
processcalledlatency,thesevirusescanexistinnervoustissueforlongperiodsoftimewithoutproducingnew
virions, onlytoleavelatency periodically andcauselesionsintheskinwherethevirusreplicates. Even though
there are similarities between lysogeny and latency, the term lysogenic cycle is usually reserved to describe
bacteriophages. Latency will be described in more detail in the next section.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 582
Chapter 21 | Viruses 571
Figure 21.10 A temperate bacteriophage has both lytic and lysogenic cycles. In the lytic cycle, the phage
replicates and lyses the host cell. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is incorporated into the host genome,
whereitispassedontosubsequentgenerations.Environmentalstressorssuchasstarvationorexposuretotoxic
chemicals may cause the prophage to excise and enter the lytic cycle.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. In the lytic cycle, new phages are produced and released into the environment.
b. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is incorporated into the host genome.
c. An environmental stressor can cause the phage to initiate the lysogenic cycle.
d. Cell lysis only occurs in the lytic cycle.
Plant Viruses
Most plant viruses, like the tobacco mosaic virus, have single-stranded (+) RNA genomes. However, there
are also plant viruses in most other virus categories. Unlike bacteriophages, plant viruses do not have active
mechanismsfordeliveringtheviralgenomeacrosstheprotectivecellwall.Foraplantvirustoenteranewhost
plant,sometypeofmechanicaldamagemustoccur.Thisdamageisoftencausedbyweather,insects,animals,
fire,orhumanactivitieslikefarmingorlandscaping.Movementfromcelltocellwithinaplantcanbefacilitatedby
viralmodificationofplasmodesmata(cytoplasmicthreadsthatpassfromoneplantcelltothenext).Additionally,
plant offspring may inherit viral diseases from parent plants. Plant viruses can be transmitted by a variety of
vectors, through contact with an infected plant’s sap, by living organisms such as insects and nematodes, and
throughpollen.Thetransferofavirusfromoneplanttoanotherisknownashorizontaltransmission,whereas
the inheritance of a virus from a parent is calledvertical transmission.
Symptoms of viral diseases vary according to the virus and its host (Table 21.4). One common symptom is
hyperplasia, the abnormal proliferation of cells that causes the appearance of plant tumors known as galls.
Othervirusesinducehypoplasia,ordecreasedcellgrowth,intheleavesofplants,causingthin,yellowareasto
appear.Stillothervirusesaffecttheplantbydirectlykillingplantcells,aprocessknownascellnecrosis.Other
symptomsofplantvirusesincludemalformedleaves;blackstreaksonthestemsoftheplants;alteredgrowthof
stems, leaves, or fruits; and ring spots, which are circular or linear areas of discoloration found in a leaf.
PAGE: 583
572 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Some Common Symptoms of Plant Viral Diseases
Symptom Appears as
Hyperplasia Galls (tumors)
Hypoplasia Thinned, yellow splotches on leaves
Cell necrosis Dead, blackened stems, leaves, or fruit
Abnormal growth patterns Malformed stems, leaves, or fruit
Discoloration Yellow, red, or black lines, or rings in stems, leaves, or fruit
Table 21.4
Plant viruses can seriously disrupt crop growth and development, significantly affecting our food supply. They
areresponsibleforpoorcropqualityandquantityglobally,andcanbringabouthugeeconomiclossesannually.
Othersvirusesmaydamageplantsusedinlandscaping.Somevirusesthatinfectagriculturalfoodplantsinclude
thenameoftheplanttheyinfect,suchastomatospottedwiltvirus,beancommonmosaicvirus,andcucumber
mosaic virus. In plants used for landscaping, two of the most common viruses are peony ring spot and rose
mosaic virus. There are far too many plant viruses to discuss each in detail, but symptoms of bean common
mosaic virus result in lowered bean production and stunted, unproductive plants. In the ornamental rose, the
rose mosaic disease causes wavy yellow lines and colored splotches on the leaves of the plant.
Animal Viruses
Animal viruses, unlike the viruses of plants and bacteria, do not have to penetrate a cell wall to gain access to
the host cell. The virus may even induce the host cell to cooperate in the infection process. Non-enveloped or
“naked”animalvirusesmayentercellsintwodifferentways.Asaproteinintheviralcapsidbindstoitsreceptor
on the host cell, the virus may be taken inside the cell via a vesicle during the normal cell process of receptor-
mediated endocytosis. An alternative method of cell penetration used by non-enveloped viruses is for capsid
proteins to undergo shape changes after binding to the receptor, creating channels in the host cell membrane.
Theviralgenomeisthen“injected”intothehostcellthroughthesechannelsinamanneranalogoustothatused
by many bacteriophages.
Enveloped viruses also have two ways of entering cells after binding to their receptors: receptor-mediated
endocytosis, or fusion. Many enveloped viruses enter the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis in a fashion
similar to that seen in some non-enveloped viruses. On the other hand, fusion only occurs with enveloped
virions.Theseviruses,whichincludeHIVamongothers,usespecialfusionproteinsintheirenvelopestocause
the envelope to fuse with the plasma membrane of the cell, thus releasing the genome and capsid of the virus
into the cell cytoplasm.
After making their proteins and copying their genomes, animal viruses complete the assembly of new virions
andexitthecell.Aswehavealreadydiscussedusingtheexampletheinfluenzavirus,envelopedanimalviruses
maybudfromthecellmembraneastheyassemblethemselves,takingapieceofthecell’splasmamembranein
theprocess.Ontheotherhand,non-envelopedviralprogeny,suchasrhinoviruses,accumulateininfectedcells
until there is a signal for lysis or apoptosis, and all virions are released together.
As you will learn in the next module, animal viruses are associated with a variety of human diseases. Some
of them follow the classic pattern of acute disease, where symptoms get increasingly worse for a short period
followed by the elimination of the virus from the body by the immune system and eventual recovery from the
infection. Examples of acute viral diseases are the common cold and influenza. Other viruses cause long-term
chronicinfections,suchastheviruscausinghepatitisC,whereasothers,likeherpessimplexvirus,onlycause
intermittent symptoms. Still other viruses, such as human herpesviruses 6 and 7, which in some cases can
causetheminorchildhooddiseaseroseola,oftensuccessfullycauseproductiveinfectionswithoutcausingany
symptoms at all in the host, and thus we say these patients have anasymptomatic infection.
In hepatitis C infections, the virus grows and reproduces in liver cells, causing low levels of liver damage. The
damage is so low that infected individuals are often unaware that they are infected, and many infections are
detected only by routine blood work on patients with risk factors such as intravenous drug use. On the other
hand, since many of the symptoms of viral diseases are caused by immune responses, a lack of symptoms
is an indication of a weak immune response to the virus. This allows the virus to escape elimination by the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 584
Chapter 21 | Viruses 573
immunesystemandpersistinindividualsforyears,allthewhileproducinglowlevelsofprogenyvirionsinwhat
isknownasachronicviraldisease.Chronicinfectionoftheliverbythisvirusleadstoamuchgreaterchanceof
developing liver cancer, sometimes as much as 30 years after the initial infection.
Asalreadydiscussed,herpessimplexviruscanremaininastateoflatencyinnervoustissueformonths,even
years. As the virus “hides” in the tissue and makes few if any viral proteins, there is nothing for the immune
response to act against, and immunity to the virus slowly declines. Under certain conditions, including various
types of physical and psychological stress, the latent herpes simplex virus may be reactivated and undergo a
lytic replication cycle in the skin, causing the lesions associated with the disease. Once virions are produced
in the skin and viral proteins are synthesized, the immune response is again stimulated and resolves the skin
lesions in a few days or weeks by destroying viruses in the skin. As a result of this type of replicative cycle,
appearances of cold sores and genital herpes outbreaks only occur intermittently, even though the viruses
remain in the nervous tissue for life. Latent infections are common with other herpesviruses as well, including
thevaricella-zostervirusthatcauseschickenpox.Afterhavingachickenpoxinfectioninchildhood,thevaricella-
zoster virus can remain latent for many years and reactivate in adults to cause the painful condition known as
“shingles” (Figure 21.11).
Figure 21.11 A latent virus infection. (a) Varicella-zoster, the virus that causes chickenpox, has an enveloped
icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron micrograph. Its double-stranded DNA genome becomes
incorporatedinthehostDNAandcanreactivateafterlatencyintheformof(b)shingles,oftenexhibitingarash.(credit
a: modification of work by Dr. Erskine Palmer, B. G. Martin, CDC; credit b: modification of work by “rosmary”/Flickr;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Some animal-infecting viruses, including the hepatitis C virus discussed above, are known as oncogenic
viruses: They have the ability to cause cancer. These viruses interfere with the normal regulation of the host
cell cycle either by introducing genes that stimulate unregulated cell growth (oncogenes) or by interfering with
theexpressionofgenesthatinhibitcellgrowth.OncogenicvirusescanbeeitherDNAorRNAviruses.Cancers
known to be associated with viral infections include cervical cancer, caused by human papillomavirus (HPV)
(Figure 21.12), liver cancer caused by hepatitis B virus, T-cell leukemia, and several types of lymphoma.
PAGE: 585
574 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Figure 21.12 HPV, or human papillomavirus, has a naked icosahedral capsid visible in this transmission electron
micrographandadouble-strandedDNAgenomethatisincorporatedintothehostDNA.Thevirus,whichissexually
transmitted,isoncogenicandcanleadtocervicalcancer.(credit:modificationofworkbyNCI,NIH;scale-bardatafrom
Matt Russell)
Visit the interactive animations (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/animal_viruses) showing the various stages
of the replicative cycles of animal viruses and click on the flash animation links.
21.3 | Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify major viral illnesses that affect humans
• Compare vaccinations and anti-viral drugs as medical approaches to viruses
Virusescauseavarietyofdiseasesinanimals,includinghumans,rangingfromthecommoncoldtopotentially
fatal illnesses like meningitis (Figure 21.13). These diseases can be treated by antiviral drugs or by vaccines;
however,someviruses,suchasHIV,arecapablebothofavoidingtheimmuneresponseandofmutatingwithin
the host organism to become resistant to antiviral drugs.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 586
Chapter 21 | Viruses 575
Figure 21.13 A sampling of human viruses. Viruses can cause dozens of ailments in humans, ranging from mild
illnesses to serious diseases. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Vaccines for Prevention
The primary method of controlling viral disease is by vaccination, which is intended to prevent outbreaks by
buildingimmunitytoavirusorvirusfamily(Figure21.14).Vaccinesmaybepreparedusingliveviruses,killed
viruses, or molecular subunits of the virus. Note that the killed viral vaccines and subunit viruses are both
incapable of causing disease, nor is there any valid evidence that vaccinations contribute to autism.
Live viral vaccines are designed in the laboratory to cause few symptoms in recipients while giving them
protective immunity against future infections. Polio was one disease that represented a milestone in the use
of vaccines. Mass immunization campaigns in the 1950s (killed vaccine) and 1960s (live vaccine) significantly
reducedtheincidenceofthedisease,whichcausedmuscleparalysisinchildrenandgeneratedagreatamount
offearinthegeneralpopulationwhenregionalepidemicsoccurred.Thesuccessofthepoliovaccinepavedthe
wayfortheroutinedispensationofchildhoodvaccinesagainstmeasles,mumps,rubella,chickenpox,andother
diseases.
The issue with using live vaccines (which are usually more effective than killed vaccines), is the low but
significantdangerthattheseviruseswillreverttotheirdisease-causingformbybackmutations.Livevaccines
are usually made by attenuating (weakening) the “wild-type” (disease-causing) virus by growing it in the
laboratory in tissues or at temperatures different from what the virus is accustomed to in the host. Adaptations
tothesenewcellsortemperaturesinducemutationsinthegenomesofthevirus,allowingittogrowbetterinthe
laboratorywhileinhibitingitsabilitytocausediseasewhenreintroducedintoconditionsfoundinthehost.These
attenuated viruses thus still cause infection, but they do not grow very well, allowing the immune response to
develop in time to prevent major disease. Back mutations occur when the vaccine undergoes mutations in the
hostsuchthatitreadaptstothehostandcanagaincausedisease,whichcanthenbespreadtootherhumansin
anepidemic.Thistypeofscenariohappenedasrecentlyas2007inNigeriawheremutationsinapoliovaccine
led to an epidemic of polio in that country.
Some vaccines are in continuous development because certain viruses, such as influenza and HIV, have a
high mutation rate compared to that of other viruses and normal host cells. With influenza, mutations in the
surface molecules of the virus help the organism evade the protective immunity that may have been obtained
inapreviousinfluenzaseason,makingitnecessaryforindividualstogetvaccinatedeveryyear.Otherviruses,
PAGE: 587
576 Chapter 21 | Viruses
suchasthosethatcausethechildhooddiseasesmeasles,mumps,andrubella,mutatesoinfrequentlythatthe
same vaccine is used year after year.
Figure 21.14 Vaccinations are designed to boost immunity to a virus to prevent infection. (credit: USACE Europe
District)
WatchthisNOVAvideo(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/1918_flu)tolearnhowmicrobiologistsareattempting
to replicate the deadly 1918 Spanish influenza virus so they can understand more about virology.
Vaccines and Antiviral Drugs for Treatment
Insomecases,vaccinescanbeusedtotreatanactiveviralinfection.Theconceptbehindthisisthatbygiving
the vaccine, immunity is boosted without adding more disease-causing virus. In the case of rabies, a fatal
neurological disease transmitted via the saliva of rabies virus-infected animals, the progression of the disease
from the time of the animal bite to the time it enters the central nervous system may be two weeks or longer.
Thisisenoughtimetovaccinateindividualswhosuspectthattheyhavebeenbittenbyarabidanimal,andtheir
boosted immune response is sufficient to prevent the virus from entering nervous tissue. Thus, the potentially
fatal neurological consequences of the disease are averted, and the individual only has to recover from the
infected bite. This approach is also being used for the treatment of Ebola, one of the fastest and most deadly
viruses on Earth. Transmitted by bats and great apes, this disease can cause death in 70 to 90 percent of
infected humans within two weeks. Using newly developed vaccines that boost the immune response in this
way, there is hope that affected individuals will be better able to control the virus, potentially saving a greater
percentage of infected persons from a rapid and very painful death.
Another way of treating viral infections is the use of antiviral drugs. Because viruses use the resources of the
host cell for replication and the production of new virus proteins, it is difficult to block their activities without
damaging the host. However, we do have some effective antiviral drugs, such as those used to treat HIV and
influenza. Some antiviral drugs are specific for a particular virus and others have been used to control and
reduce symptoms for a wide variety of viral diseases. For most viruses, these drugs can inhibit the virus by
blockingtheactionsofoneormoreofitsproteins.Itisimportanttonotethatthetargetedproteinsbeencoded
byviralgenesandthatthesemoleculesarenotpresentinahealthyhostcell.Inthisway,viralgrowthisinhibited
without damaging the host.
Antivirals have been developed to treat genital herpes (herpes simplex II) and influenza. For genital herpes,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 588
Chapter 21 | Viruses 577
drugs such as acyclovir can reduce the number and duration of episodes of active viral disease, during which
patientsdevelopvirallesionsintheirskincells.Asthevirusremainslatentinnervoustissueofthebodyforlife,
thisdrugisnotcurativebutcanmakethesymptomsofthediseasemoremanageable.Forinfluenza,drugslike
Tamiflu(oseltamivir)(Figure21.15)canreducethedurationof“flu”symptomsbyoneortwodays,butthedrug
does not prevent symptoms entirely. Tamiflu works by inhibiting an enzyme (viral neuraminidase) that allows
new virions to leave their infected cells. Thus, Tamiflu inhibits the spread of virus from infected to uninfected
cells. Other antiviral drugs, such as Ribavirin, have been used to treat a variety of viral infections, although its
mechanism of action against certain viruses remains unclear.
Figure 21.15 Action of an antiviral drug. (a) Tamiflu inhibits a viral enzyme called neuraminidase (NA) found in the
influenzaviralenvelope.(b)Neuraminidasecleavestheconnectionbetweenviralhemagglutinin(HA),alsofoundinthe
viralenvelope,andglycoproteinsonthehostcellsurface.Inhibitionofneuraminidasepreventsthevirusfromdetaching
from the host cell, thereby blocking further infection. (credit a: modification of work by M. Eickmann)
By far, the most successful use of antivirals has been in the treatment of the retrovirus HIV, which causes a
diseasethat,ifuntreated,isusuallyfatalwithin10to12yearsafterinfection.Anti-HIVdrugshavebeenableto
control viral replication to the point that individuals receiving these drugs survive for a significantly longer time
than the untreated.
Anti-HIVdrugsinhibitviralreplicationatmanydifferentphasesoftheHIVreplicativecycle(Figure21.16).Drugs
havebeendevelopedthatinhibitthefusionoftheHIVviralenvelopewiththeplasmamembraneofthehostcell
(fusioninhibitors),theconversionofitsRNAgenomeintodouble-strandedDNA(reversetranscriptaseinhibitors,
likeAZT),theintegrationoftheviralDNAintothehostgenome(integraseinhibitors),andtheprocessingofviral
proteins (protease inhibitors).
PAGE: 589
578 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Figure21.16LifecycleofHIV.HIV,anenveloped,icosahedralvirus,attachestotheCD4receptorofanimmunecell
and fuses with the cell membrane. Viral contents are released into the cell, where viral enzymes convert the single-
stranded RNA genome into DNA and incorporate it into the host genome. (credit: NIAID, NIH)
Unfortunately,whenanyofthesedrugsareusedindividually,thehighmutationrateofthevirusallowsittoeasily
and rapidly develop resistance to the drug, limiting the drug’s effectiveness. The breakthrough in the treatment
ofHIVwasthedevelopmentofHAART,highlyactiveanti-retroviraltherapy,whichinvolvesamixtureofdifferent
drugs, sometimes called a drug “cocktail.” By attacking the virus at different stages of its replicative cycle, it is
much more difficult for the virus to develop resistance to multiple drugs at the same time. Still, even with the
use of combination HAART therapy, there is concern that, over time, the virus will develop resistance to this
therapy.Thus,newanti-HIVdrugsareconstantlybeingdevelopedwiththehopeofcontinuingthebattleagainst
this highly fatal virus.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 590
Chapter 21 | Viruses 579
Applied Virology:
The study of viruses has led to the development of a variety of new ways to treat non-viral diseases.
Viruses have been used in gene therapy. Gene therapy is used to treat genetic diseases such as severe
combinedimmunodeficiency(SCID),aheritable,recessivediseaseinwhichchildrenarebornwithseverely
compromised immune systems. One common type of SCID is due to the lack of an enzyme, adenosine
deaminase (ADA), which breaks down purine bases. To treat this disease by gene therapy, bone marrow
cells are taken from a SCID patient and the ADA gene is inserted. This is where viruses come in, and
their use relies on their ability to penetrate living cells and bring genes in with them. Viruses such as
adenovirus,anupper-respiratoryhumanvirus,aremodifiedbytheadditionoftheADAgene,andthevirus
then transports this gene into the cell. The modified cells, now capable of making ADA, are then given
back to the patients in the hope of curing them. Gene therapy using viruses as carriers of genes (viral
vectors),althoughstillexperimental,holdspromiseforthetreatmentofmanygeneticdiseases.Still,many
technological problems need to be solved for this approach to be a viable method for treating genetic
disease.
Another medical use for viruses relies on their specificity and ability to kill the cells they infect. Oncolytic
viruses are engineered in the laboratory specifically to attack and kill cancer cells. A genetically modified
adenovirus known as H101 has been used since 2005 in clinical trials in China to treat head and neck
cancers. The results have been promising, with a greater short-term response rate to the combination of
chemotherapyandviraltherapythantochemotherapytreatmentalone.Thisongoingresearchmayherald
the beginning of a new age of cancer therapy, where viruses are engineered to find and specifically kill
cancer cells, regardless of where in the body they may have spread.
A third use of viruses in medicine relies on their specificity and involves using bacteriophages in the
treatment of bacterial infections. Bacterial diseases have been treated with antibiotics since the 1940s.
However, over time, many bacteria have evolved resistance to antibiotics. A good example is methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA, pronounced “mersa”), an infection commonly acquired in
hospitals. This bacterium is resistant to a variety of antibiotics, making it difficult to treat. The use of
bacteriophages specific for such bacteria would bypass their resistance to antibiotics and specifically kill
them. Although phage therapy is in use in the Republic of Georgia to treat antibiotic-resistant bacteria,
its use to treat human diseases has not been approved in most countries. However, the safety of the
treatment was confirmed in the United States when the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved
spraying meats with bacteriophages to destroy the food pathogen Listeria. As more and more antibiotic-
resistantstrainsofbacteriaevolve,theuseofbacteriophagesmightbeapotentialsolutiontotheproblem,
and the development of phage therapy is of much interest to researchers worldwide.
21.4 | Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe prions and their basic properties
• Define viroids and their targets of infection
Prions and viroids are pathogens (agents with the ability to cause disease) that have simpler structures than
viruses but, in the case of prions, still can produce deadly diseases.
Prions
Prions, so-called because they are proteinaceous, are infectious particles—smaller than viruses—that contain
no nucleic acids (neither DNA nor RNA). Historically, the idea of an infectious agent that did not use nucleic
acids was considered impossible, but pioneering work by Nobel Prize-winning biologist Stanley Prusiner has
convinced the majority of biologists that such agents do indeed exist.
PAGE: 591
580 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Fatal neurodegenerative diseases, such as kuru in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in
cattle (commonly known as “mad cow disease”) were shown to be transmitted by prions. The disease was
spreadbytheconsumptionofmeat,nervoustissue,orinternalorgansbetweenmembersofthesamespecies.
Kuru, native to humans in Papua New Guinea, was spread from human to human via ritualistic cannibalism.
BSE, originally detected in the United Kingdom, was spread between cattle by the practice of including cattle
nervous tissue in feed for other cattle. Individuals with kuru and BSE show symptoms of loss of motor control
andunusualbehaviors,suchasuncontrolledburstsoflaughterwithkuru,followedbydeath.Kuruwascontrolled
by inducing the population to abandon its ritualistic cannibalism.
Ontheotherhand,BSEwasinitiallythoughttoonlyaffectcattle.Cattledyingofthediseasewereshowntohave
developedlesionsor“holes”inthebrain,causingthebraintissuetoresembleasponge.Lateronintheoutbreak,
however, it was shown that a similar encephalopathy in humans, known as variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD), could be acquired from eating beef from animals infected with BSE, sparking bans by various countries
ontheimportationofBritishbeefandcausingconsiderableeconomicdamagetotheBritishbeefindustry(Figure
21.17). BSE still exists in various areas, and although a rare disease, individuals that acquire CJD are difficult
to treat. The disease can be spread from human to human by blood, so many countries have banned blood
donation from regions associated with BSE.
Thecauseofspongiformencephalopathies,suchaskuruandBSE,isaninfectiousstructuralvariantofanormal
cellular protein called PrP (prion protein). It is this variant that constitutes the prion particle. PrP exists in two
c sc
forms, PrP , the normal form of the protein, and PrP , the infectious form. Once introduced into the body, the
sc c sc
PrP contained within the prion binds to PrP and converts it to PrP . This leads to an exponential increase
sc sc
of the PrP protein, which aggregates. PrP is folded abnormally, and the resulting conformation (shape)
is directly responsible for the lesions seen in the brains of infected cattle. Thus, although not without some
detractors among scientists, the prion seems likely to be an entirely new form of infectious agent, the first one
found whose transmission is not reliant upon genes made of DNA or RNA.
Figure21.17MadCowDiseaseinhumans.(a)Endogenousnormalprionprotein(PrPc)isconvertedintothedisease-
causingform(PrPsc)whenitencountersthisvariantformoftheprotein.PrPscmayarisespontaneouslyinbraintissue,
especially if a mutant form of the protein is present, or it may occur via the spread of misfolded prions consumed in
food into brain tissue. (b)This prion-infected brain tissue, visualized using light microscopy, shows the vacuoles that
giveitaspongytexture,typicaloftransmissiblespongiformencephalopathies.(creditb:modificationofworkbyDr.Al
Jenny, USDA APHIS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Viroids
Viroids are plant pathogens: small, single-stranded, circular RNA particles that are much simpler than a virus.
They do not have a capsid or outer envelope, but like viruses can reproduce only within a host cell. Viroids
do not, however, manufacture any proteins, and they only produce a single, specific RNA molecule. Human
diseases caused by viroids have yet to be identified.
Viroidsareknowntoinfectplants(Figure21.18)andareresponsibleforcropfailuresandthelossofmillionsof
dollarsinagriculturalrevenueeachyear.Someoftheplantstheyinfectincludepotatoes,cucumbers,tomatoes,
chrysanthemums, avocados, and coconut palms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 592
Chapter 21 | Viruses 581
Figure21.18Thesepotatoeshavebeeninfectedbythepotatospindletuberviroid(PSTV),whichistypicallyspread
wheninfectedknivesareusedtocuthealthypotatoes,whicharethenplanted.(credit:PamelaRoberts,Universityof
Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, USDA ARS)
PAGE: 593
582 Chapter 21 | Viruses
Virologist
Virologyisthestudyofviruses,andavirologistisanindividualtrainedinthisdiscipline.Traininginvirology
canleadtomanydifferentcareerpaths.Virologistsareactivelyinvolvedinacademicresearchandteaching
in colleges and medical schools. Some virologists treat patients or are involved in the generation and
production of vaccines. They might participate in epidemiologic studies (Figure 21.19) or become science
writers, to name just a few possible careers.
Figure21.19Thisvirologistisengagedinfieldwork,samplingeggsfromthisnestforavianinfluenza.(credit:Don
Becker, USGS EROS, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service)
If you think you may be interested in a career in virology, find a mentor in the field. Many large medical
centers have departments of virology, and smaller hospitals usually have virology labs within their
microbiology departments. Volunteer in a virology lab for a semester or work in one over the summer.
Discussingtheprofessionandgettingafirst-handlookattheworkwillhelpyoudecidewhetheracareerin
virologyisrightforyou.TheAmericanSocietyofVirology’swebsite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/asv)is
a good resource for information regarding training and careers in virology.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 594
Chapter 21 | Viruses 583
KEY TERMS
acellular lacking cells
acute disease disease where the symptoms rise and fall within a short period of time
asymptomatic disease diseasewheretherearenosymptomsandtheindividualisunawareofbeinginfected
unless lab tests are performed
attenuation weakening of a virus during vaccine development
AZT anti-HIV drug that inhibits the viral enzyme reverse transcriptase
back mutation when a live virus vaccine reverts back to it disease-causing phenotype
bacteriophage virus that infects bacteria
budding methodofexitfromthecellusedincertainanimalviruses,wherevirionsleavethecellindividuallyby
capturing a piece of the host plasma membrane
capsid protein coating of the viral core
capsomere protein subunit that makes up the capsid
cell necrosis cell death
chronic infection describes when the virus persists in the body for a long period of time
cytopathic causing cell damage
envelope lipid bilayer that encircles some viruses
fusion methodofentrybysomeenvelopedviruses,wheretheviralenvelopefuseswiththeplasmamembrane
of the host cell
gall appearance of a plant tumor
gene therapy treatment of genetic disease by adding genes, using viruses to carry the new genes inside the
cell
group I virus virus with a dsDNA genome
group II virus virus with an ssDNA genome
group III virus virus with a dsRNA genome
group IV virus virus with an ssRNA genome with positive polarity
group V virus virus with an ssRNA genome with negative polarity
group VI virus virus with an ssRNA genome converted into dsDNA by reverse transcriptase
group VII virus virus with a single-stranded mRNA converted into dsDNA for genome replication
horizontal transmission transmission of a disease between unrelated individuals
hyperplasia abnormally high cell growth and division
hypoplasia abnormally low cell growth and division
intermittent symptom symptom that occurs periodically
latency virus that remains in the body for a long period of time but only causes intermittent symptoms
PAGE: 595
584 Chapter 21 | Viruses
lysis bursting of a cell
lysogenic cycle typeofvirusreplicationinwhichtheviralgenomeisincorporatedintothegenomeofthehost
cell
lytic cycle type of virus replication in which virions are released through lysis, or bursting, of the cell
matrix protein envelopeproteinthatstabilizestheenvelopeandoftenplaysaroleintheassemblyofprogeny
virions
negative polarity ssRNA viruses with genomes complementary to their mRNA
oncogenic virus virus that has the ability to cause cancer
oncolytic virus virus engineered to specifically infect and kill cancer cells
pathogen agent with the ability to cause disease
permissive cell type that is able to support productive replication of a virus
phage therapy treatment of bacterial diseases using bacteriophages specific to a particular bacterium
positive polarity ssRNAviruswithagenomethatcontainsthesamebasesequencesandcodonsfoundintheir
mRNA
prion infectious particle that consists of proteins that replicate without DNA or RNA
productive viral infection that leads to the production of new virions
prophage phage DNA that is incorporated into the host cell genome
PrP c normal prion protein
PrP sc infectious form of a prion protein
replicative intermediate dsRNA intermediate made in the process of copying genomic RNA
reverse transcriptase enzyme found in Baltimore groups VI and VII that converts single-stranded RNA into
double-stranded DNA
vaccine weakened solution of virus components, viruses, or other agents that produce an immune response
vertical transmission transmission of disease from parent to offspring
viral receptor glycoprotein used to attach a virus to host cells via molecules on the cell
virion individual virus particle outside a host cell
viroid plant pathogen that produces only a single, specific RNA
virus core contains the virus genome
CHAPTER SUMMARY
21.1Viral Evolution, Morphology, and Classification
Viruses are tiny, noncellular entities that usually can be seen only with an electron microscope. Their genomes
contain either DNA or RNA—never both—and they replicate either by using the replication proteins of a host
cell or by using proteins encoded in the viral genome. Viruses are diverse, infecting archaea, bacteria, fungi,
plants, and animals. Viruses consist of a nucleic acid core surrounded by a protein capsid with or without an
outer lipid envelope. The capsid shape, presence of an envelope, and core composition dictate some elements
of the classification of viruses. The most commonly used classification method, the Baltimore classification,
categorizes viruses based on how they produce their mRNA.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 596
Chapter 21 | Viruses 585
21.2Virus Infections and Hosts
Plant viruses may be transmitted either vertically from parent reproductive cells or horizontally through
damaged plant tissues. Viruses of plants are responsible for significant economic damage in both crop plants
and plants used for ornamentation. Animal viruses enter their hosts through several types of virus-host cell
interactions and cause a variety of infections. Viral infections can be either acute, with a brief period of infection
terminated by host immune responses, or chronic, in which the infection persists. Persistent infections may
cause chronic symptoms (hepatitis C), intermittent symptoms (latent viruses such a herpes simplex virus 1), or
even be effectively asymptomatic (human herpesviruses 6 and 7). Oncogenic viruses in animals have the
ability to cause cancer by interfering with the regulation of the host cell cycle.
21.3Prevention and Treatment of Viral Infections
Viruses cause a variety of diseases in humans. Many of these diseases can be prevented by the use of viral
vaccines, which stimulate protective immunity against the virus without causing major disease. Viral vaccines
may also be used in active viral infections, boosting the ability of the immune system to control or destroy the
virus. A series of antiviral drugs that target enzymes and other protein products of viral genes have been
developed and used with mixed success. Combinations of anti-HIV drugs have been used to effectively control
the virus, extending the lifespans of infected individuals. Viruses have many uses in medicines, such as in the
treatment of genetic disorders, cancer, and bacterial infections.
21.4Other Acellular Entities: Prions and Viroids
Prions are infectious agents that consist of protein, but no DNA or RNA, and seem to produce their deadly
effects by duplicating their shapes and accumulating in tissues. They are thought to contribute to several
progressive brain disorders, including mad cow disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Viroids are single-
stranded RNA pathogens that infect plants. Their presence can have a severe impact on the agriculture
industry.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 21.5Which of the following statements What advantage does the virus gain by keeping the
about virus structure is true? host cell alive?
a. All viruses are encased in a viral membrane.
3.Figure 21.10Which of the following statements is
b. The capsomere is made up of small protein
false?
subunits called capsids.
a. In the lytic cycle, new phages are produced
c. DNA is the genetic material in all viruses.
and released into the environment.
d. Glycoproteins help the virus attach to the
b. In the lysogenic cycle, phage DNA is
host cell.
incorporated into the host genome.
2.Figure 21.8Influenza virus is packaged in a viral c. An environmental stressor can cause the
envelope that fuses with the plasma membrane. This phage to initiate the lysogenic cycle.
way, the virus can exit the host cell without killing it. d. Cell lysis only occurs in the lytic cycle.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which statement is true? a. all have a round shape
a. A virion contains DNA and RNA. b. cannot have a long shape
b. Viruses are acellular. c. do not maintain any shape
c. Viruses replicate outside of the cell. d. vary in shape
d. Most viruses are easily visualized with a
7.The observation that the bacteria genus
light microscope.
Chlamydiacontains species that can only survive as
5.The viral ________ play(s) a role in attaching a intracellular parasites supports which viral origin
virion to the host cell. hypothesis?
a. core a. Progressive
b. capsid b. Regressive
c. envelope c. Self-replicating
d. both b and c d. Virus-first
6.Viruses_______. 8.A scientist discovers a new virus with a linear,
PAGE: 597
586 Chapter 21 | Viruses
RNA genome surrounded by a helical capsid. The HIV-1 without becoming sick. What step of the virus
virus is most likely a member of which family based life cycle is likely to be inhibited with this mutation?
on structure classification?
a. Rabies virus a. Release
b. Herpesviruses b. Reverse transcription
c. Retroviruses c. Uncoating
d. Influenza viruses d. Attachment
9.Which statement isnottrue of viral replication? 16.An apple grower notices that several of his apple
trees with fungi growing on their trunks have
a. A lysogenic cycle kills the host cell. developed necrotic ring spots, while other trees in the
b. There are six basic steps in the viral orchard that lack fungi appear healthy. What is the
replication cycle. most likely conclusion the farmer can make about the
c. Viral replication does not affect host cell virus infecting his apple trees?
function. a. The apple trees were infected by horizontal
d. Newly released virions can infect adjacent transmission.
cells. b. The fungi carry disease.
c. The fungi attract disease-carrying insects.
10.Which statement is true of viral replication?
d. The apple trees were infected by vertical
transmission.
a. In the process of apoptosis, the cell
survives. 17.Which of the following is NOT used to treat active
b. During attachment, the virus attaches at viral disease?
specific sites on the cell surface. a. Vaccines
c. The viral capsid helps the host cell produce b. Antiviral drugs
more copies of the viral genome. c. Antibiotics
d. mRNA works outside of the host cell to d. Phage therapy
produce enzymes and proteins.
18.Vaccines_______.
11.Which statement is true of reverse transcriptase? a. are similar to viroids
b. are only needed once
a. It is a nucleic acid. c. kill viruses
b. It infects cells. d. stimulate an immune response
c. It transcribes RNA to make DNA.
19.A patient presents at the clinic with an acute viral
d. It is a lipid.
infection. Assays that analyze the viral life cycle
12.Oncogenic virus cores can be_______. classify the virus into Group V with a segmented
a. RNA genome. Which virus is the most likely diagnosis for
b. DNA the patient?
c. neither RNA nor DNA a. Rabies virus
d. either RNA or DNA b. Picornavirus
c. HIV-1
13.Which is true of DNA viruses?
d. Influenza A virus
a. They use the host cell’s machinery to
produce new copies of their genome. 20.Which of the following is not associated with
b. They all have envelopes. prions?
c. They are the only kind of viruses that can a. Replicating shapes
cause cancer. b. Mad cow disease
d. They are not important plant pathogens. c. DNA
d. Toxic proteins
14.A bacteriophage can infect ________.
a. the lungs 21.Which statement is true of viroids?
b. viruses a. They are single-stranded RNA particles.
c. prions b. They reproduce only outside of the cell.
d. bacteria c. They produce proteins.
d. They affect both plants and animals.
15.People with the CCR5Δ32 mutation of a T-cell
surface protein can be exposed to some strains of
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
22.The first electron micrograph of a virus (tobacco time, how did scientists know that viruses existed if
mosaic virus) was produced in 1939. Before that they could not see them? (Hint: Early scientists called
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 598
Chapter 21 | Viruses 587
viruses “filterable agents.”) mutation that allows it to now also go through the
lysogenic cycle. How would this provide an
23.Varicella-zoster virus is a double-stranded DNA
evolutionary advantage over the other
virus that causes chickenpox. How does its genome
bacteriophages that can only spread through lytic
structure provide an evolutionary advantage over a
cycles?
single-stranded DNA virus?
30.Why is immunization after being bitten by a rabid
24.Classify the Rabies virus (a rhabdovirus family
animal so effective and why aren’t people vaccinated
member) and HIV-1 with both the Baltimore and
for rabies like dogs and cats are?
genomic structure systems. Compare your results.
What conclusions can be made about these two 31.The vaccine Gardasil that targets human
different methods? papilloma virus (HPV), the etiological agent of genital
warts, was developed after the anti-HPV medication
25.Why can’t dogs catch the measles?
podofilox. Why would doctors still want a vaccine
26.One of the first and most important targets for created after anti-viral medications were available?
drugs to fight infection with HIV (a retrovirus) is the
32.Prions are responsible for variant Creutzfeldt-
reverse transcriptase enzyme. Why?
Jakob Disease, which has resulted in over 100
27.In this section, you were introduced to different human deaths in Great Britain during the last 10
types of viruses and viral diseases. Briefly discuss years. How do humans contract this disease?
the most interesting or surprising thing you learned
33.How are viroids like viruses?
about viruses.
34.A botanist notices that a tomato plant looks
28.Although plant viruses cannot infect humans,
diseased. How could the botanist confirm that the
what are some of the ways in which they affect
agent causing disease is a viroid, and not a virus?
humans?
29.A bacteriophage with a lytic life cycle develops a
PAGE: 599
588 Chapter 21 | Viruses
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 600
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 589
22 | PROKARYOTES:
BACTERIA AND
ARCHAEA
Figure 22.1 Certain prokaryotes can live in extreme environments such as the Morning Glory pool, a hot spring in
YellowstoneNationalPark.Thespring’svividbluecolorisfromtheprokaryotesthatthriveinitsveryhotwaters.(credit:
modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Chapter Outline
22.1:Prokaryotic Diversity
22.2:Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
22.3:Prokaryotic Metabolism
22.4:Bacterial Diseases in Humans
22.5:Beneficial Prokaryotes
Introduction
In the recent past, scientists grouped living things into five kingdoms—animals, plants, fungi, protists, and
prokaryotes—based on several criteria, such as the absence or presence of a nucleus and other membrane-
th
boundorganelles,theabsenceorpresenceofcellwalls,multicellularity,andsoon.Inthelate20 century,the
pioneeringworkofCarlWoeseandotherscomparedsequencesofsmall-subunitribosomalRNA(SSUrRNA),
which resulted in a more fundamental way to group organisms on Earth. Based on differences in the structure
of cell membranes and in rRNA, Woese and his colleagues proposed that all life on Earth evolved along three
lineages, called domains. The domain Bacteria comprises all organisms in the kingdom Bacteria, the domain
Archaea comprises the rest of the prokaryotes, and the domain Eukarya comprises all eukaryotes—including
organisms in the kingdoms Animalia, Plantae, Fungi, and Protista.
Two of the three domains—Bacteria and Archaea—are prokaryotic. Prokaryotes were the first inhabitants on
PAGE: 601
590 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Earth, appearing 3.5 to 3.8 billion years ago. These organisms are abundant and ubiquitous; that is, they are
presenteverywhere.Inadditiontoinhabitingmoderateenvironments,theyarefoundinextremeconditions:from
boilingspringstopermanentlyfrozenenvironmentsinAntarctica;fromsaltyenvironmentsliketheDeadSeato
environments under tremendous pressure, such as the depths of the ocean; and from areas without oxygen,
such as a waste management plant, to radioactively contaminated regions, such as Chernobyl. Prokaryotes
reside in the human digestive system and on the skin, are responsible for certain illnesses, and serve an
important role in the preparation of many foods.
22.1 | Prokaryotic Diversity
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the evolutionary history of prokaryotes
• Discuss the distinguishing features of extremophiles
• Explain why it is difficult to culture prokaryotes
Prokaryotes are ubiquitous. They cover every imaginable surface where there is sufficient moisture, and
they also live on and inside virtually all other living things. In the typical human body, prokaryotic cells
outnumberhumanbodycellsbyabouttentoone.Theycomprisethemajorityoflivingthingsinallecosystems.
Some prokaryotes thrive in environments that are inhospitable for most living things. Prokaryotes recycle
nutrients—essential substances (such as carbon and nitrogen)—and they drive the evolution of new
ecosystems, some of which are natural and others man-made. Prokaryotes have been on Earth since long
before multicellular life appeared. Indeed, eukaryotic cells are thought to be the descendants of ancient
prokaryotic communities.
Prokaryotes, the First Inhabitants of Earth
When and where did cellular life begin? What were the conditions on Earth when life began? We now know
that prokaryotes were likely the first forms of cellular life on Earth, and they existed for billions of years before
plantsandanimalsappeared.TheEarthanditsmoonaredatedatabout4.54billionyearsinage.Thisestimate
is based on evidence from radiometric dating of meteorite material together with other substrate material from
Earthandthemoon.EarlyEarthhadaverydifferentatmosphere(containedlessmolecularoxygen)thanitdoes
todayandwassubjectedtostrongsolarradiation;thus,thefirstorganismsprobablywouldhaveflourishedwhere
they were more protected, such as in the deep ocean or far beneath the surface of the Earth. Strong volcanic
activitywascommononEarthatthistime,soitislikelythatthesefirstorganisms—thefirstprokaryotes—were
adaptedtoveryhightemperatures.BecauseearlyEarthwaspronetogeologicalupheavalandvolcaniceruption,
andwassubjecttobombardmentbymutagenicradiationfromthesun,thefirstorganismswereprokaryotesthat
must have withstood these harsh conditions.
Microbial Mats
Microbial mats or large biofilms may represent the earliest forms of prokaryotic life on Earth; there is fossil
evidence of their presence starting about 3.5 billion years ago. It is remarkable that cellular life appeared on
EarthonlyabillionyearsaftertheEarthitselfformed,suggestingthatpre-cellular“life”thatcouldreplicateitself
had evolved much earlier. A microbial mat is a multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes (Figure 22.2) that includes
mostly bacteria, but also archaeans. Microbial mats are only a few centimeters thick, and they typically grow
where different types of materials interface, mostly on moist surfaces. The various types of prokaryotes that
comprisethemcarryoutdifferentmetabolicpathways,andthatisthereasonfortheirvariouscolors.Prokaryotes
in a microbial mat are held together by a glue-like sticky substance that they secrete calledextracellular matrix.
The first microbial mats likely obtained their energy from chemicals found near hydrothermal vents. A
hydrothermal vent is a breakage or fissure in the Earth’s surface that releases geothermally heated water.
Withtheevolutionofphotosynthesisaboutthreebillionyearsago,someprokaryotesinmicrobialmatscameto
use a more widely available energy source—sunlight—whereas others were still dependent on chemicals from
hydrothermal vents for energy and food.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 602
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 591
Figure22.2Amicrobialmat.(a)Thismicrobialmat,aboutonemeterindiameter,isgrowingoverahydrothermalvent
inthePacificOceaninaregionknownasthe“PacificRingofFire.”Themat’scolonyofbacteriahelpsretainmicrobial
nutrients. Chimneys such as the one indicated by the arrow allow gases to escape. (b) In this micrograph, bacteria
arevisualizedusingfluorescencemicroscopy.(credita:modificationofworkbyDr.BobEmbley,NOAAPMEL,Chief
Scientist; credit b: modification of work by Ricardo Murga, Rodney Donlan, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Stromatolites
Fossilized microbial mats represent the earliest record of life on Earth. A stromatolite is a sedimentary
structure formed when minerals are precipitated out of water by prokaryotes in a microbial mat (Figure 22.3).
Stromatolitesformlayeredrocksmadeofcarbonateorsilicate.Althoughmoststromatolitesareartifactsfromthe
past, there are places on Earth where stromatolites are still forming. For example, growing stromatolites have
been found in the Anza-Borrego Desert State Park in San Diego County, California.
Figure 22.3 Stromatolites. (a) These living stromatolites are located in Shark Bay, Australia. (b) These fossilized
stromatolites,foundinGlacierNationalPark,Montana,arenearly1.5billionyearsold.(credita:RobertYoung;credit
b: P. Carrara, NPS)
The Ancient Atmosphere
Evidence indicates that during the first two billion years of Earth’s existence, the atmosphere was anoxic,
meaning that there was no molecular oxygen. Therefore, only those organisms that can grow without
oxygen—anaerobicorganisms—wereabletolive.Autotrophicorganismsthatconvertsolarenergyintochemical
energy are called phototrophs, and they appeared within one billion years of the formation of Earth. Then,
cyanobacteria, also known as “blue-green algae,” evolved from these simple phototrophs at least one billion
years later. It was the ancestral cyanobacteria (Figure 22.4) that began the “oxygenation” of the atmosphere:
Increased atmospheric oxygen allowed the evolution of more efficient O2-utilizing catabolic pathways. It also
opened up the land to increased colonization, because some O2 is converted into O3 (ozone) and ozone
effectively absorbs the ultraviolet light that could have otherwise caused lethal mutations in DNA. The current
evidence suggests that the increase in O2concentrations allowed the evolution of other life forms.
PAGE: 603
592 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure22.4Cyanobacteria.ThishotspringinYellowstoneNationalParkflowstowardtheforeground.Cyanobacteria
in the spring are green, and as water flows down the gradient, the intensity of the color increases as cell density
increases. The water is cooler at the edges of the stream than in the center, causing the edges to appear greener.
(credit: Graciela Brelles-Mariño)
Microbes Are Adaptable: Life in Moderate and Extreme Environments
Someorganismshavedevelopedstrategiesthatallowthemtosurviveharshconditions.Almostallprokaryotes
have a cell wall, a protective structure that allows them to survive in both hypertonic and hypotonic aqueous
conditions. Some soil bacteria are able to form endospores that resist heat and drought, thereby allowing the
organism to survive until favorable conditions recur. These adaptations, along with others, allow bacteria to
remain the most abundant life form in all terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems.
Prokaryotes thrive in a vast array of environments: Some grow in conditions that would seem very normal to
us, whereas others are able to thrive and grow under conditions that would kill a plant or an animal. Bacteria
and archaea that are adapted to grow under extreme conditions are called extremophiles, meaning “lovers of
extremes.” Extremophiles have been found in all kinds of environments: the depths of the oceans, hot springs,
theArcticandtheAntarctic,inverydryplaces,deepinsideEarth,inharshchemicalenvironments,andinhigh
radiation environments (Figure 22.5), just to mention a few. Because they have specialized adaptations that
allow them to live in extreme conditions, many extremophiles cannot survive in moderate environments. There
are many different groups of extremophiles: They are identified based on the conditions in which they grow
best,andseveralhabitatsareextremeinmultipleways.Forexample,asodalakeisbothsaltyandalkaline,so
organisms that live in a soda lake must be both alkaliphiles and halophiles (Table 22.1). Other extremophiles,
like radioresistant organisms, do not prefer an extreme environment (in this case, one with high levels of
radiation),buthaveadaptedtosurviveinit(Figure22.5).Organismslikethesegiveusabetterunderstandingof
prokaryoticdiversityandopenupthepossibilityoffindingnewprokaryoticspeciesthatmayleadtothediscovery
of new therapeutic drugs or have industrial applications.
Extremophiles and Their Preferred Conditions
Extremophile Conditions for Optimal Growth
Acidophiles pH 3 or below
Alkaliphiles pH 9 or above
Thermophiles Temperature 60–80 °C (140–176 °F)
Hyperthermophiles Temperature 80–122 °C (176–250 °F)
Psychrophiles Temperature of -15-10 °C (5-50 °F) or lower
Halophiles Salt concentration of at least 0.2 M
Osmophiles High sugar concentration
Table 22.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 604
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 593
Figure 22.5 Radiation-tolerant prokaryotes. Deinococcus radiodurans, visualized in this false color transmission
electronmicrograph,isaprokaryotethatcantolerateveryhighdosesofionizingradiation.IthasdevelopedDNArepair
mechanismsthatallowittoreconstructitschromosomeevenifithasbeenbrokenintohundredsofpiecesbyradiation
or heat. (credit: modification of work by Michael Daly; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Prokaryotes in the Dead Sea
OneexampleofaveryharshenvironmentistheDeadSea,ahypersalinebasinthatislocatedbetweenJordan
and Israel. Hypersaline environments are essentially concentrated seawater. In the Dead Sea, the sodium
concentrationis10timeshigherthanthatofseawater,andthewatercontainshighlevelsofmagnesium(about
40 times higher than in seawater) that would be toxic to most living things. Iron, calcium, and magnesium,
2+ 2+ 2+
elementsthatformdivalentions(Fe ,Ca ,andMg ),producewhatiscommonlyreferredtoas“hard”water.
Takentogether,thehighconcentrationofdivalentcations,theacidicpH(6.0),andtheintensesolarradiationflux
[1]
make the Dead Sea a unique, and uniquely hostile, ecosystem (Figure 22.6).
What sort of prokaryotes do we find in the Dead Sea? The extremely salt-tolerant bacterial mats include
Halobacterium, Haloferax volcanii (which is found in other locations, not only the Dead Sea), Halorubrum
sodomense, andHalobaculum gomorrense, and the archaeanHaloarcula marismortui, among others.
Figure22.6Halophilicprokaryotes.(a)TheDeadSeaishypersaline.Nevertheless,salt-tolerantbacteriathriveinthis
sea. (b) These halobacteria cells can form salt-tolerant bacterial mats. (credit a: Julien Menichini; credit b: NASA;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Unculturable Prokaryotes and the Viable-but-Non-Culturable State
Theprocessofculturingbacteriaiscomplexandisoneofthegreatestdiscoveriesofmodernscience.German
physicianRobertKochiscreditedwithdiscoveringthetechniquesforpureculture,includingstainingandusing
1. Bodaker, I, Itai, S, Suzuki, MT, Feingersch, R, Rosenberg, M, Maguire, ME, Shimshon, B, and others. Comparative community genomics
in the Dead Sea: An increasingly extreme environment.The ISME Journal4 (2010): 399–407,doi:10.1038/ismej.2009.141. published online
24 December 2009.
PAGE: 605
594 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
growthmedia.Microbiologiststypicallygrowprokaryotesinthelaboratoryusinganappropriateculturemedium
containing all the nutrients needed by the target organism. The medium can be liquid, broth, or solid. After an
incubation time at the right temperature, there should be evidence of microbial growth (Figure 22.7). Koch's
assistant JuliusPetriinventedthePetridish,whoseusepersistsintoday’slaboratories. Kochworkedprimarily
with the Mycobacterium tuberculosis bacterium that causes tuberculosis and developed guidelines, called
Koch's postulates, to identify the organisms responsible for specific diseases. Koch's postulates continue to
be widely used in the medical community. Koch’s postulates include that an organism can be identified as the
cause of disease when it is present in all infected samples and absent in all healthy samples, and it is able to
reproduce the infection after being cultured multiple times. Today, cultures remain a primary diagnostic tool in
medicine and other areas of molecular biology.
Figure 22.7 Bacteria growing on blood agar plates. In these agar plates, the growth medium is supplemented with
red blood cells. Blood agar becomes transparent in the presence of hemolytic Streptococcus, which destroys red
blood cells and is used to diagnose Streptococcus infections. The plate on the left is inoculated with non-hemolytic
Staphylococcus(largewhitecolonies),andtheplateontherightisinoculatedwithhemolyticStreptococcus(tinyclear
colonies). If you look closely at the right plate, you can see that the agar surrounding the bacteria has turned clear.
(credit: Bill Branson, NCI)
Koch's postulates can be fully applied only to organisms that can be isolated and cultured. Some prokaryotes,
however,cannotgrowinalaboratorysetting.Infact,over99percentofbacteriaandarchaeaareunculturable.
Forthemostpart,thisisduetoalackofknowledgeastowhattofeedtheseorganismsandhowtogrowthem;
they may have special requirements for growth that remain unknown to scientists, such as needing specific
micronutrients, pH, temperature, pressure, co-factors, or co-metabolites. Some bacteria cannot be cultured
because they are obligate intracellular parasites and cannot be grown outside a host cell.
In other cases, culturable organisms become unculturable under stressful conditions, even though the same
organism could be cultured previously. Those organisms that cannot be cultured but are not dead are in a
viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC)state.TheVBNCstateoccurswhenprokaryotesrespondtoenvironmental
stressorsbyenteringadormantstatethatallowstheirsurvival.ThecriteriaforenteringintotheVBNCstateare
notcompletelyunderstood.Inaprocesscalledresuscitation,theprokaryotecangobackto“normal”lifewhen
environmental conditions improve.
Is the VBNC state an unusual way of living for prokaryotes? In fact, most of the prokaryotes living in the soil
or in oceanic waters are non-culturable. It has been said that only a small fraction, perhaps one percent, of
prokaryotes can be cultured under laboratory conditions. If these organisms are non-culturable, then how is it
known whether they are present and alive? Microbiologists use molecular techniques, such as the polymerase
chainreaction(PCR),toamplifyselectedportionsofDNAofprokaryotes,e.g.,16SrRNAgenes,demonstrating
their existence. (Recall that PCR can make billions of copies of a DNA segment in a process called
amplification.)
The Ecology of Biofilms
Someprokaryotesmaybeunculturablebecausetheyrequirethepresenceofotherprokaryoticspecies.Untila
coupleofdecadesago,microbiologistsusedtothinkofprokaryotesasisolatedentitieslivingapart.Thismodel,
however, does not reflect the true ecology of prokaryotes, most of which prefer to live in communities where
theycaninteract.Aswehaveseen,abiofilmisamicrobialcommunity(Figure22.8)heldtogetherinagummy-
texturedmatrixthatconsistsprimarilyofpolysaccharidessecretedbytheorganisms,togetherwithsomeproteins
andnucleicacids.Biofilmstypicallygrowattachedtosurfaces.Someofthebest-studiedbiofilmsarecomposed
of prokaryotes, although fungal biofilms have also been described, as well as some composed of a mixture of
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 606
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 595
fungi and bacteria.
Biofilms are present almost everywhere: they can cause the clogging of pipes and readily colonize surfaces in
industrial settings. In recent, large-scale outbreaks of bacterial contamination of food, biofilms have played a
majorrole.Theyalsocolonizehouseholdsurfaces,suchaskitchencounters,cuttingboards,sinks,andtoilets,
as well as places on the human body, such as the surfaces of our teeth.
Interactions among the organisms that populate a biofilm, together with their protective exopolysaccharidic
(EPS)environment,makethesecommunitiesmorerobustthanfree-living,orplanktonic,prokaryotes.Thesticky
substancethatholdsbacteriatogetheralsoexcludesmostantibioticsanddisinfectants,makingbiofilmbacteria
hardierthantheirplanktoniccounterparts.Overall,biofilmsareverydifficulttodestroybecausetheyareresistant
to many common forms of sterilization.
Figure 22.8 Development of a biofilm. Five stages of biofilm development are shown. During stage 1, initial
attachment,bacteriaadheretoasolidsurfaceviaweakvanderWaalsinteractions(forcesproducedbyinduced
electrical interactions between atoms). During stage 2, irreversible attachment, hairlike appendages called pili
permanently anchor the bacteria to the surface. During stage 3, maturation I, the biofilm grows through cell
divisionandrecruitmentofotherbacteria.Anextracellularmatrixcomposedprimarilyofpolysaccharidesholdsthe
biofilmtogether.Duringstage4,maturationII,thebiofilmcontinuestogrowandtakesonamorecomplexshape.
Duringstage5,dispersal,thebiofilmmatrixispartlybrokendown,allowingsomebacteriatoescapeandcolonize
another surface. Micrographs of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm in each of the stages of development are
shown. (credit: D. Davis, Don Monroe, PLoS)
Compared to free-floating bacteria, bacteria in biofilms often show increased resistance to antibiotics and
detergents. Why do you think this might be the case?
22.2 | Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the basic structure of a typical prokaryote
• Describe important differences in structure between Archaea and Bacteria
There are many differences between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. The name "prokaryote" suggests that
prokaryotes are defined by exclusion—they are not eukaryotes, or organisms whose cells contain a nucleus
and other internal membrane-bound organelles. However, all cells have four common structures: the plasma
membrane,whichfunctionsasabarrierforthecellandseparatesthecellfromitsenvironment;thecytoplasm,
a complex solution of organic molecules and salts inside the cell; a double-stranded DNA genome, the
informational archive of the cell; and ribosomes, where protein synthesis takes place. Prokaryotes come in
PAGE: 607
596 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
various shapes, but many fall into three categories: cocci (spherical), bacilli (rod-shaped), and spirilli (spiral-
shaped) (Figure 22.9).
Figure 22.9 Common prokaryotic cell types. Prokaryotes fall into three basic categories based on their shape,
visualizedhereusingscanningelectronmicroscopy:(a)cocci,orspherical(apairisshown);(b)bacilli,orrod-shaped;
and(c)spirilli,orspiral-shaped.(credita:modificationofworkbyJaniceHaneyCarr,Dr.RichardFacklam,CDC;credit
c: modification of work by Dr. David Cox; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The Prokaryotic Cell
Recall that prokaryotes are unicellular organisms that lack membrane-bound organelles or other internal
membrane-boundstructures(Figure22.10).Theirchromosome—usuallysingle—consistsofapieceofcircular,
double-stranded DNA located in an area of the cell called the nucleoid. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall
outside the plasma membrane. The cell wall functions as a protective layer, and it is responsible for the
organism’s shape. Some bacterial species have a capsule outside the cell wall. The capsule enables the
organism to attach to surfaces, protects it from dehydration and attack by phagocytic cells, and makes
pathogensmoreresistanttoourimmuneresponses.Somespeciesalsohaveflagella(singular,flagellum)used
for locomotion, and pili (singular, pilus) used for attachment to surfaces including the surfaces of other cells.
Plasmids, which consist of extra-chromosomal DNA, are also present in many species of bacteria and archaea.
Figure 22.10The features of a typical prokaryotic cell. Flagella, capsules, and pili are not found in all prokaryotes.
Recall that prokaryotes are divided into two different domains, Bacteria and Archaea, which together with
Eukarya, comprise the three domains of life (Figure 22.11).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 608
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 597
Figure22.11Thethreedomainsoflivingorganisms.BacteriaandArchaeaarebothprokaryotesbutdifferenoughto
be placed in separate domains. An ancestor of modern Archaea is believed to have given rise to Eukarya, the third
domain of life. Major groups of Archaea and Bacteria are shown.
Characteristics of bacterial phyla are described in Figure 22.12 and Figure 22.13. Major bacterial phyla
include the Proteobacteria, the Chlamydias, the Spirochaetes, the photosynthetic Cyanobacteria, and the
Gram-positive bacteria. The Proteobacteria are in turn subdivided into several classes, from the Alpha- to the
Epsilonproteobacteria.Eukaryoticmitochondriaarethoughttobethedescendantsofalphaproteobacteria,while
eukaryotic chloroplasts are derived from cyanobacteria. Archaeal phyla are described inFigure 22.14.
PAGE: 609
598 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure 22.12 The Proteobacteria. Phylum Proteobacteria is one of up to 52 bacteria phyla. Proteobacteria is further
subdividedintofiveclasses,AlphathroughEpsilon.(credit“Rickettsiarickettsia”:modificationofworkbyCDC;credit
“Spirillumminus”:modificationofworkbyWolframmAdlassnig;credit“Vibriocholera”:modificationofworkbyJanice
Haney Carr, CDC; credit “Desulfovibrio vulgaris”: modification of work by Graham Bradley; credit “Campylobacter”:
modification of work by De Wood, Pooley, USDA, ARS, EMU; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 610
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 599
Figure22.13Otherbacterialphyla.Chlamydia,Spirochetes,Cyanobacteria,andGram-positivebacteriaaredescribed
inthistable.Notethatbacterialshapeisnotphylum-dependent;bacteriawithinaphylummaybecocci,rod-shaped,
orspiral.(credit“Chlamydiatrachomatis”:modificationofworkbyDr.LanceLiottaLaboratory,NCI;credit“Treponema
pallidum”: modification of work by Dr. David Cox, CDC; credit “Phormidium”: modification of work by USGS; credit
“Clostridium difficile”: modification of work by Lois S. Wiggs, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
PAGE: 611
600 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure 22.14 Archaeal phyla. Archaea are separated into four phyla: the Korarchaeota, Euryarchaeota,
Crenarchaeota,andNanoarchaeota.(credit“Halobacterium”:modificationofworkbyNASA;credit“Nanoarchaeotum
equitans”: modification of work byKarl O. Stetter; credit “Korarchaeota”: modification of work byOffice of Science of
the U.S. Dept. of Energy; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The Plasma Membrane of Prokaryotes
The prokaryotic plasma membrane is a thin lipid bilayer (6 to 8 nanometers) that completely surrounds the
cell and separates the inside from the outside. Its selectively permeable nature keeps ions, proteins, and
other molecules within the cell and prevents them from diffusing into the extracellular environment, while
other molecules may move through the membrane. Recall that the general structure of a cell membrane is a
phospholipidbilayercomposedoftwolayersoflipidmolecules.Inarchaealcellmembranes,isoprene(phytanyl)
chains linked to glycerol replace the fatty acids linked to glycerol in bacterial membranes. Some archaeal
membranes are lipid monolayers instead of bilayers (Figure 22.15).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 612
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 601
Figure 22.15 Bacterial and archaeal phospholipids. Archaeal phospholipids differ from those found in Bacteria and
Eukarya in two ways. First, they have branched phytanyl sidechains instead of linear ones. Second, an ether bond
instead of an ester bond connects the lipid to the glycerol.
The Cell Wall of Prokaryotes
The cytoplasm of prokaryotic cells has a high concentration of dissolved solutes. Therefore, the osmotic
pressurewithinthecellisrelativelyhigh.Thecellwallisaprotectivelayerthatsurroundssomecellsandgives
them shape and rigidity. It is located outside the cell membrane and prevents osmotic lysis (bursting due to
increasing volume). The chemical composition of the cell wall varies between Archaea and Bacteria, and also
varies between bacterial species.
Bacterialcellwallscontainpeptidoglycan,composedofpolysaccharidechainsthatarecross-linkedbyunusual
peptides containing both L- and D-amino acids including D-glutamic acid and D-alanine. (Proteins normally
have only L-amino acids; as a consequence, many of our antibiotics work by mimicking D-amino acids and
therefore have specific effects on bacterial cell-wall development.) There are more than 100 different forms of
peptidoglycan.S-layer(surfacelayer)proteinsarealsopresentontheoutsideofcellwallsofbothArchaeaand
Bacteria.
Bacteriaaredividedintotwomajorgroups:GrampositiveandGramnegative,basedontheirreactiontoGram
staining.NotethatallGram-positivebacteriabelongtoonephylum;bacteriaintheotherphyla(Proteobacteria,
Chlamydias,Spirochetes,Cyanobacteria,andothers)areGram-negative.TheGramstainingmethodisnamed
after its inventor, Danish scientist Hans Christian Gram (1853–1938). The different bacterial responses to the
staining procedure are ultimately due to cell wall structure. Gram-positive organisms typically lack the outer
membranefoundinGram-negativeorganisms(Figure22.16).Upto90percentofthecell-wallinGram-positive
bacteria is composed of peptidoglycan, and most of the rest is composed of acidic substances called teichoic
acids. Teichoic acids may be covalently linked to lipids in the plasma membrane to form lipoteichoic acids.
Lipoteichoic acids anchor the cell wall to the cell membrane. Gram-negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell
wall composed of a few layers of peptidoglycan (only 10 percent of the total cell wall), surrounded by an outer
envelope containing lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and lipoproteins. This outer envelope is sometimes referred to
asasecondlipidbilayer.Thechemistryofthisouterenvelopeisverydifferent,however,fromthatofthetypical
lipid bilayer that forms plasma membranes.
PAGE: 613
602 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure22.16CellwallsinGram-positiveandGram-negativebacteria.Bacteriaaredividedintotwomajorgroups:
Gram positive and Gram negative. Both groups have a cell wall composed of peptidoglycan: in Gram-positive
bacteria,thewallisthick,whereasinGram-negativebacteria,thewallisthin.InGram-negativebacteria,thecell
wallissurroundedbyanoutermembranethatcontainslipopolysaccharidesandlipoproteins.Porinsareproteins
in this cell membrane that allow substances to pass through the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria. In
Gram-positivebacteria,lipoteichoicacidanchorsthecellwalltothecellmembrane.(credit:modificationofwork
by "Franciscosp2"/Wikimedia Commons)
Which of the following statements is true?
a. Gram-positive bacteria have a single cell wall anchored to the cell membrane by lipoteichoic acid.
b. Porins allow entry of substances into both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
c. The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is thick, and the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria is thin.
d. Gram-negativebacteriahaveacellwallmadeofpeptidoglycan,whereasGram-positivebacteriahave
a cell wall made of lipoteichoic acid.
Archaean cell walls do not have peptidoglycan. There are four different types of archaean cell walls. One type
is composed of pseudopeptidoglycan, which is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but contains different
sugars in the polysaccharide chain. The other three types of cell walls are composed of polysaccharides,
glycoproteins, or pure protein. Other differences between Bacteria and Archaea are seen in Table 22.2. Note
that features related to DNA replication, transcription and translation in Archaea are similar to those seen in
eukaryotes.
Differences and Similarities between Bacteria and Archaea
Structural Characteristic Bacteria Archaea
Cell type Prokaryotic Prokaryotic
Cell morphology Variable Variable
Cell wall Contains peptidoglycan Does not contain peptidoglycan
Cell membrane type Lipid bilayer Lipid bilayer or lipid monolayer
Plasma membrane lipids Fatty acids-glycerol ester Phytanyl-glycerol ethers
Chromosome Typically circular Typically circular
Replication origins Single Multiple
Table 22.2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 614
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 603
Differences and Similarities between Bacteria and Archaea
Structural Characteristic Bacteria Archaea
RNA polymerase Single Multiple
Initiator tRNA Formyl-methionine Methionine
Streptomycin inhibition Sensitive Resistant
Calvin cycle Yes No
Table 22.2
Reproduction
Reproduction in prokaryotes is asexual and usually takes place by binary fission. (Recall that the DNA of a
prokaryote is a single, circular chromosome.) Prokaryotes do not undergo mitosis; instead, the chromosome is
replicatedandthetworesultingcopiesseparatefromoneanother,duetothegrowthofthecell.Theprokaryote,
now enlarged, is pinched inward at its equator and the two resulting cells, which are clones, separate. Binary
fissiondoesnotprovideanopportunityforgeneticrecombinationorgeneticdiversity,butprokaryotescanshare
genes by three other mechanisms.
In transformation, the prokaryote takes in DNA shed by other prokaryotes into its environment. If a
nonpathogenic bacterium takes up DNA for a toxin gene from a pathogen and incorporates the new DNA into
its own chromosome, it too may become pathogenic. In transduction, bacteriophages, the viruses that infect
bacteria,maymoveshortpiecesofchromosomalDNAfromonebacteriumtoanother.Transductionresultsina
recombinant organism. Archaea also have viruses that may translocate genetic material from one individual to
another. In conjugation, DNA is transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a pilus, which brings
the organisms into contact with one another, and provides a channel for transfer of DNA. The DNA transferred
can be in the form of a plasmid or as a composite molecule, containing both plasmid and chromosomal DNA.
These three processes of DNA exchange are shown inFigure 22.17.
Reproduction can be very rapid: a few minutes for some species. This short generation time coupled with
mechanisms of genetic recombination and high rates of mutation result in the rapid evolution of prokaryotes,
allowing them to respond to environmental changes (such as the introduction of an antibiotic) very quickly.
Figure 22.17 Gene transfer mechanisms in prokaryotes. There are three mechanisms by which prokaryotes can
exchange DNA. In (a) transformation, the cell takes up prokaryotic DNA directly from the environment. The DNA
mayremainseparateasplasmidDNAorbeincorporatedintothehostgenome.In(b)transduction,abacteriophage
injectsDNAintothecellthatcontainsasmallfragmentofDNAfromadifferentprokaryote.In(c)conjugation,DNAis
transferredfromonecelltoanotherviaamatingbridge,orpilus,thatconnectsthetwocellsafterthesexpilusdraws
the two bacteria close enough to form the bridge.
PAGE: 615
604 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
The Evolution of Prokaryotes
How do scientists answer questions about the evolution of prokaryotes? Unlike with animals, artifacts in
the fossil record of prokaryotes offer very little information. Fossils of ancient prokaryotes look like tiny
bubbles in rock. Some scientists turn to genetics and to the principle of the molecular clock, which holds
that the more recently two species have diverged, the more similar their genes (and thus proteins) will be.
Conversely, species that diverged long ago will have more genes that are dissimilar.
Scientists at the NASA Astrobiology Institute and at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory
collaborated to analyze the molecular evolution of 32 specific proteins common to 72 species of
[2]
prokaryotes. The model they derived from their data indicates that three important groups of
bacteria—Actinobacteria, Deinococcus, and Cyanobacteria (collectively called Terrabacteria by the
authors)—werethefirsttocolonizeland.ActinobacteriaareagroupofverycommonGram-positivebacteria
that produce branched structures like fungal mycelia, and include species important in decomposition of
organic wastes. You will recall that Deinococcus is a genus of bacterium that is highly resistant to ionizing
radiation.Ithasathickpeptidoglycanlayerinadditiontoasecondexternalmembrane,soithasfeaturesof
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
Cyanobacteria are photosynthesizers, and were probably responsible for the production of oxygen on the
ancientearth.Thetimelinesofdivergencesuggestthatbacteria(membersofthedomainBacteria)diverged
from common ancestral species between 2.5 and 3.2 billion years ago, whereas the Archaea diverged
earlier: between 3.1 and 4.1 billion years ago. Eukarya later diverged from the archaean line. The work
further suggests that stromatolites that formed prior to the advent of cyanobacteria (about 2.6 billion years
ago)photosynthesizedinananoxicenvironmentandthatbecauseofthemodificationsoftheTerrabacteria
forland(resistancetodryingandthepossessionofcompoundsthatprotecttheorganismfromexcesslight),
photosynthesis using oxygen may be closely linked to adaptations to survive on land.
22.3 | Prokaryotic Metabolism
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the macronutrients needed by prokaryotes, and explain their importance
• Describe the ways in which prokaryotes get energy and carbon for life processes
• Describe the roles of prokaryotes in the carbon and nitrogen cycles
Prokaryotes are metabolically diverse organisms. In many cases, a prokaryote may be placed into a species
clade by its defining metabolic features: Can it metabolize lactose? Can it grow on citrate? Does it produce
H2S? Does it ferment carbohydrates to produce acid and gas? Can it grow under anaerobic conditions? Since
metabolism and metabolites are the product of enzyme pathways, and enzymes are encoded in genes, the
metabolic capabilities of a prokaryote are a reflection of its genome. There are many different environments
on Earth with various energy and carbon sources, and variable conditions to which prokaryotes may be
able to adapt. Prokaryotes have been able to live in every environment from deep-water volcanic vents to
Antarcticicebyusingwhateverenergyandcarbonsourcesareavailable.ProkaryotesfillmanynichesonEarth,
including involvement in nitrogen and carbon cycles, photosynthetic production of oxygen, decomposition of
dead organisms, and thriving as parasitic, commensal, or mutualistic organisms inside multicellular organisms,
includinghumans.Theverybroadrangeofenvironmentsthatprokaryotesoccupyispossiblebecausetheyhave
diverse metabolic processes.
2. Battistuzzi, FU, Feijao, A, and Hedges, SB. A genomic timescale of prokaryote evolution: Insights into the origin of methanogenesis,
phototrophy, and the colonization of land.BioMed Central: Evolutionary Biology4 (2004): 44, doi:10.1186/1471-2148-4-44.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 616
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 605
Needs of Prokaryotes
The diverse environments and ecosystems on Earth have a wide range of conditions in terms of temperature,
availablenutrients,acidity,salinity,oxygenavailability,andenergysources.Prokaryotesareverywellequipped
to make their living out of a vast array of nutrients and environmental conditions. To live, prokaryotes need a
source of energy, a source of carbon, and some additional nutrients.
Macronutrients
Cells are essentially a well-organized assemblage of macromolecules and water. Recall that macromolecules
are produced by the polymerization of smaller units called monomers. For cells to build all of the molecules
required to sustain life, they need certain substances, collectively called nutrients. When prokaryotes grow
in nature, they must obtain their nutrients from the environment. Nutrients that are required in large amounts
are called macronutrients, whereas those required in smaller or trace amounts are called micronutrients. Just
a handful of elements are considered macronutrients—carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, and
sulfur. (A mnemonic for remembering these elements is the acronymCHONPS.)
Why are these macronutrients needed in large amounts? They are the components of organic compounds in
cells,includingwater.Carbonisthemajorelementinallmacromolecules:carbohydrates,proteins,nucleicacids,
lipids, and many other compounds. Carbon accounts for about 50 percent of the composition of the cell. In
contrast,nitrogenrepresentsonly12percentofthetotaldryweightofatypicalcell.Nitrogenisacomponentof
proteins,nucleicacids,andothercellconstituents.Mostofthenitrogenavailableinnatureiseitheratmospheric
nitrogen(N2)oranotherinorganicform.Diatomic(N2)nitrogen,however,canbeconvertedintoanorganicform
only by certain microorganisms, called nitrogen-fixing organisms. Both hydrogen and oxygen are part of many
organiccompoundsandofwater.Phosphorusisrequiredbyallorganismsforthesynthesisofnucleotidesand
phospholipids. Sulfur is part of the structure of some amino acids such as cysteine and methionine, and is
alsopresentinseveralvitaminsandcoenzymes.Otherimportantmacronutrientsarepotassium(K),magnesium
(Mg), calcium (Ca), and sodium (Na). Although these elements are required in smaller amounts, they are very
important for the structure and function of the prokaryotic cell.
Micronutrients
In addition to these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various metallic elements in small amounts. These
are referred to as micronutrients or trace elements. For example, iron is necessary for the function of the
cytochromesinvolvedinelectron-transportreactions.Someprokaryotesrequireotherelements—suchasboron
(B), chromium (Cr), and manganese (Mn)—primarily as enzyme cofactors.
The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain Energy
Prokaryotesareclassifiedbothbythewaytheyobtainenergy,andbythecarbonsourcetheyuseforproducing
organic molecules. These categories are summarized in Table 22.3. Prokaryotes can use different sources of
energytogeneratetheATPneededforbiosynthesisandothercellularactivities.Phototrophs(orphototrophic
organisms) obtain their energy from sunlight. Phototrophs trap the energy of light using chlorophylls, or in a
few cases, bacterial rhodopsin. (Rhodopsin-using phototrophs, oddly, are phototrophic, but not photosynthetic,
since they do not fix carbon.) Chemotrophs (or chemosynthetic organisms) obtain their energy from chemical
compounds.Chemotrophsthatcanuseorganiccompoundsasenergysourcesarecalledchemoorganotrophs.
Those that can use inorganic compounds, like sulfur or iron compounds, as energy sources are called
chemolithotrophs.
Energy-producing pathways may be either aerobic, using oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor, or
anaerobic, using either simple inorganic compounds or organic molecules as the terminal electron acceptor.
Since prokaryotes lived on Earth for nearly a billion years before photosynthesis produced significant amounts
ofoxygenforaerobicrespiration,manyspeciesofbothBacteriaandArchaeaareanaerobicandtheirmetabolic
activities are important in the carbon and nitrogen cycles discussed below.
The Ways in Which Prokaryotes Obtain Carbon
Prokaryotes not only can use different sources of energy, but also different sources of carbon compounds.
Autotrophic prokaryotes synthesize organic molecules from carbon dioxide. In contrast, heterotrophic
prokaryotesobtaincarbonfromorganiccompounds.Tomakethepicturemorecomplex,thetermsthatdescribe
howprokaryotesobtainenergyandcarboncanbecombined.Thus,photoautotrophsuseenergyfromsunlight,
and carbon from carbon dioxide and water, whereas chemoheterotrophs obtain both energy and carbon from
an organic chemical source. Chemolithoautotrophs obtain their energy from inorganic compounds, and they
buildtheircomplexmoleculesfromcarbondioxide.Finally,prokaryotesthatgettheirenergyfromlight,buttheir
carbonfromorganiccompounds,arephotoheterotrophs.Thetablebelow(Table22.3)summarizescarbonand
PAGE: 617
606 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
energy sources in prokaryotes.
Carbon and Energy Sources in Prokaryotes
Energy Sources Carbon Sources
Light Chemicals Carbon dioxide Organic compounds
Phototrophs Chemotrophs Autotrophs Heterotrophs
Organic chemicals Inorganic chemicals
Chemo-organotrophs Chemolithotrophs
Table 22.3
Role of Prokaryotes in Ecosystems
Prokaryotes are ubiquitous: There is no niche or ecosystem in which they are not present. Prokaryotes play
many roles in the environments they occupy. The roles they play in the carbon and nitrogen cycles are vital
to life on Earth. In addition, the current scientific consensus suggests that metabolically interactive prokaryotic
communities may have been the basis for the emergence of eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotes and the Carbon Cycle
Carbonisoneofthemostimportantmacronutrients,andprokaryotesplayanimportantroleinthecarboncycle
(Figure 22.18). The carbon cycle traces the movement of carbon from inorganic to organic compounds and
back again. Carbon is cycled through Earth’s major reservoirs: land, the atmosphere, aquatic environments,
sediments and rocks, and biomass. In a way, the carbon cycle echoes the role of the “four elements” first
proposedbytheancientGreekphilosopher,Empedocles:fire,water,earth,andair.Carbondioxideisremoved
from the atmosphere by land plants and marine prokaryotes, and is returned to the atmosphere via the
respiration of chemoorganotrophic organisms, including prokaryotes, fungi, and animals. Although the largest
carbon reservoir in terrestrial ecosystems is in rocks and sediments, that carbon is not readily available.
Participantsinthecarboncycleareroughlydividedamongproducers,consumers,anddecomposersoforganic
carbon compounds. The primary producers of organic carbon compounds from CO2 are land plants and
photosynthetic bacteria. A large amount of available carbon is found in living land plants. A related source of
carbon compounds is humus, which is a mixture of organic materials from dead plants and prokaryotes that
have resisted decomposition. (The term "humus," by the way, is the root of the word "human.") Consumers
such as animals and other heterotrophs use organic compounds generated by producers and release carbon
dioxidetotheatmosphere.Otherbacteriaandfungi,collectivelycalleddecomposers,carryoutthebreakdown
(decomposition)ofplantsandanimalsandtheirorganiccompounds.Mostcarbondioxideintheatmosphereis
derived from the respiration of microorganisms that decompose dead animals, plants, and humus.
Inaqueousenvironmentsandtheiranoxicsediments,thereisanothercarboncycletakingplace.Inthiscase,the
cycleisbasedonone-carboncompounds.Inanoxicsediments,prokaryotes,mostlyarchaea,producemethane
(CH4).Thismethanemovesintothezoneabovethesediment,whichisricherinoxygenandsupportsbacteria
calledmethane oxidizersthat oxidize methane to carbon dioxide, which then returns to the atmosphere.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 618
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 607
Figure 22.18 The carbon cycle. Prokaryotes play a significant role in continuously moving carbon through the
biosphere. (credit: modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS)
Prokaryotes and the Nitrogen Cycle
Nitrogen is a very important element for life because it is a major constituent of proteins and nucleic acids.
It is a macronutrient, and in nature, it is recycled from organic compounds to ammonia, ammonium ions,
nitrate, nitrite, and nitrogen gas by many processes, many of which are carried out only by prokaryotes. As
illustrated in Figure 22.19, prokaryotes are key to the nitrogen cycle. The largest pool of nitrogen available in
the terrestrial ecosystem is gaseous nitrogen (N2) from the air, but this nitrogen is not usable by plants, which
are primary producers. Gaseous nitrogen is transformed, or “fixed” into more readily available forms, such as
ammonia (NH3), through the process of nitrogen fixation. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria include Azotobacter in soil
andtheubiquitousphotosyntheticcyanobacteria.Somenitrogenfixingbacteria,likeRhizobium,liveinsymbiotic
relationships in the roots of legumes. Another source of ammonia is ammonification, the process by which
ammonia is released during the decomposition of nitrogen-containing organic compounds. The ammonium ion
isprogressivelyoxidizedbydifferentspeciesofbacteriainaprocesscallednitrification.Thenitrificationprocess
-
beginswiththeconversionofammoniumtonitrite(NO2),andcontinueswiththeconversionofnitritetonitrate.
Nitrification in soils is carried out by bacteria belonging to the genera Nitrosomas, Nitrobacter, and Nitrospira.
+ -
Mostnitrogeninsoilisintheformofammonium(NH4 )ornitrate(NO3).Ammoniaandnitratecanbeusedby
plants or converted to other forms.
Ammoniareleasedintotheatmosphere,however,representsonly15percentofthetotalnitrogenreleased;the
rest is as N2 and N2O (nitrous oxide). Ammonia is catabolized anaerobically by some prokaryotes, yielding N2
as the final product. Denitrifying bacteria reverse the process of nitrification, reducing the nitrate from soils to
gaseous compounds such as N2O, NO, and N2.
PAGE: 619
608 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure 22.19 The nitrogen cycle. Prokaryotes play a key role in the nitrogen cycle. (credit: Environmental
Protection Agency)
Which of the following statements about the nitrogen cycle is false?
a. Nitrogen-fixing bacteria exist on the root nodules of legumes and in the soil.
-
b. Denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates (NO3) into nitrogen gas (N2).
+
c. Ammonificationistheprocessbywhichammoniumion(NH4 )isreleasedfromdecomposingorganic
compounds.
- +
d. Nitrification is the process by which nitrites (NO2) are converted to ammonium ion (NH4 ).
22.4 | Bacterial Diseases in Humans
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify bacterial diseases that caused historically important plagues and epidemics
• Describe the link between biofilms and foodborne diseases
• Explain how overuse of antibiotics may be creating “super bugs”
• Explain the importance of MRSA with respect to the problems of antibiotic resistance
To a prokaryote, humans may be just another housing opportunity. Unfortunately, the tenancy of some species
canhaveharmfuleffectsandcausedisease.Bacteriaorotherinfectiousagentsthatcauseharmtotheirhuman
hosts are called pathogens. Devastating pathogen-borne diseases and plagues, both viral and bacterial in
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 620
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 609
nature,haveaffectedhumansandtheirancestorsformillionsofyears.Thetruecauseofthesediseaseswasnot
understood untilmodernscientific thought developed, andmanypeoplethought that diseaseswerea“spiritual
punishment.” Only within the past several centuries have people understood that staying away from afflicted
persons,disposingofthecorpsesandpersonalbelongingsofvictimsofillness,andsanitationpracticesreduced
their own chances of getting sick.
Epidemiologistsstudyhowdiseasesaretransmittedandhowtheyaffectapopulation.Often,theymustfollowing
thecourseofanepidemic—adiseasethatoccursinanunusuallyhighnumberofindividualsinapopulationat
thesametime.Incontrast,apandemicisawidespread,andusuallyworldwide,epidemic.Anendemicdisease
is a disease that is always present, usually at low incidence, in a population.
Long History of Bacterial Disease
Therearerecordsaboutinfectiousdiseasesasfarbackas3000B.C.Anumberofsignificantpandemicscaused
bybacteriahavebeendocumentedoverseveralhundredyears.Someofthemostmemorablepandemicsledto
the decline of cities and entire nations.
st
Inthe21 century,infectiousdiseasesremainamongtheleadingcausesofdeathworldwide,despiteadvances
madeinmedicalresearchandtreatmentsinrecentdecades.Adiseasespreadswhenthepathogenthatcauses
it is passed from one person to another. For a pathogen to cause disease, it must be able to reproduce in the
host’s body and damage the host in some way.
The Plague of Athens
In 430 B.C., the Plague of Athens killed one-quarter of the Athenian troops who were fighting in the great
Peloponnesian War and weakened Athens’s dominance and power. The plague impacted people living in
overcrowded Athens as well as troops aboard ships that had to return to Athens. The source of the plague
may have been identified recently when researchers from the University of Athens were able to use DNA from
teethrecoveredfromamassgrave.Thescientistsidentifiednucleotidesequencesfromapathogenicbacterium,
[3]
SalmonellaentericaserovarTyphi(Figure22.20),whichcausestyphoidfever. Thisdiseaseiscommonlyseen
in overcrowded areas and has caused epidemics throughout recorded history.
3. Papagrigorakis MJ, Synodinos PN, and Yapijakis C. Ancient typhoid epidemic reveals possible ancestral strain ofSalmonella enterica
serovar Typhi.Infect Genet Evol7 (2007): 126–7, Epub 2006 Jun.
PAGE: 621
610 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure 22.20 Salmonella enterica. Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi, the causative agent of Typhoid fever, is a
Gram-negative,rod-shapedgammaproteobacterium.Typhoidfever,whichisspreadthroughfeces,causesintestinal
hemorrhage,highfever,delirium,anddehydration.Today,between16and33millioncasesofthisre-emergingdisease
occurannually,resultinginover200,000deaths.Carriersofthediseasecanbeasymptomatic.Inafamouscaseinthe
early1900s,acooknamedMaryMallon(“TyphoidMary”)unknowinglyspreadthediseasetooverfiftypeople,threeof
whom died. Other serotypes ofSalmonellacause food poisoning. (credit: modification of work by NCI, CDC)
Bubonic Plagues
From541to750,thePlagueofJustinian,anoutbreakofwhatwaslikelybubonicplague,eliminatedone-quarter
toone-halfofthehumanpopulationintheeasternMediterraneanregion.ThepopulationinEuropedroppedby
50 percent during this outbreak. Astoundingly, bubonic plague would strike Europe more than once!
Bubonic plague is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. One of the most devastating pandemics attributed
to bubonic plague was the Black Death (1346 to 1361). It is thought to have originated in China and spread
along the Silk Road, a network of land and sea trade routes, to the Mediterranean region and Europe, carried
by fleas living on black rats that were always present on ships. The Black Death was probably named for the
tissuenecrosis(Figure22.21c)thatcanbeoneofthesymptoms.The"buboes"ofbubonicplaguewerepainfully
swollen areas of lymphatic tissue. A pneumonic form of the plague, spread by the coughing and sneezing of
infectedindividuals,spreadsdirectlyfromhumantohumanandcancausedeathwithinaweek.Thepneumonic
form was responsible for the rapid spread of the Black Death in Europe. The Black Death reduced the world’s
population from an estimated 450 million to about 350 to 375 million. Bubonic plague struck London yet again
inthemid-1600s(Figure22.21).Inmoderntimes,approximately1,000to3,000casesofplagueariseglobally
each year, and a “sylvatic” form of plague, carried by fleas living on rodents such as prairie dogs and black
footedferrets,infects10to20peopleannuallyintheAmericanSouthwest.Althoughcontractingbubonicplague
before antibiotics meant almost certain death, the bacterium responds to several types of modern antibiotics,
and mortality rates from plague are now very low.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 622
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 611
Figure 22.21 The Black Death. The (a) Great Plague of London killed an estimated 200,000 people, or about 20
percentofthecity’spopulation.Thecausativeagent,the(b)bacteriumYersiniapestis,isaGram-negative,rod-shaped
bacteriumfromtheclassGammaproteobacteria.Thediseaseistransmittedthroughthebiteofaninfectedflea,which
is carried on a rodent. Symptoms include swollen lymph nodes, fever, seizure, vomiting of blood, and (c) gangrene.
(credit b: Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell; credit c: Textbook of Military
Medicine, Washington, D.C., U.S. Dept. of the Army, Office of the Surgeon General, Borden Institute)
Watch a video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/black_death) on the modern understanding of the Black
th
Death—bubonic plague in Europe during the 14 century.
Migration of Diseases to New Populations
One of the negative consequences of human exploration was the accidental “biological warfare” that resulted
fromthetransportofapathogenintoapopulationthathadnotpreviouslybeenexposedtoit.Overthecenturies,
Europeanstendedtodevelopgeneticimmunitytoendemicinfectiousdiseases,butwhenEuropeanconquerors
reachedthewesternhemisphere,theybroughtwiththemdisease-causingbacteriaandviruses,whichtriggered
epidemics that completely devastated many diverse populations of Native Americans, who had no natural
resistance to many European diseases. It has been estimated that up to 90 percent of Native Americans
died from infectious diseases after the arrival of Europeans, making conquest of the New World a foregone
conclusion.
Emerging and Re-emerging Diseases
The distribution of a particular disease is dynamic. Changes in the environment, the pathogen, or the host
populationcandramaticallyimpactthespreadofadisease.AccordingtotheWorldHealthOrganization(WHO),
anemergingdisease(Figure22.22)isonethathasappearedinapopulationforthefirsttime,orthatmayhave
existed previously but is rapidly increasing in incidence or geographic range. This definition also includes re-
emergingdiseasesthatwerepreviouslyundercontrol.Approximately75percentofrecentlyemerginginfectious
diseasesaffectinghumansarezoonoticdiseases.Zoonosesarediseasesthatprimarilyinfectanimalsbutcan
betransmittedtohumans;someareofviraloriginandsomeareofbacterialorigin.Brucellosisisanexampleof
aprokaryoticzoonosisthatisre-emerginginsomeregions,andnecrotizingfasciitis(commonlyknownasflesh-
eating bacteria) has been increasing in virulence for the last 80 years for unknown reasons.
PAGE: 623
612 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Figure 22.22 Emerging diseases. The map shows regions where bacterial diseases are emerging or re-emerging.
(credit: modification of work by NIH)
Someofthepresentemergingdiseasesarenotactuallynew,butarediseasesthatwerecatastrophicinthepast
(Figure 22.23). They devastated populations and became dormant for a while, just to come back, sometimes
more virulent than before, as was the case with bubonic plague. Other diseases, like tuberculosis, were never
eradicatedbutwereundercontrolinsomeregionsoftheworlduntilcomingback,mostlyinurbancenterswith
highconcentrationsofimmunocompromisedpeople.WHOhasidentifiedcertaindiseaseswhoseworldwidere-
emergence should be monitored. Among these are three viral diseases (dengue fever, yellow fever, and zika),
andthreebacterialdiseases(diphtheria,cholera,andbubonicplague).Thewaragainstinfectiousdiseaseshas
no foreseeable end.
Figure 22.23 Lyme Disease. Lyme disease often, but not always, results in (a) a characteristic bullseye rash. The
disease is caused by a (b) Gram-negative spirochete bacterium of the genus Borrelia. The bacteria (c) infect ticks,
whichinturninfectmice.Deerarethepreferredsecondaryhost,buttheticksalsomayfeedonhumans.Untreated,
the disease causes chronic disorders in the nervous system, eyes, joints, and heart. The disease is named after
Lyme, Connecticut, where an outbreak occurred in 1995 and has subsequently spread. The disease is not new,
however. Genetic evidence suggests that Ötzi the Iceman, a 5,300-year-old mummy found in the Alps, was infected
withBorrelia. (credit a: James Gathany, CDC; credit b: CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Foodborne Diseases
Prokaryotes are everywhere: They readily colonize the surface of any type of material, and food is not an
exception. Most of the time, prokaryotes colonize food and food-processing equipment in the form of a biofilm,
as we have discussed earlier. Outbreaks of bacterial infection related to food consumption are common.
A foodborne disease (commonly called “food poisoning”) is an illness resulting from the consumption the
pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or other parasites that contaminate food. Although the United States has one of
thesafestfoodsuppliesintheworld,theU.S.CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention(CDC)hasreported
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 624
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 613
that “76 million people get sick, more than 300,000 are hospitalized, and 5,000 Americans die each year from
foodborne illness.”
The characteristics of foodborne illnesses have changed over time. In the past, it was relatively common to
hear about sporadic cases of botulism, the potentially fatal disease produced by a toxin from the anaerobic
bacteriumClostridiumbotulinum.Someofthemostcommonsourcesforthisbacteriumwerenon-acidiccanned
foods, homemade pickles, and processed meat and sausages. The can, jar, or package created a suitable
anaerobicenvironmentwhereClostridiumcouldgrow.Propersterilizationandcanningprocedureshavereduced
the incidence of this disease.
While people may tend to think of foodborne illnesses as associated with animal-based foods, most cases are
now linked to produce. There have been serious, produce-related outbreaks associated with raw spinach in
the United States and with vegetable sprouts in Germany, and these types of outbreaks have become more
common. The raw spinach outbreak in 2006 was produced by the bacterium E. coli serotype O157:H7. A
serotypeisastrainofbacteriathatcarriesasetofsimilarantigensonitscellsurface,andthereareoftenmany
different serotypes of a bacterial species. Most E. coli are not particularly dangerous to humans, but serotype
O157:H7 can cause bloody diarrhea and is potentially fatal.
Alltypesoffoodcanpotentiallybecontaminatedwithbacteria.RecentoutbreaksofSalmonellareportedbythe
CDC occurred in foods as diverse as peanut butter, alfalfa sprouts, and eggs. A deadly outbreak in Germany
in 2010 was caused by E. coli contamination of vegetable sprouts (Figure 22.24). The strain that caused the
outbreakwasfoundtobeanewserotypenotpreviouslyinvolvedinotheroutbreaks,whichindicatesthatE.coli
is continuously evolving. Outbreaks of listeriosis, due to contamination of meats, raw cheeses, and frozen or
fresh vegetables withListeria monocytogenes, are becoming more frequent.
Figure 22.24 Foodborne pathogens. (a) Vegetable sprouts grown at an organic farm were the cause of an (b) E.
colioutbreakthat killed32peopleandsickened3,800inGermanyin2011.Thestrainresponsible, E. coliO104:H4,
producesShigatoxin,asubstancethatinhibitsproteinsynthesisinthehostcell.Thetoxin(c)destroysredbloodcells
resultinginbloodydiarrhea.Deformedredbloodcellsclogthecapillariesofthekidney,whichcanleadtokidneyfailure,
ashappenedto845patientsinthe2011outbreak.Kidneyfailureisusuallyreversible,butsomepatientsexperience
kidney problems years later. (credit c: NIDDK, NIH)
Biofilms and Disease
Recall that biofilms are microbial communities that are very difficult to destroy. They are responsible for
diseases such as Legionnaires’ disease, otitis media (ear infections), and various infections in patients with
cysticfibrosis.Theyproducedentalplaqueandcolonizecatheters,prostheses,transcutaneousandorthopedic
devices,contactlenses,andinternaldevicessuchaspacemakers.Theyalsoforminopenwoundsandburned
tissue. In healthcare environments, biofilms grow on hemodialysis machines, mechanical ventilators, shunts,
andothermedicalequipment.Infact,65percentofallinfectionsacquiredinthehospital(nosocomialinfections)
are attributed to biofilms. Biofilms are also related to diseases contracted from food because they colonize the
surfaces of vegetable leaves and meat, as well as food-processing equipment that isn’t adequately cleaned.
Biofilminfectionsdevelopgraduallyandmaynotcauseimmediatesymptoms.Theyarerarelyresolvedbyhost
defense mechanisms. Once an infection by a biofilm is established, it is very difficult to eradicate, because
biofilmstendtoberesistanttomostmethodsusedtocontrolmicrobialgrowth,includingantibiotics.Thematrix
thatattachesthecellstoasubstrateandtootheranotherprotectsthecellsfromantibioticsordrugs.Inaddition,
sincebiofilmsgrowslowly,theyarelessresponsivetoagentsthatinterferewithcellgrowth.Ithasbeenreported
that biofilms can resist up to 1,000 times the antibiotic concentrations used to kill the same bacteria when they
arefree-livingorplanktonic.Anantibioticdosethatlargewouldharmthepatient;therefore,scientistsareworking
on new ways to get rid of biofilms.
PAGE: 625
614 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Antibiotics: Are We Facing a Crisis?
The word antibiotic comes from the Greek anti meaning “against” and bios meaning “life.” An antibiotic is
a chemical, produced either by microbes or synthetically, that is hostile to or prevents the growth of other
organisms.Today’smediaoftenaddressconcernsaboutanantibioticcrisis.Aretheantibioticsthateasilytreated
bacterial infections in the past becoming obsolete? Are there new “superbugs”—bacteria that have evolved to
become more resistant to our arsenal of antibiotics? Is this the beginning of the end of antibiotics? All these
questions challenge the healthcare community.
One of the main causes of antibiotic resistance in bacteria is overexposure to antibiotics. The imprudent and
excessiveuseofantibioticshasresultedinthenaturalselectionofresistantformsofbacteria.Theantibiotickills
most of the infecting bacteria, and therefore only the resistant forms remain. These resistant forms reproduce,
resulting in an increase in the proportion of resistant forms over non-resistant ones. In addition to transmission
ofresistancegenestoprogeny,lateraltransferofresistancegenesonplasmidscanrapidlyspreadthesegenes
through a bacterial population. A major misuse of antibiotics is in patients with viral infections like colds or the
flu, against which antibiotics are useless. Another problem is the excessive use of antibiotics in livestock. The
routineuseofantibioticsinanimalfeedpromotesbacterialresistanceaswell.IntheUnitedStates,70percentof
theantibioticsproducedarefedtoanimals.Theseantibioticsaregiventolivestockinlowdoses,whichmaximize
the probability of resistance developing, and these resistant bacteria are readily transferred to humans.
Watch a recent news report (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/antibiotics) on the problem of routine antibiotic
administration to livestock and antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
One of the Superbugs: MRSA
The imprudent use of antibiotics has paved the way for the expansion of resistant bacterial populations. For
example, Staphylococcus aureus, often called “staph,” is a common bacterium that can live in the human
body and is usually easily treated with antibiotics. However, a very dangerous strain, methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) has made the news over the past few years (Figure 22.25). This strain is
resistant to many commonly used antibiotics, including methicillin, amoxicillin, penicillin, and oxacillin. MRSA
can cause infections of the skin, but it can also infect the bloodstream, lungs, urinary tract, or sites of injury.
While MRSA infections are common among people in healthcare facilities, they have also appeared in healthy
people who haven’t been hospitalized, but who live or work in tight populations (like military personnel and
prisoners). Researchers have expressed concern about the way this latter source of MRSA targets a much
younger population than those residing in care facilities. The Journal of the American Medical Association
reportedthat,amongMRSA-afflictedpersonsinhealthcarefacilities,theaverageageis68,whereaspeoplewith
“community-associated MRSA” (CA-MRSA) have an average age of 23.[4]
4. Naimi, TS, LeDell, KH, Como-Sabetti, K, et al. Comparison of community- and health care-associated methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureusinfection.JAMA290 (2003): 2976–84, doi: 10.1001/jama.290.22.2976.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 626
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 615
Figure22.25MRSA.Thisscanningelectronmicrographshowsmethicillin-resistantStaphylococcusaureusbacteria,
commonlyknownasMRSA.S.aureusisnotalwayspathogenic,butcancausediseasessuchasfoodpoisoningand
skin and respiratory infections. (credit: modification of work by Janice Haney Carr; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
In summary, the medical community is facing an antibiotic crisis. Some scientists believe that after years of
beingprotectedfrombacterialinfectionsbyantibiotics,wemaybereturningtoatimeinwhichasimplebacterial
infectioncouldagaindevastatethehumanpopulation.Researchersaredevelopingnewantibiotics,butittakes
many years of research and clinical trials, plus financial investments in the millions of dollars, to generate an
effective and approved drug.
PAGE: 627
616 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Epidemiologist
Epidemiology is the study of the occurrence, distribution, and determinants of health and disease in a
population.Itis,therefore,partofpublichealth.Anepidemiologiststudiesthefrequencyanddistributionof
diseases within human populations and environments.
Epidemiologists collect data about a particular disease and track its spread to identify the original mode
of transmission. They sometimes work in close collaboration with historians to try to understand the way
a disease evolved geographically and over time, tracking the natural history of pathogens. They gather
information from clinical records, patient interviews, surveillance, and any other available means. That
information is used to develop strategies, such as vaccinations (Figure 22.26), and design public health
policies to reduce the incidence of a disease or to prevent its spread. Epidemiologists also conduct rapid
investigations in case of an outbreak to recommend immediate measures to control it.
An epidemiologist has a bachelor’s degree, plus a master’s degree in public health (MPH). Many
epidemiologists are also physicians (and have an M.D. or D.O degree), or they have a Ph.D. in an
associated field, such as biology or microbiology.
Figure 22.26 Vaccination. Vaccinations can slow the spread of communicable diseases. (credit: modification of
work by Daniel Paquet)
22.5 | Beneficial Prokaryotes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the need for nitrogen fixation and how it is accomplished
• Describe the beneficial effects of bacteria that colonize our skin and digestive tracts
• Identify prokaryotes used during the processing of food
• Describe the use of prokaryotes in bioremediation
Fortunately,onlyafewspeciesofprokaryotesarepathogenic!Prokaryotesalsointeractwithhumansandother
organismsinanumberofwaysthatarebeneficial.Forexample,prokaryotesaremajorparticipantsinthecarbon
and nitrogen cycles. They produce or process nutrients in the digestive tracts of humans and other animals.
Prokaryotesareusedintheproductionofsomehumanfoods,andalsohavebeenrecruitedforthedegradation
of hazardous materials. In fact, our life would not be possible without prokaryotes!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 628
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 617
Cooperation between Bacteria and Eukaryotes: Nitrogen Fixation
Nitrogen is a very important element to living things, because it is part of nucleotides and amino acids that are
the building blocks of nucleic acids and proteins, respectively. Nitrogen is usually the most limiting element in
terrestrialecosystems,withatmosphericnitrogen,N2,providingthelargestpoolofavailablenitrogen.However,
eukaryotes cannot use atmospheric, gaseous nitrogen to synthesize macromolecules. Fortunately, nitrogen
can be “fixed,” meaning it is converted into a more accessible form—ammonia (NH3)—either biologically or
abiotically.
Abiotic nitrogen fixation occurs as a result of physical processes such as lightning or by industrial processes.
Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is exclusively carried out by prokaryotes: soil bacteria, cyanobacteria,
and Frankia spp. (filamentous bacteria interacting with actinorhizal plants such as alder, bayberry, and sweet
fern).Afterphotosynthesis,BNFisthemostimportantbiologicalprocessonEarth.Theoverallnitrogenfixation
equation below represents a series ofredox reactions(Pi stands for inorganic phosphate).
N + 16ATP + 8e− + 8H + → 2NH + 16ADP + 16Pi + H
2 3 2
ThetotalfixednitrogenthroughBNFisabout100to180millionmetrictonsperyear,whichcontributesabout65
percent of the nitrogen used in agriculture.
Cyanobacteria are the most important nitrogen fixers in aquatic environments. In soil, members of the genera
Clostridium and Azotobacter are examples of free-living, nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Other bacteria live
symbiotically with legume plants, providing the most important source of fixed nitrogen. Symbionts may fix
more nitrogen in soils than free-living organisms by a factor of 10. Soil bacteria, collectively called rhizobia,
are able to symbiotically interact with legumes to form nodules, specialized structures where nitrogen fixation
occurs (Figure 22.27). Nitrogenase, the enzyme that fixes nitrogen, is inactivated by oxygen, so the nodule
provides an oxygen-free area for nitrogen fixation to take place. The oxygen is sequestered by a form of
planthemoglobincalledleghemoglobin,whichprotectsthenitrogenase,butreleasesenoughoxygentosupport
respiratory activity.
Symbioticnitrogenfixationprovidesanaturalandinexpensiveplantfertilizer:Itreducesatmosphericnitrogen
to ammonia, which is easily usable by plants. The use oflegumes is an excellent alternative tochemical
fertilizationandisofspecialinteresttosustainableagriculture,whichseekstominimizetheuseofchemicalsand
conservenaturalresources.Throughsymbioticnitrogenfixation,theplantbenefitsfromusinganendlesssource
of nitrogen: the atmosphere. The bacteria benefit from using photosynthates (carbohydrates produced during
photosynthesis) from the plant and having a protected niche. In addition, the soil benefits from being naturally
fertilized. Therefore, the use of rhizobia as biofertilizers is a sustainable practice.
Whyarelegumessoimportant?Some,likesoybeans,arekeysourcesofagriculturalprotein.Someofthemost
importantlegumesconsumedbyhumansaresoybeans,peanuts,peas,chickpeas,andbeans.Otherlegumes,
such as alfalfa, are used to feed cattle.
Figure 22.27 Nitrogen-fixation nodules on soybean roots. Soybean (Glycine max) is a legume that interacts
symbiotically with the soil bacterium Bradyrhizobium japonicum to form specialized structures on the roots called
noduleswhere nitrogen fixation occurs. (credit: USDA)
PAGE: 629
618 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Microbes on the Human Body
Thecommensalbacteriathatinhabitourskinandgastrointestinaltractdoahostofgoodthingsforus.They
protectusfrompathogens,helpusdigestourfood,andproducesomeofourvitaminsandothernutrients.
These activities have been known for a long time. More recently, scientists have gathered evidence that
thesebacteriamayalsohelpregulateourmoods,influenceouractivitylevels,andevenhelpcontrolweight
by affecting our food choices and absorption patterns. The Human Microbiome Project has begun the
process of cataloging our normal bacteria (and archaea) so we can better understand these functions.
A particularly fascinating example of our normal flora relates to our digestive systems. People who take
high doses of antibiotics tend to lose many of their normal gut bacteria, allowing a naturally antibiotic-
resistant species called Clostridium difficile to overgrow and cause severe gastric problems, especially
chronicdiarrhea(Figure22.28).Obviously,tryingtotreatthisproblemwithantibioticsonlymakesitworse.
However, it has been successfully treated by giving the patients fecal transplants from healthy donors to
reestablishthenormalintestinalmicrobialcommunity.Clinicaltrialsareunderwaytoensurethesafetyand
effectiveness of this technique.
Figure22.28Clostridiumdifficile.ThisscanningelectronmicrographshowsClostridiumdifficile,aGram-positive,
rod-shaped bacterium that causes severe diarrhea. Infection commonly occurs after the normal gut fauna are
eradicatedbyantibiotics,andinthehospitalcanbedeadlytoseriouslyillpatients.(credit:modificationofworkby
CDC, HHS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Scientists are also discovering that the absence of certain key microbes from our intestinal tract may set
us up for a variety of problems. This seems to be particularly true regarding the appropriate functioning of
the immune system. There are intriguing findings that suggest that the absence of these microbes is an
importantcontributortothedevelopmentofallergiesandsomeautoimmunedisorders.Researchiscurrently
underway to test whether adding certain microbes to our internal ecosystem may help in the treatment of
these problems, as well as in treating some forms of autism.
Early Biotechnology: Cheese, Bread, Wine, Beer, and Yogurt
According to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity, biotechnology is “any technological
application that uses biological systems, living organisms, or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products
[5]
or processes for specific use." The concept of “specific use” involves some sort of commercial application.
Genetic engineering, artificial selection, antibiotic production, and cell culture are current topics of study in
biotechnologyandwillbedescribedinlaterchapters.However,humanswereusingprokaryotesbeforetheterm
biotechnology was even coined. Some of the products of this early biotechnology are as familiar as cheese,
bread,wine,beer,andyogurt,whichemploybothbacteriaandothermicrobes,suchasyeast,afungus(Figure
22.29).
5. http://www.cbd.int/convention/articles/?a=cbd-02 (http://openstax.org/l/UN_convention), United Nations Convention on Biological
Diversity: Article 2: Use of Terms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 630
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 619
Figure 22.29 Some foods produced by microorganisms. Some of the products derived from the use of prokaryotes
in early biotechnology include (a) cheese, (b) wine, (c) beer and bread, and (d) yogurt. (credit bread: modification of
work by F. Rodrigo/Wikimedia Commons; credit wine: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit beer and bread:
modification of work by Kris Miller; credit yogurt: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Cheeseproductionbeganaround4,000to7,000yearsagowhenhumansbegantobreedanimalsandprocess
their milk. Fermentation in this case preserves nutrients: Milk will spoil relatively quickly, but when processed
as cheese, it is more stable. As for beer, the oldest records of brewing are about 6,000 years old and were
an integral part of the Sumerian culture. Evidence indicates that the Sumerians discovered fermentation by
chance.Winehasbeenproducedforabout4,500years,andevidencesuggeststhatculturedmilkproducts,like
yogurt, have existed for at least 4,000 years.
Using Prokaryotes to Clean up Our Planet: Bioremediation
Microbial bioremediation is the use of prokaryotes (or microbial metabolism) to remove pollutants.
Bioremediation has been used to remove agricultural chemicals (e.g., pesticides, fertilizers) that leach from
soil into groundwater and the subsurface. Certain toxic metals and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic
-2 -2 0
compounds,canalsoberemovedfromwaterbybioremediation.ThereductionofSeO4 toSeO3 andtoSe
(metallicselenium)isamethodusedtoremoveseleniumionsfromwater.Mercury(Hg)isanexampleofatoxic
metalthatcanberemovedfromanenvironmentbybioremediation.Asanactiveingredientofsomepesticides,
mercury is used in industry and is also a by-product of certain processes, such as battery production. Methyl
mercury is usually present in very low concentrations in natural environments, but it is highly toxic because it
accumulates in living tissues. Several species of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation of toxic mercury
+2 0
into nontoxic forms. These bacteria, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, can convert Hg into Hg , which is
nontoxic to humans.
One of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the
cleanup of oil spills. The significance of prokaryotes to petroleum bioremediation has been demonstrated in
several oil spills in recent years, such as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska (1989) (Figure 22.30), the Prestige
oilspillinSpain(2002),thespillintotheMediterraneanfromaLebanonpowerplant(2006),andmorerecently,
theBPoilspillintheGulfofMexico(2010).Inthecaseofoilspillsintheocean,ongoingnaturalbioremediation
tendstooccur,sincethereareoil-consumingbacteriaintheoceanpriortothespill.Inadditiontothesenaturally
PAGE: 631
620 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
occurring oil-degrading bacteria, humans select and engineer bacteria that possess the same capability with
increasedefficacyandspectrumofhydrocarboncompoundsthatcanbeprocessed.Bioremediationisenhanced
by the addition of inorganic nutrients that help bacteria to grow.
Somehydrocarbon-degradingbacteriafeedonhydrocarbonsintheoildroplet,breakingdownthehydrocarbons
into smaller subunits. Some species, such as Alcanivorax borkumensis, produce surfactants that solubilize
the oil (making it soluble in water), whereas other bacteria degrade the oil into carbon dioxide. Under ideal
conditions,ithasbeenreportedthatupto80percentofthenonvolatilecomponentsinoilcanbedegradedwithin
one year of the spill. Other oil fractions containing aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chains are more
difficult to remove and remain in the environment for longer periods of time.
Figure22.30Prokaryotesandbioremediation.(a)CleaningupoilaftertheExxonValdezspillinAlaska,workershosed
oil from beaches and then used a floating boom to corral the oil, which was finally skimmed from the water surface.
Somespeciesofbacteria areabletosolubilizeanddegradetheoil.(b)Oneofthemostcatastrophic consequences
of oil spills is the damage to fauna. (credit a: modification of work by NOAA; credit b: modification of work by
GOLUBENKOV, NGO: Saving Taman)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 632
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 621
KEY TERMS
acidophile organism with optimal growth pH of three or below
alkaliphile organism with optimal growth pH of nine or above
ammonification process by which ammonia is released during the decomposition of nitrogen-containing
organic compounds
anaerobic refers to organisms that grow without oxygen
anoxic without oxygen
antibiotic biological substance that, in low concentration, is antagonistic to the growth of prokaryotes
biofilm microbial community that is held together by a gummy-textured matrix
biological nitrogen fixation conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia exclusively carried out by
prokaryotes
bioremediation use of microbial metabolism to remove pollutants
biotechnology anytechnologicalapplicationthatuseslivingorganisms,biologicalsystems,ortheirderivatives
to produce or modify other products
Black Death devastatingpandemicthatisbelievedtohavebeenanoutbreakofbubonicplaguecausedbythe
bacteriumYersinia pestis
botulism disease produced by the toxin of the anaerobic bacteriumClostridium botulinum
CA-MRSA MRSA acquired in the community rather than in a hospital
capsule external structure that enables a prokaryote to attach to surfaces and protects it from dehydration
chemotroph organism that obtains energy from chemical compounds
conjugation process by which prokaryotes move DNA from one individual to another using a pilus
cyanobacteria bacteria that evolved from early phototrophs and oxygenated the atmosphere; also known as
blue-green algae
decomposer organism that carries out the decomposition of dead organisms
denitrification transformation of nitrate from soil to gaseous nitrogen compounds such as N2O, NO, and N2
emerging disease disease making an initial appearance in a population or that is increasing in incidence or
geographic range
endemic disease disease that is constantly present, usually at low incidence, in a population
epidemic disease that occurs in an unusually high number of individuals in a population at the same time
extremophile organism that grows under extreme or harsh conditions
foodborne disease any illness resulting from the consumption of contaminated food, or of the pathogenic
bacteria, viruses, or other parasites that contaminate food
Gram negative bacterium whose cell wall contains little peptidoglycan but has an outer membrane
Gram positive bacterium that contains mainly peptidoglycan in its cell walls
halophile organism that require a salt concentration of at least 0.2 M
PAGE: 633
622 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
hydrothermal vent fissure in Earth’s surface that releases geothermally heated water
hyperthermophile organism that grows at temperatures between 80–122 °C
microbial mat multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes that may include bacteria and archaea
MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus) very dangerous Staphylococcus aureus strain resistant to
multiple antibiotics
nitrification conversion of ammonium into nitrite and nitrate in soils
nitrogen fixation processbywhichgaseousnitrogenistransformed,or“fixed”intomorereadilyavailableforms
such as ammonia
nodule novel structure on the roots of certain plants (legumes) that results from the symbiotic interaction
between the plant and soil bacteria, and is the site of nitrogen fixation
nutrient essential substances for growth, such as carbon and nitrogen
osmophile organism that grows in a high sugar concentration
pandemic widespread, usually worldwide, epidemic disease
peptidoglycan material composed of polysaccharide chains cross-linked to unusual peptides
phototroph organism that is able to make its own food by converting solar energy to chemical energy
pilus surface appendage of some prokaryotes used for attachment to surfaces including other prokaryotes
pseudopeptidoglycan component of archaea cell walls that is similar to peptidoglycan in morphology but
contains different sugars
psychrophile organism that grows at temperatures of -15 °C or lower
radioresistant organism that grows in high levels of radiation
resuscitation process by which prokaryotes that are in the VBNC state return to viability
S-layer surface-layer protein present on the outside of cell walls of archaea and bacteria
serotype strain of bacterium that carries a set of similar antigens on its cell surface, often many in a bacterial
species
stromatolite layeredsedimentarystructureformedbyprecipitationofmineralsbyprokaryotesinmicrobialmats
teichoic acid polymer associated with the cell wall of Gram-positive bacteria
thermophile organism that lives at temperatures between 60–80 °C
transduction process by which a bacteriophage moves DNA from one prokaryote to another
transformation process by which a prokaryote takes in DNA found in its environment that is shed by other
prokaryotes
viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC) state survival mechanism of bacteria facing environmental stress
conditions
zoonosis disease that primarily infects animals that is transmitted to humans
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 634
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 623
CHAPTER SUMMARY
22.1Prokaryotic Diversity
Prokaryotes existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. Hot springs and hydrothermal
vents may have been the environments in which life began. Microbial mats are thought to represent the earliest
forms of life on Earth. A microbial mat is a multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes that grows at interfaces between
different types of material, mostly on moist surfaces. Fossilized microbial mats are called stromatolites and
consist of laminated organo-sedimentary structures formed by precipitation of minerals by prokaryotes. They
represent the earliest fossil record of life on Earth.
During the first two billion years, the atmosphere was anoxic and only anaerobic organisms were able to live.
Cyanobacteria evolved from early phototrophs and began the oxygenation o the atmosphere. The increase in
oxygen concentration allowed the evolution of other life forms.
Bacteria and archaea grow in virtually every environment. Those that survive under extreme conditions are
called extremophiles (extreme lovers). Some prokaryotes cannot grow in a laboratory setting, but they are not
dead. They are in the viable-but-non-culturable (VBNC) state. The VBNC state occurs when prokaryotes enter
a dormant state in response to environmental stressors. Most prokaryotes are colonial and prefer to live in
communities where interactions take place. A biofilm is a microbial community held together in a gummy-
textured matrix.
22.2Structure of Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Prokaryotes (domains Archaea and Bacteria) are single-celled organisms that lack a nucleus. They have a
single piece of circular DNA in the nucleoid area of the cell. Most prokaryotes have a cell wall that lies outside
the boundary of the plasma membrane. Some prokaryotes may have additional structures such as a capsule,
flagella, and pili. Bacteria and Archaea differ in the lipid composition of their cell membranes and the
characteristics of the cell wall. In archaeal membranes, phytanyl units, rather than fatty acids, are linked to
glycerol. Some archaeal membranes are lipid monolayers instead of bilayers.
The cell wall is located outside the cell membrane and prevents osmotic lysis. The chemical composition of cell
walls varies between species. Bacterial cell walls contain peptidoglycan. Archaean cell walls do not have
peptidoglycan, but they may have pseudopeptidoglycan, polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or protein-based cell
walls. Bacteria can be divided into two major groups: Gram positive and Gram negative, based on the Gram
stain reaction. Gram-positive organisms have a thick peptidoglycan layer fortified with teichoic acids. Gram-
negative organisms have a thin cell wall and an outer envelope containing lipopolysaccharides and
lipoproteins.
Prokaryotes can transfer DNA from one cell to another by three mechanisms: transformation (uptake of
environmental DNA), transduction (transfer of genomic DNA via viruses), and conjugation (transfer of DNA by
direct cell contact).
22.3Prokaryotic Metabolism
As the oldest living inhabitants of Earth, prokaryotes are also the most metabolically diverse; they flourish in
many different environments with various energy and carbon sources, variable temperature, pH, pressure,
oxygen and water availability. Nutrients required in large amounts are called macronutrients, whereas those
required in trace amounts are called micronutrients or trace elements. Macronutrients include C, H, O, N, P, S,
K, Mg, Ca, and Na. In addition to these macronutrients, prokaryotes require various metallic elements for
growth and enzyme function. Prokaryotes use different sources of energy to assemble macromolecules from
smaller molecules. Phototrophs obtain their energy from sunlight, whereas chemotrophs obtain energy from
chemical compounds. Energy-producing pathways may be either aerobic or anaerobic.
Prokaryotes play roles in the carbon and nitrogen cycles. Producers capture carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere and convert it to organic compounds. Consumers (animals and other chemoorganotrophic
organisms) use organic compounds generated by producers and release carbon dioxide into the atmosphere
by respiration. Carbon dioxide is also returned to the atmosphere by the microbial decomposers of dead
organisms. Nitrogen also cycles in and out of living organisms, from organic compounds to ammonia,
ammonium ions, nitrite, nitrate, and nitrogen gas. Prokaryotes are essential for most of these conversions.
Gaseous nitrogen is transformed into ammonia through nitrogen fixation. Ammonia is anaerobically catabolized
by some prokaryotes, yielding N2as the final product. Nitrification is the conversion of ammonium into nitrite.
PAGE: 635
624 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
Nitrification in soils is carried out by bacteria. Denitrification is also performed by bacteria and transforms nitrate
from soils into gaseous nitrogen compounds, such as N2O, NO, and N2.
22.4Bacterial Diseases in Humans
Some prokaryotes are human pathogens. Devastating diseases and plagues have been among us since early
times and remain among the leading causes of death worldwide. Emerging diseases are those rapidly
increasing in incidence or geographic range. They can be new or re-emerging diseases (previously under
control). Many emerging diseases affecting humans originate in animals (zoonoses), such as brucellosis. A
group of re-emerging bacterial diseases recently identified by WHO for monitoring include bubonic plague,
diphtheria, and cholera. Foodborne diseases result from the consumption of food contaminated with food,
pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or parasites.
Some bacterial infections have been associated with biofilms: Legionnaires’ disease, otitis media, and infection
of patients with cystic fibrosis. Biofilms can grow on human tissues, like dental plaque; colonize medical
devices; and cause infection or produce foodborne disease by growing on the surfaces of food and food-
processing equipment. Biofilms are resistant to most of the methods used to control microbial growth. The
excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in a major global problem, since resistant forms of bacteria have been
selected over time. A very dangerous strain, methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA), has wreaked
havoc recently across the world.
22.5Beneficial Prokaryotes
Pathogens are only a small percentage of all prokaryotes. In fact, prokaryotes provide essential services to
humans and other organisms. Nitrogen, which is not usable by eukaryotes in its plentiful atmospheric form, can
be “fixed,” or converted into ammonia (NH3) either biologically or abiotically. Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is
exclusively carried out by prokaryotes, and constitutes the second most important biological process on Earth.
Although some terrestrial nitrogen is fixed by free-living bacteria, most BNF comes from the symbiotic
interaction between soil rhizobia and the roots of legume plants.
Human life is only possible due to the action of microbes, both those in the environment and those species that
call us home. Internally, they help us digest our food, produce vital nutrients for us, protect us from pathogenic
microbes, and help train our immune systems to function properly.
Microbial bioremediation is the use of microbial metabolism to remove pollutants. Bioremediation has been
used to remove agricultural chemicals that leach from soil into groundwater and the subsurface. Toxic metals
and oxides, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed by bioremediation. Probably one
of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the
cleanup of oil spills.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 22.8Compared to free-floating bacteria, 3.Figure 22.19Which of the following statements
bacteria in biofilms often show increased resistance about the nitrogen cycle is false?
to antibiotics and detergents. Why do you think this a. Nitrogen fixing bacteria exist on the root
might be the case? nodules of legumes and in the soil.
-
2.Figure 22.16Which of the following statements is b. Denitrifying bacteria convert nitrates (NO3)
true? into nitrogen gas (N2).
a. Gram-positive bacteria have a single cell c. Ammonification is the process by which
wall anchored to the cell membrane by ammonium ion (NH4 + ) is released from
lipoteichoic acid. decomposing organic compounds.
b. Porins allow entry of substances into both d. Nitrification is the process by which nitrites
Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. -
(NO2) are converted to ammonium ion
c. The cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria is
+
thick, and the cell wall of Gram-positive (NH4 ).
bacteria is thin.
d. Gram-negative bacteria have a cell wall
made of peptidoglycan, whereas Gram-
positive bacteria have a cell wall made of
lipoteichoic acid.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 636
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 625
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The first forms of life on Earth were thought to a. interior to the cell membrane
be_________. b. exterior to the cell membrane
a. single-celled plants c. a part of the cell membrane
b. prokaryotes d. interior or exterior, depending on the
c. insects particular cell
d. large animals such as dinosaurs
12.Organisms most likely to be found in extreme
5.Microbial mats __________. environments are ________.
a. are the earliest forms of life on Earth a. fungi
b. obtained their energy and food from b. bacteria
hydrothermal vents c. viruses
c. are multi-layered sheets of prokaryotes d. archaea
including mostly bacteria but also archaea
13.Prokaryotes stain as Gram-positive or Gram-
d. all of the above
negative because of differences in the cell _______.
6.The first organisms that oxygenated the
atmosphere were a. wall
a. cyanobacteria b. cytoplasm
b. phototrophic organisms c. nucleus
c. anaerobic organisms d. chromosome
d. all of the above
14.Pseudopeptidoglycan is a characteristic of the
7.Halophiles are organisms that require________. walls of ________.
a. eukaryotic cells
a. a salt concentration of at least 0.2 M b. bacterial prokaryotic cells
b. high sugar concentration c. archaean prokaryotic cells
c. the addition of halogens d. bacterial and archaean prokaryotic cells
d. all of the above
15.The lipopolysaccharide layer (LPS) is a
8.Many of the first prokaryotes to be cultured in a characteristic of the wall of ________.
scientific lab were human or animal pathogens. Why a. archaean cells
would these species be more readily cultured than b. Gram-negative bacteria
non-pathogenic prokaryotes? c. bacterial prokaryotic cells
a. Pathogenic prokaryotes are hardier than d. eukaryotic cells
non-pathogenic prokaryotes.
16.Which of the following elements isnota
b. Non-pathogenic prokaryotes require more
micronutrient?
supplements in their growth media.
a. boron
c. Most of the necessary culture conditions
b. calcium
could be inferred for pathogenic
c. chromium
prokaryotes.
d. manganese
d. Pathogenic bacteria can grow as free
bacteria, but non-pathogenic bacteria only 17.Prokaryotes that obtain their energy from
grow as parts of large colonies. chemical compounds are called _____.
a. phototrophs
9.The presence of a membrane-enclosed nucleus is
b. auxotrophs
a characteristic of ________.
c. chemotrophs
a. prokaryotic cells
d. lithotrophs
b. eukaryotic cells
c. all cells 18.Ammonification is the process by which _____.
d. viruses
a. ammonia is released during the
10.Which of the following consist of prokaryotic
decomposition of nitrogen-containing
cells?
organic compounds
a. bacteria and fungi
b. ammonium is converted to nitrite and nitrate
b. archaea and fungi
in soils
c. protists and animals
c. nitrate from soil is transformed to gaseous
d. bacteria and archaea
nitrogen compounds such as NO, N2O, and
11.The cell wall is ________. N2
d. gaseous nitrogen is fixed to yield ammonia
PAGE: 637
626 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
19.Plants use carbon dioxide from the air and are a. Salmonella enterica
therefore called _____. b. Borrelia burgdorferi
a. consumers c. Clostridium botulinum
b. producers d. Yersinia pestis
c. decomposer
25.MRSA has emerged as a serious infectious
d. carbon fixers
disease, with the first case of methicillin-resistant S.
20.Cyanobacteria harness energy from the sun aureusbeing detected in 1961. Why are medical
through photosynthesis, and oxidize water to provide professionals so concerned when antibiotics exist
electrons for energy generation. Thus, we classify that can kill MRSA?
cyanobacteria as _________. a. MRSA can transfer methicillin-resistance to
a. photolithotrophs other bacteria.
b. photoautotrophs b. Patients are not treated with correct
c. chemolithoautotrophs antibiotics rapidly enough to prevent serious
d. chemo-organotrophs illness.
c. MRSA could acquire additional antibiotic
21.A disease that is constantly present in a
resistance genes from other bacteria to
population is called _____.
become a “super bug.”
a. pandemic
d. All of the above.
b. epidemic
c. endemic 26.Which of these occurs through symbiotic nitrogen
d. re-emerging fixation?
a. The plant benefits from using an endless
22.Which of the statements about biofilms is
source of nitrogen.
incorrect?
b. The soil benefits from being naturally
a. Biofilms are considered responsible for
fertilized.
diseases such as cystic fibrosis.
c. Bacteria benefit from using photosynthates
b. Biofilms produce dental plaque, and
from the plant.
colonize catheters and prostheses.
d. All of the above occur.
c. Biofilms colonize open wounds and burned
tissue. 27.Synthetic compounds found in an organism but
d. All statements are incorrect. not normally produced or expected to be present in
that organism are called _____.
23.Which of these statements is true?
a. pesticides
a. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
b. bioremediators
a organism that is antagonistic to the growth
c. recalcitrant compounds
of prokaryotes.
d. xenobiotics
b. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the 28.Bioremediation includes _____.
growth of other viruses. a. the use of prokaryotes that can fix nitrogen
c. An antibiotic is any substance produced by b. the use of prokaryotes to clean up pollutants
a prokaryote that is antagonistic to the c. the use of prokaryotes as natural fertilizers
growth of eukaryotic cells. d. All of the above
d. An antibiotic is any substance produced by
29.In addition to providing yogurt with its unique
a prokaryote that prevents growth of the
flavor and texture, lactic acid-producing bacteria also
same prokaryote.
provide which additional benefit during food
24.A person in England arrives at a medical clinic production?
with a fever and swollen lymph nodes shortly after a. Providing xenobiotics
returning from a visit to New Mexico. For which b. Lowering the pH to kill pathogenic bacteria
bacteria should the doctor test the patient? c. Pasteurizing milk products
d. Breaking down lactose for lactose-intolerant
individuals
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
30.Describe briefly how you would detect the 32.A new bacterial species is discovered and
presence of a non-culturable prokaryote in an classified as an endolith, an extremophile that lives
environmental sample. inside rock. If the bacteria were discovered in the
permafrost of Antarctica, describe two extremophile
31.Why do scientists believe that the first organisms
features the bacteria must possess.
on Earth were extremophiles?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 638
Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea 627
33.Mention three differences between bacteria and in the soil?
archaea.
38.Imagine a region of soil became contaminated,
34.Explain the statement that both types, bacteria killing bacteria that decompose dead plants and
and archaea, have the same basic structures, but animals. How would this effect the carbon cycle in
built from different chemical components. the area? Be specific in stating where carbon would
accumulate in the cycle.
35.A scientist isolates a new species of prokaryote.
He notes that the specimen is a bacillus with a lipid 39.Explain the reason why the imprudent and
bilayer and cell wall that stains positive for excessive use of antibiotics has resulted in a major
peptidoglycan. Its circular chromosome replicates global problem.
from a single origin of replication. Is the specimen
40.Researchers have discovered that washing
most likely an Archaea, a Gram-positive bacterium,
spinach with water several times does not prevent
or a Gram-negative bacterium? How do you know?
foodborne diseases due toE. coli. How can you
36.Think about the conditions (temperature, light, explain this fact?
pressure, and organic and inorganic materials) that
41.Your friend believes that prokaryotes are always
you may find in a deep-sea hydrothermal vent. What
detrimental and pathogenic. How would you explain
type of prokaryotes, in terms of their metabolic needs
to them that they are wrong?
(autotrophs, phototrophs, chemotrophs, etc.), would
you expect to find there? 42.Many people use antimicrobial soap to kill
bacteria on their hands. However, overuse may
37.Farmers continually rotate the crops grown in
actually increase the risk of infection. How could this
different fields to maintain nutrients in the soil. How
occur?
would planting soybeans in a field the year after the
field was used to grow carrots help maintain nitrogen
PAGE: 639
628 Chapter 22 | Prokaryotes: Bacteria and Archaea
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 640
Chapter 23 | Protists 629
23 | PROTISTS
Figure 23.1 Protists range from the microscopic, single-celled (a) Acanthocystis turfacea and the (b) ciliate
Tetrahymena thermophila, both visualized here using light microscopy, to the enormous, multicellular (c) kelps
(Chromalveolata)thatextendforhundredsoffeetinunderwater“forests.”(credita:modificationofworkbyYuiujiTsukii;
credit b: modification of work by Richard Robinson, Public Library of Science; credit c: modification of work by Kip
Evans, NOAA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
23.1:Eukaryotic Origins
23.2:Characteristics of Protists
23.3:Groups of Protists
23.4:Ecology of Protists
Introduction
Humans have been familiar with macroscopic organisms (organisms big enough to see with the unaided eye)
since before there was a written history, and it is likely that most cultures distinguished between animals and
land plants, and most probably included the macroscopic fungi as plants. Therefore, it became an interesting
challenge to deal with the world of microorganisms once microscopes were developed a few centuries ago.
Many different naming schemes were used over the last couple of centuries, but it has become the most
common practice to refer to eukaryotes that are not land plants, animals, or fungi as protists.
This name was first suggested by Ernst Haeckel in the late nineteenth century. It has been applied in many
contextsandhasbeenformallyusedtorepresentakingdom-leveltaxoncalledProtista.However,manymodern
systematists(biologistswhostudytherelationshipsamongorganisms)arebeginningtoshyawayfromtheidea
of formal ranks such as kingdom and phylum. Instead, they are naming taxa as groups of organisms thought
to include all the descendants of a last common ancestor (monophyletic group). During the past two decades,
thefieldofmoleculargeneticshasdemonstratedthatsomeprotistsaremorerelatedtoanimals,plants,orfungi
than theyaretoother protists. Therefore, notincluding animals, plants, andfungi makethekingdomProtista a
paraphyleticgroup,oronethatdoesnotincludealldescendentsofitscommonancestor.Forthisreason,protist
lineages originally classified into the kingdom Protista continue to be examined and debated. In the meantime,
the term “protist” still is used informally to describe this tremendously diverse group of eukaryotes.
Mostprotistsaremicroscopic,unicellularorganismsthatareabundantinsoil,freshwater,brackish,andmarine
environments. They are also common in the digestive tracts of animals and in the vascular tissues of plants.
Othersinvadethecellsofotherprotists,animals,andplants.Notallprotistsaremicroscopic.Somehavehuge,
macroscopiccells,suchastheplasmodia(giantamoebae)ofmyxomyceteslimemoldsorthemarinegreenalga
PAGE: 641
630 Chapter 23 | Protists
Caulerpa,whichcanhavesinglecellsthatcanbeseveralmetersinsize.Someprotistsaremulticellular,suchas
the red, green, and brown seaweeds. It is among the protists that one finds the wealth of ways that organisms
can grow.
23.1 | Eukaryotic Origins
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the unifying characteristics of eukaryotes
• Describe what scientists know about the origins of eukaryotes based on the last common ancestor
• Explain the endosymbiotic theory
Organismsareclassifiedintothreedomains:Archaea,Bacteria,andEukarya.Thefirsttwolineagescompriseall
prokaryoticcells,andthethirdcontainsalleukaryotes.Averysparsefossilrecordpreventsusfromdetermining
what the first members of each of these lineages looked like, so it is possible that all the events that led to the
lastcommonancestorofextanteukaryoteswillremainunknown.However,comparativebiologyofextant(living)
organisms and the limited fossil record provide some insight into the evolution of Eukarya.
TheearliestfossilsfoundappeartobethoseofdomainBacteria,mostlikelycyanobacteria.Theyareabout3.5
to 3.8 billion years old and are recognizable because of their relatively complex structure and, for prokaryotes,
relatively large cells. Most other prokaryotes have small cells, 1 or 2 µm in size, and would be difficult to pick
out as fossils. Fossil stromatolites suggest that at least some prokaryotes lived in interactive communities, and
evidencefromthestructureoflivingeukaryoticcellssuggeststhatitwassimilarancestralinteractionsthatgave
risetotheeukaryotes.Mostlivingeukaryoteshavecellsmeasuring10µmorgreater.Structuresthissize,which
mightbefossilizedremainsofearlyeukaryotes,appearinthegeologicalrecordindepositsdatingtoabout2.1
billion years ago.
Characteristics of Eukaryotes
Datafromthesefossils,aswellasfromthestudyoflivinggenomes,haveledcomparativebiologiststoconclude
thatlivingeukaryotesarealldescendantsofasinglecommonancestor.Mappingthecharacteristicsfoundinall
majorgroupsofeukaryotesrevealsthatthefollowingcharacteristicsarepresentinatleastsomeofthemembers
of each major lineage, or during some part of their life cycle, and therefore must have been present in the last
common ancestor.
1. Cellswithnucleisurroundedbyanuclearenvelopewithnuclearpores:Thisisthesinglecharacteristic
thatisbothnecessaryandsufficienttodefineanorganismasaeukaryote.Allextanteukaryoteshavecells
with nuclei.
2. Mitochondria: Most extant eukaryotes have "typical" mitochondria, although some eukaryotes have very
reduced mitochondrial “remnants” and a few lack detectable mitochondria.
3. Cytoskeleton of microtubules and microfilaments: Eukaryotic cells possess the structural and motility
components called actin microfilaments and microtubules. All extant eukaryotes have these cytoskeletal
elements.
4. Flagella and cilia: Organelles associated with cell motility. Some extant eukaryotes lack flagella and/
or cilia, but their presence in related lineages suggests that they are descended from ancestors that
possessed these organelles.
5. Chromosomesorganizedbyhistones:EacheukaryoticchromosomeconsistsofalinearDNAmolecule
coiled around basic (alkaline) proteins called histones. The few eukaryotes with chromosomes lacking
histones clearly evolved from ancestors that had them.
6. Mitosis: A process of nuclear division in which replicated chromosomes are divided and separated using
elements of the cytoskeleton. Mitosis is universally present in eukaryotes.
7. Sexual reproduction: A meiotic process of nuclear division and genetic recombination unique to
eukaryotes.Duringthisprocess,diploidnucleiatonestageofthelifecycleundergomeiosistoyieldhaploid
nuclei, which subsequently fuse together (karyogamy) to create a diploid zygote nucleus.
8. Cellwalls:Itmightbereasonabletoconcludethatthelastcommonancestorcouldmakecellwallsduring
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 642
Chapter 23 | Protists 631
somestageofitslifecycle,simplebecausecellwallswerepresentintheirprokaryoteprecursors.However,
notenoughisknownabouteukaryotes’cellwallsandtheirdevelopmenttoknowhowmuchhomologyexists
betweenthoseofprokaryotesandeukaryotes.Ifthelastcommonancestorcouldmakecellwalls,itisclear
that this ability must have been lost in many groups.
Endosymbiosis and the Evolution of Eukaryotes
Beforewediscusstheoriginsofeukaryotes,itisfirstimportanttounderstandthatallextanteukaryotesarelikely
the descendants of a chimera-like organism that was a composite of a host cell and the cell(s) of an alpha-
proteobacterium that “took up residence” inside it. This major theme in the origin of eukaryotes is known as
endosymbiosis, one cell engulfing another such that the engulfed cell survives and both cells benefit. Over
manygenerations,asymbioticrelationshipcanresultintwoorganismsthatdependoneachothersocompletely
that neither could survive on its own. Endosymbiotic events likely contributed to the origin of the last common
ancestoroftoday’seukaryotesandtolaterdiversificationincertainlineagesofeukaryotes(Figure23.5).Similar
endosymbioticassociationsarenotuncommoninlivingeukaryotes.Beforeexplainingthisfurther,itisnecessary
to consider metabolism in prokaryotes.
Prokaryotic Metabolism
Manyimportantmetabolicprocessesaroseinprokaryotes;however,someoftheseprocesses,suchasnitrogen
fixation, are never found in eukaryotes. The process of aerobic respiration is found in all major lineages
of eukaryotes, and it is localized in the mitochondria. Aerobic respiration is also found in many lineages of
prokaryotes, but it is not present in all of them, and a great deal of evidence suggests that such anaerobic
prokaryotes never carried out aerobic respiration nor did their ancestors.
While today’s atmosphere is about 20 percent molecular oxygen (O2), geological evidence shows that it
originally lacked O2. Without oxygen, aerobic respiration would not be expected, and living things would have
relied on anaerobic respiration or the process of fermentation instead. At some point before about 3.8 billion
yearsago,someprokaryotesbeganusingenergyfromsunlighttopoweranabolicprocessesthatreducecarbon
dioxidetoformorganiccompounds.Thatis,theyevolvedtheabilitytophotosynthesize.Hydrogen,derivedfrom
varioussources,was“captured”usinglight-poweredreactionstoreducefixedcarbondioxideintheCalvincycle.
The group of Gram-negative bacteria that gave rise to cyanobacteria used water as the hydrogen source and
released O2as a “waste” product.
Eventually, the amount of photosynthetic oxygen built up in some environments to levels that posed a risk to
living organisms, since it can damage many organic compounds. Various metabolic processes evolved that
protected organisms from oxygen, one of which, aerobic respiration, also generated high levels of ATP. It
became widely present among prokaryotes, including in a free-living group we now call alpha-proteobacteria.
Organisms that did not acquire aerobic respiration had to remain in oxygen-free environments. Originally,
oxygen-rich environments were likely localized around places where cyanobacteria were abundant and active,
butbyabout2billionyearsago,geologicalevidenceshowsthatoxygenwasbuildinguptohigherconcentrations
in the atmosphere. Oxygen levels similar to today’s levels only arose within the last 700 million years.
Recall that the first fossils that we believe to be eukaryotes date to about 2 billion years old, so they seemed
tohaveevolvedanddiversifiedrapidlyasoxygenlevelswereincreasing.Also,recallthatallextanteukaryotes
descended from an ancestor with mitochondria. These organelles were first observed by light microscopists
in the late 1800s, where they appeared to be somewhat worm-shaped structures that seemed to be moving
aroundinthecell.Someearlyobserverssuggestedthattheymightbebacterialivinginsidehostcells,butthese
hypotheses remained unknown or rejected in most scientific communities.
Endosymbiotic Theory
As cell biology developed in the twentieth century, it became clear that mitochondria were the organelles
responsible for producing ATP using aerobic respiration, in which oxygen was the final electron acceptor. In
the1960s,AmericanbiologistLynnMargulisofBostonUniversitydevelopedtheendosymbiotictheory,which
states that eukaryotes may have been a product of one cell engulfing another, one living within another, and
coevolvingovertimeuntiltheseparatecellswerenolongerrecognizableassuchandsharedgeneticcontrolofa
mutualisticmetabolicpathwaytoproduceATP.In1967,Margulisintroducednewdatatosupportherworkonthe
theory and substantiated her findings through microbiological evidence. Although Margulis’s work initially was
met with resistance, this basic component of this once-revolutionary hypothesis is now widely accepted, with
work progressing on uncovering the steps involved in this evolutionary process and the key players involved.
While the metabolic organelles and genes responsible for many energy-harvesting processes appear to have
had their origins in bacteria, our nuclear genes and the molecular machinery responsible for replication and
PAGE: 643
632 Chapter 23 | Protists
expressionappeartobemorecloselyrelatedtothosefoundintheArchaea.Muchremainstobeclarifiedabout
how this relationship occurred; this continues to be an exciting field of discovery in biology. For instance, it is
notknownwhethertheendosymbioticeventthatledtomitochondriaoccurredbeforeorafterthehostcellhada
nucleus. Such organisms would be among the extinct precursors of the last common ancestor of eukaryotes.
Mitochondria
One of the major features distinguishing prokaryotes from eukaryotes is the presence of mitochondria, or their
reduced derivatives, in virtually all eukaryotic cells. Eukaryotic cells may contain anywhere from one to several
thousandmitochondria,dependingonthecell’slevelofenergyconsumption,inhumansbeingmostabundantin
theliverandskeletalmuscles.Eachmitochondrionmeasures1to10orgreatermicrometersinlengthandexists
in the cell as an organelle that can be ovoid to worm-shaped to intricately branched (Figure 23.2). However,
although they may have originated as free-living aerobic organisms, mitochondria can no longer survive and
reproduce outside the cell.
Mitochondriahaveseveralfeaturesthatsuggesttheirrelationshiptoalpha-proteobacteria(Figure23.5).Alpha-
proteobacteria are a large group of bacteria that includes species symbiotic with plants, disease organisms
thatcaninfecthumansviaticks,andmanyfree-livingspeciesthatuselightforenergy.Mitochondriahavetheir
owngenomes,withacircularchromosomestabilizedbyattachmentstotheinnermembrane.Mitochondriaalso
havespecialribosomesandtransferRNAsthatresemblethesesamecomponentsinprokaryotes.Anintriguing
featureofmitochondriaisthatmanyofthemexhibitminordifferencesfromtheuniversalgeneticcode.However,
many of the genes for respiratory proteins are now relocated in the nucleus. When these genes are compared
to those of other organisms, they appear to be of alpha-proteobacterial origin. In some eukaryotic groups,
such genes are found in the mitochondria, whereas in other groups, they are found in the nucleus. This has
been interpreted as evidence that over evolutionary time, genes have been transferred from the endosymbiont
chromosome to those of the host genome. This apparent “loss” of genes by the endosymbiont is probably one
explanation why mitochondria cannot live without a host.
Anotherlineofevidencesupportingtheideathatmitochondriawerederivedbyendosymbiosiscomesfromthe
structureofthemitochondrianitself.Mostmitochondriaareshapedlikealpha-proteobacteriaandaresurrounded
by two membranes; the inner membrane is bacterial in nature whereas the outer membrane is eukaryotic in
nature.Thisisexactlywhatonewouldexpectifonemembrane-boundorganismwasengulfedintoavacuoleby
another membrane-bound organism. The outer mitochondrial membrane was derived by the enclosing vesicle,
while the inner membrane was derived from the plasma membrane of the endosymbiont. The mitochondrial
inner membrane is extensive and involves substantial infoldings called cristae that resemble the textured,
outersurfaceofalpha-proteobacteria.Thematrixandinnermembranearerichwiththeenzymesnecessaryfor
aerobic respiration.
Figure 23.2 Mitochondria. In this transmission electron micrograph of mitochondria in a mammalian lung cell, the
cristae, infoldings of the mitochondrial inner membrane, can be seen in cross-section. (credit: Louise Howard)
The third line of evidence comes from the production of new mitochondria. Mitochondria divide independently
by a process that resembles binary fission in prokaryotes. Mitochondria arise only from previous mitochondria;
theyarenotformedfromscratch(denovo)bytheeukaryoticcell.Mitochondriamayfusetogether;andtheymay
bemovedaroundinsidethecellbyinteractionswiththecytoskeleton.Theyreproducewithintheirenclosingcell
andaredistributedwiththecytoplasmwhenacelldividesortwocellsfuse.Therefore,althoughtheseorganelles
are highly integrated into the eukaryotic cell, they still reproduce as if they were independent organisms within
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 644
Chapter 23 | Protists 633
thecell.However,theirreproductionissynchronizedwiththeactivityanddivisionofthecell.Thesefeaturesall
support the theory that mitochondria were once free-living prokaryotes.
Somelivingeukaryotesareanaerobicandcannotsurviveinthepresenceoftoomuchoxygen.However,afew
appear to lack organelles that could be recognized as mitochondria. In the 1970s and on into the early 1990s,
many biologists suggested that some of these eukaryotes were descended from ancestors whose lineages
had diverged from the lineage of mitochondrion-containing eukaryotes before endosymbiosis occurred. Later
findingssuggestthatreducedorganellesarefoundinmost,ifnotall,anaerobiceukaryotes,andthatvirtuallyall
eukaryotes appear to carry some genes in their nuclei that are of mitochondrial origin.
In addition to the aerobic generation of ATP, mitochondria have several other metabolic functions. One of
these functions is to generate clusters of iron and sulfur that are important cofactors of many enzymes. Such
functionsareoftenassociatedwiththereducedmitochondrion-derivedorganellesofanaerobiceukaryotes.The
protist Monocercomonoides, an inhabitant of vertebrate digestive tracts, appears to be an exception; it has
no mitochondria and its genome contains neither genes derived from mitochondria nor nuclear genes related
to mitochondrial maintenance. However, it is related to other protists with reduced mitochondria and probably
represents an end-point in mitochondrial reduction. Although most biologists accept that the last common
ancestor of eukaryotes had mitochondria, it appears that the complex relationship between mitochondria and
their host cell continues to evolve.
Plastids
Some groups of eukaryotes are photosynthetic. Their cells contain, in addition to the standard eukaryotic
organelles, another kind of organelle called a plastid. When such cells are carrying out photosynthesis, their
plastids are rich in the pigment chlorophyll a and a range of other pigments, called accessory pigments, which
are involved in harvesting energy from light. Photosynthetic plastids are called chloroplasts (Figure 23.3).
Figure 23.3 Chloroplasts. (a) This chloroplast cross-section illustrates its elaborate inner membrane organization.
Stacks of thylakoid membranes compartmentalize photosynthetic enzymes and provide scaffolding for chloroplast
DNA.(b)InthismicrographofElodeasp.,thechloroplastscanbeseenassmallgreenspheres.(creditb:modification
of work by Brandon Zierer; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Like mitochondria, plastids appear to have an endosymbiotic origin. This hypothesis was also proposed and
championed with the first direct evidence by Lynn Margulis. We now know that plastids are derived from
cyanobacteriathatlivedinsidethecellsofanancestral,aerobic,heterotrophiceukaryote.Thisiscalledprimary
endosymbiosis, and plastids of primary origin are surrounded by two membranes. However, the best evidence
is that the acquisition of cyanobacterial endosymbionts has happened twice in the history of eukaryotes. In
one case, the common ancestor of the major lineage/supergroup Archaeplastida took on a cyanobacterial
endosymbiont; in the other, the ancestor of the small amoeboid rhizarian taxon, Paulinella, took on a different
cyanobacterialendosymbiont.Almostallphotosyntheticeukaryotesaredescendedfromthefirstevent,andonly
a couple of species are derived from the other, which in evolutionary terms, appears to be more recent.
CyanobacteriaareagroupofGram-negativebacteriawithalltheconventionalstructuresofthegroup.However,
unlike most prokaryotes, they have extensive, internal membrane-bound sacs called thylakoids. Chlorophyll
is a component of these membranes, as are many of the proteins of the light reactions of photosynthesis.
Cyanobacteria also have the peptidoglycan wall and lipopolysaccharide layer associated with Gram-negative
bacteria.
Chloroplasts of primary endosymbiotic origin have thylakoids, a circular DNA chromosome, and ribosomes
PAGE: 645
634 Chapter 23 | Protists
similar to those of cyanobacteria. As in mitochondria, each chloroplast is surrounded by two membranes. The
outer membrane is thought to be derived from the enclosing vacuole of the host, and the inner membrane
is thought to be derived from the plasma membrane of the cyanobacterial endosymbiont. In the group of
ArchaeplastidacalledtheglaucophytesandintherhizarianPaulinella,athinpeptidoglycanlayerisstillpresent
between the outer and inner plastid membranes. All other plastids lack this relict of the cyanobacterial wall.
There is also, as with the case of mitochondria, strong evidence that many of the genes of the endosymbiont
were transferred to the nucleus. Plastids, like mitochondria, cannot live independently outside the host. In
addition, like mitochondria, plastids are derived from the division of other plastids and never built from scratch.
Researchers have suggested that the endosymbiotic event that led to Archaeplastida occurred 1 to 1.5 billion
years ago, at least 5 hundred million years after the fossil record suggests that eukaryotes were present.
Not all plastids in eukaryotes are derived directly from primary endosymbiosis. Some of the major groups
of algae became photosynthetic by secondary endosymbiosis, that is, by taking in either green algae or red
algae (both from Archaeplastida) as endosymbionts (Figure 23.4). Numerous microscopic and genetic studies
have supported this conclusion. Secondary plastids are surrounded by three or more membranes, and some
secondaryplastidsevenhaveclearremnantsofthenucleus(nucleomorphs)ofendosymbioticalgae.Thereare
even cases where tertiary or higher-order endosymbiotic events are the best explanations for the features of
some eukaryotic plastids.
Figure23.4Algae.(a)Redalgaeand(b)greenalgae(seenherebylightmicroscopy)sharesimilarDNAsequences
with photosynthetic cyanobacteria. Scientists speculate that, in a process called endosymbiosis, an ancestral
prokaryote engulfed a photosynthetic cyanobacterium that evolved into modern-day chloroplasts. (credit a:
modificationofworkbyEdBierman;creditb:modificationofworkbyG.Fahnenstiel,NOAA;scale-bardatafromMatt
Russell)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 646
Chapter 23 | Protists 635
Figure 23.5 The Endosymbiotic Theory. The first eukaryote may have originated from an ancestral prokaryote
thathadundergonemembraneproliferation,compartmentalizationofcellularfunction(intoanucleus,lysosomes,
andanendoplasmicreticulum),andtheestablishmentofendosymbioticrelationshipswithanaerobicprokaryote,
and, in some cases, a photosynthetic prokaryote, to form mitochondria and chloroplasts, respectively.
What evidence is there that mitochondria were incorporated into the ancestral eukaryotic cell before
chloroplasts?
PAGE: 647
636 Chapter 23 | Protists
Secondary Endosymbiosis in Chlorarachniophytes
Endosymbiosisinvolvesonecellengulfinganothertoproduce,overtime,acoevolvedrelationshipinwhich
neithercellcouldsurvivealone.Thechloroplastsofredandgreenalgae,forinstance,arederivedfromthe
engulfment of a photosynthetic cyanobacterium by an ancestral prokaryote.
This evidence suggests the possibility that an ancestral cell (already containing a photosynthetic
endosymbiont)wasengulfedbyanothereukaryotecell,resultinginasecondaryendosymbiosis.Molecular
and morphological evidence suggest that the chlorarachniophyte protists are derived from a secondary
endosymbiotic event. Chlorarachniophytes are rare algae indigenous to tropical seas and sand. They
are classified into the Rhizarian supergroup. Chlorarachniophytes are reticulose amoebae, extending thin
cytoplasmicstrandsthatinterconnectthemwithotherchlorarachniophytesinacytoplasmicnetwork.These
protists are thought to have originated when a eukaryote engulfed a green alga, the latter of which had
previously established an endosymbiotic relationship with a photosynthetic cyanobacterium (Figure 23.6).
Figure 23.6 Secondary endosymbiosis. The hypothesized process of several endosymbiotic events leading to
the evolution of chlorarachniophytes is shown. In a primary endosymbiotic event, a heterotrophic eukaryote
consumedacyanobacterium.Inasecondaryendosymbioticevent,thecellresultingfromprimaryendosymbiosis
was consumed by a second cell. The resulting organelle became a plastid in modern chlorarachniophytes.
Several lines of evidence support that chlorarachniophytes evolved from secondary endosymbiosis. The
chloroplasts contained within the green algal endosymbionts still are capable of photosynthesis, making
chlorarachniophytesphotosynthetic.Thegreenalgalendosymbiontalsoexhibitsavestigialnucleus.Infact,
it appears that chlorarachniophytes are the products of an evolutionarily recent secondary endosymbiotic
event. The plastids of chlorarachniophytes are surrounded by four membranes: The first two correspond
to the inner and outer membranes of the photosynthetic cyanobacterium, the third corresponds to plasma
membrane of the green alga, and the fourth corresponds to the vacuole that surrounded the green
alga when it was engulfed by the chlorarachniophyte ancestor. In other lineages that involved secondary
endosymbiosis, only three membranes can be identified around plastids. This is currently interpreted as a
sequential loss of a membrane during the course of evolution.
Theprocessofsecondaryendosymbiosisisnotuniquetochlorarachniophytes.Secondaryplastidsarealso
found in the Excavates and the Chromalveolates. In the Excavates, secondary endosymbiosis of green
algae led to euglenid protists, while in the Chromalveolates, secondary endosymbiosis of red algae led to
the evolution of plastids in dinoflagellates, apicomplexans, and stramenopiles.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 648
Chapter 23 | Protists 637
23.2 | Characteristics of Protists
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the cell structure characteristics of protists
• Describe the metabolic diversity of protists
• Describe the life cycle diversity of protists
Thereareover100,000describedlivingspeciesofprotists,anditisunclearhowmanyundescribedspeciesmay
exist.Sincemanyprotistsliveascommensalsorparasitesinotherorganismsandtheserelationshipsareoften
species-specific,thereisahugepotentialforprotistdiversitythatmatchesthediversityoftheirhosts.Because
thename"protist"servesasacatchalltermforeukaryoticorganismsthatarenotanimal,plant,orfungi,itisnot
surprisingthatveryfewcharacteristicsarecommontoallprotists.Ontheotherhand,familiarcharacteristicsof
plants and animals are foreshadowed in various protists.
Cell Structure
The cells of protists are among the most elaborate of all cells. Multicellular plants, animals, and fungi are
embeddedamongtheprotistsineukaryoticphylogeny.Inmostplantsandanimalsandsomefungi,complexity
arises out of multicellularity, tissue specialization, and subsequent interaction because of these features.
Althougharudimentaryformofmulticellularityexistsamongsomeoftheorganismslabelledas“protists,”those
that have remained unicellular show how complexity can evolve in the absence of true multicellularity, with the
differentiation of cellular morphology and function. A few protists live as colonies that behave in some ways
as a group of free-living cells and in other ways as a multicellular organism. Some protists are composed of
enormous, multinucleate, single cells that look like amorphous blobs of slime, or in other cases, like ferns. In
some species of protists, the nuclei are different sizes and have distinct roles in protist cell function.
Singleprotistcellsrangeinsizefromlessthanamicrometertothreemetersinlengthtohectares!Protistcells
may be enveloped by animal-like cell membranes or plant-like cell walls. Others are encased in glassy silica-
based shells or wound with pellicles of interlocking protein strips. The pellicle functions like a flexible coat of
armor, preventing the protist from being torn or pierced without compromising its range of motion.
Metabolism
Protists exhibit many forms of nutrition and may be aerobic or anaerobic. Those that store energy by
photosynthesis belong to a group of photoautotrophs and are characterized by the presence of chloroplasts.
Other protists are heterotrophic and consume organic materials (such as other organisms) to obtain nutrition.
Amoebas and some other heterotrophic protist species ingest particles by a process called phagocytosis, in
which the cell membrane engulfs a food particle and brings it inward, pinching off an intracellular membranous
sac, or vesicle, called a food vacuole (Figure 23.7). In some protists, food vacuoles can be formed anywhere
on the body surface, whereas in others, they may be restricted to the base of a specialized feeding structure.
The vesicle containing the ingested particle, the phagosome, then fuses with a lysosome containing hydrolytic
enzymes to produce a phagolysosome, and the food particle is broken down into small molecules that can
diffuseintothecytoplasmandbeusedincellularmetabolism.Undigestedremainsultimatelyareexpelledfrom
the cell viaexocytosis.
PAGE: 649
638 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure23.7Phagocytosis.Thestagesofphagocytosisincludetheengulfmentofafoodparticle,thedigestionofthe
particleusinghydrolyticenzymescontainedwithinalysosome,andtheexpulsionofundigestedmaterialsfromthecell.
Subtypesofheterotrophs,calledsaprobes,absorbnutrientsfromdeadorganismsortheirorganicwastes.Some
protistscanfunctionasmixotrophs,obtainingnutritionbyphotoautotrophicorheterotrophicroutes,depending
on whether sunlight or organic nutrients are available.
Motility
The majority of protists are motile, but different types of protists have evolved varied modes of movement
(Figure23.8).Someprotistshaveoneormoreflagella,whichtheyrotateorwhip.Othersarecoveredinrowsor
tuftsoftinyciliathattheybeatinacoordinatedmannertoswim.Stillothersformcytoplasmicextensionscalled
pseudopodiaanywhereonthecell,anchorthepseudopodiatoasubstrate,andpullthemselvesforward.Some
protists can move toward or away from a stimulus, a movement referred to as taxis. For example, movement
towardlight,termedphototaxis,isaccomplishedbycouplingtheirlocomotionstrategywithalight-sensingorgan.
Figure23.8Locomotororganellesinprotists.Protistsusevariousmethodsfortransportation.(a)Parameciumwaves
hair-like appendages called cilia to propel itself. (b) Amoeba uses lobe-like pseudopodia to anchor itself to a solid
surface and pull itself forward. (c)Euglenauses a whip-like tail called a flagellum to propel itself.
Life Cycles
Protistsreproducebyavarietyofmechanisms.Mostundergosomeformofasexualreproduction,suchasbinary
fission, to produce two daughter cells. In protists, binary fission can be divided into transverse or longitudinal,
depending on the axis of orientation; sometimes Paramecium exhibits this method. Some protists such as the
trueslimemoldsexhibitmultiplefissionandsimultaneouslydivideintomanydaughtercells.Othersproducetiny
buds that go on to divide and grow to the size of the parental protist.
Sexual reproduction, involving meiosis and fertilization, is common among protists, and many protist species
can switch from asexual to sexual reproduction when necessary. Sexual reproduction is often associated with
periodswhennutrientsaredepletedorenvironmentalchangesoccur.Sexualreproductionmayallowtheprotist
to recombine genes and produce new variations of progeny, some of which may be better suited to surviving
changes in a new or changing environment. However, sexual reproduction is often associated with resistant
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 650
Chapter 23 | Protists 639
cysts that are a protective, resting stage. Depending on habitat of the species, the cysts may be particularly
resistant to temperature extremes, desiccation, or low pH. This strategy allows certain protists to “wait out”
stressorsuntiltheirenvironmentbecomesmorefavorableforsurvivaloruntiltheyarecarried(suchasbywind,
water, or transport on a larger organism) to a different environment, because cysts exhibit virtually no cellular
metabolism.
Protistlifecyclesrangefromsimpletoextremelyelaborate.Certainparasiticprotistshavecomplicatedlifecycles
andmustinfectdifferenthostspeciesatdifferentdevelopmentalstagestocompletetheirlifecycle.Someprotists
are unicellular in the haploid form and multicellular in the diploid form, a strategy employed by animals. Other
protistshavemulticellularstagesinbothhaploidanddiploidforms,astrategycalledalternationofgenerations,
analogous to that used by plants.
Habitats
Nearly all protists exist in some type of aquatic environment, including freshwater and marine environments,
damp soil, and even snow. Several protist species are parasites that infect animals or plants. A few protist
species live on dead organisms or their wastes, and contribute to their decay.
23.3 | Groups of Protists
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe representative protist organisms from each of the six presently recognized supergroups of
eukaryotes
• Identify the evolutionary relationships of plants, animals, and fungi within the six presently recognized
supergroups of eukaryotes
• Identify defining features of protists in each of the six supergroups of eukaryotes.
In the span of several decades, the Kingdom Protista has been disassembled because sequence analyses
have revealed new genetic (and therefore evolutionary) relationships among these eukaryotes. Moreover,
protists that exhibit similar morphological features may have evolved analogous structures because of similar
selective pressures—rather than because of recent common ancestry. This phenomenon, called convergent
evolution,isonereasonwhyprotistclassificationissochallenging.Theemergingclassificationschemegroups
the entire domain Eukarya into six “supergroups” that contain all of the protists as well as animals, plants,
and fungi that evolved from a common ancestor (Figure 23.9). Each of the supergroups is believed to be
monophyletic, meaning that all organisms within each supergroup are believed to have evolved from a single
common ancestor, and thus all members are most closely related to each other than to organisms outside
that group. There is still evidence lacking for the monophyly of some groups. Each supergroup can be viewed
as representing one of many variants on eukaryotic cell structure. In each group, one or more of the defining
characters of the eukaryotic cell—the nucleus, the cytoskeleton, and the endosymbiotic organelles—may have
diverged from the "typical" pattern.
PAGE: 651
640 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure23.9Eukaryoticsupergroups.ThisdiagramshowsaproposedclassificationofthedomainEukarya.Currently,
the domain Eukarya is divided into six supergroups. Within each supergroup are multiple kingdoms. Although each
supergroupisbelievedtobemonophyletic,thedottedlinessuggestevolutionaryrelationshipsamongthesupergroups
that continue to be debated.
Keepinmindthattheclassificationschemepresentedhererepresentsjustoneofseveralhypotheses,andthe
true evolutionary relationships are still to be determined. The six supergroups may be modified or replaced by
amoreappropriatehierarchyasgenetic,morphological,andecologicaldataaccumulate.Whenlearningabout
protists, it is helpful to focus less on the nomenclature and more on the commonalities and differences that
illustrate how each group has exploited the possibilities of eukaryotic life.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 652
Chapter 23 | Protists 641
Archaeplastida
Molecular evidence supports the hypothesis that all Archaeplastida are descendents of an endosymbiotic
relationship between a heterotrophic protist and a cyanobacterium. The protist members of the group include
the red algae and green algae. It was from a common ancestor of these protists that the land plants evolved,
since their closest relatives are found in this group. The red and green algae include unicellular, multicellular,
and colonial forms. A variety of algal life cycles exists, but the most complex is alternation of generations, in
whichbothhaploidanddiploidstagesaremulticellular.Adiploidsporophytecontainscellsthatundergomeiosis
to produce haploid spores. The spores germinate and grow into a haploid gametophyte, which then makes
gametes by mitosis. The gametes fuse to form a zygote that grows into a diploid sporophyte. Alternation of
generationsisseeninsomespeciesofArchaeplastidalgae,aswellassomespeciesofStramenopiles(Figure
23.10). In some species, the gametophyte and sporophyte look quite different, while in others they are nearly
indistinguishable.
Glaucophytes
GlaucophytesareasmallgroupofArchaeplastidainterestingbecausetheirchloroplastsretainremnantsofthe
peptidoglycan cell wall of the ancestral cyanobacterial endosymbiont (Figure 23.10).
Figure 23.10 Glaucocystis. (credit: By ja:User:NEON / commons:User:NEON_ja - Own work, CC BY-SA 2.5,
https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=1706641 (http://openstax.org/l/Glaucocystis))
Red Algae
Red algae, or rhodophytes lack flagella, and are primarily multicellular, although they range in size from
microscopic, unicellular protists to large, multicellular forms grouped into the informal seaweed category. Red
algae have a second cell wall outside an inner cellulose cell wall. Carbohydrates in this wall are the source of
agaroseusedforelectrophoresisgelsandagarforsolidifyingbacterialmedia.The"red"intheredalgaecomes
fromphycoerythrins, accessoryphotopigments thatareredincolorandobscurethegreentintofchlorophyllin
some species. Other protists classified as red algae lack phycoerythrins and are parasites. Both the red algae
and the glaucophytes store carbohydrates in the cytoplasm rather than in the plastid. Red algae are common
in tropical waters where they have been detected at depths of 260 meters. Other red algae exist in terrestrial
or freshwater environments. The red algae life cycle is an unusual alternation of generations that includes two
sporophyte phases, with meiosis occurring only in the second sporophyte.
PAGE: 653
642 Chapter 23 | Protists
Green Algae: Chlorophytes and Charophytes
The most abundant group of algae is the green algae. The green algae exhibit features similar to those of the
land plants, particularly in terms of chloroplast structure. In both green algae and plants, carbohydrates are
stored in the plastid. That this group of protists shared a relatively recent common ancestor with land plants is
well supported. The green algae are subdivided into the chlorophytes and the charophytes. The charophytes
aretheclosestlivingrelativestolandplantsandresembletheminmorphologyandreproductivestrategies.The
familiarSpirogyraisacharophyte.Charophytesarecommoninwethabitats,andtheirpresenceoftensignalsa
healthy ecosystem.
Thechlorophytesexhibitgreatdiversityofformandfunction.Chlorophytesprimarilyinhabitfreshwateranddamp
soil,andareacommoncomponentofplankton.Chlamydomonasisasimple,unicellularchlorophytewithapear-
shapedmorphologyandtwoopposing,anteriorflagellathatguidethisprotisttowardlightsensedbyitseyespot.
More complex chlorophyte species exhibit haploid gametes and spores that resembleChlamydomonas.
ThechlorophyteVolvoxisoneofonlyafewexamplesofacolonialorganism,whichbehavesinsomewayslike
a collection of individual cells, but in other ways like the specialized cells of a multicellular organism (Figure
23.11).Volvoxcoloniescontain500to60,000cells,eachwithtwoflagella,containedwithinahollow,spherical
matrixcomposedofagelatinousglycoproteinsecretion.IndividualcellsinaVolvoxcolonymoveinacoordinated
fashion and are interconnected by cytoplasmic bridges. Only a few of the cells reproduce to create daughter
colonies, an example of basic cell specialization in this organism. Daughter colonies are produced with their
flagella on the inside and have to evert as they are released.
Figure23.11Volvox.VolvoxaureusisagreenalgainthesupergroupArchaeplastida.Thisspeciesexistsasacolony,
consisting ofcellsimmersedinagel-likematrixandintertwined with eachotherviahair-likecytoplasmic extensions.
(credit: Dr. Ralf Wagner)
True multicellular organisms, such as the sea lettuce, Ulva, are also represented among the chlorophytes. In
addition, some chlorophytes exist as large, multinucleate, single cells. Species in the genus Caulerpa exhibit
flattenedfern-likefoliageandcanreachlengthsof3meters(Figure23.12).Caulerpaspeciesundergonuclear
division, but their cells do not complete cytokinesis, remaining instead as massive and elaborate single cells.
Figure23.12Amultinucleatealga.Caulerpataxifoliaisachlorophyteconsistingofasinglecellcontainingpotentially
thousands of nuclei. (credit: NOAA). An interesting question is how a single cell can produce such complex shapes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 654
Chapter 23 | Protists 643
Take a look at this video to see cytoplasmic streaming in a green alga.
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66555/1.3/#eip-
id1164992)
Amoebozoa
Like the Archaeplastida, the Amoebozoa include species with single cells, species with large multinucleated
cells,andspeciesthathavemulticellularphases.Amoebozoancellscharacteristicallyexhibitpseudopodiathat
extend like tubes or flat lobes. These pseudopods project outward from anywhere on the cell surface and can
anchor to a substrate. The protist then transports its cytoplasm into the pseudopod, thereby moving the entire
cell.ThistypeofmotionissimilartothecytoplasmicstreamingusedtomoveorganellesintheArchaeplastida,
andisalsousedbyother protists asameansoflocomotion orasamethod todistribute nutrients andoxygen.
The Amoebozoa include both free-living and parasitic species.
Gymnomoebae
The Gymnamoeba or lobose amoebae include both naked amoebae like the familiar Amoeba proteus and
shelled amoebae, whose bodies protrude like snails from their protective tests. Amoeba proteus is a large
amoeba about 500 µm in diameter but is dwarfed by the multinucleate amoebae Pelomyxa, which can be 10
times its size. Although Pelomyxa may have hundreds of nuclei, it has lost its mitochondria, but replaced them
withbacterialendosymbionts.Thesecondarylossormodificationofmitochondriaisafeaturealsoseeninother
protist groups.
Figure 23.13 Amoeba. Amoebae with tubular and lobe-shaped pseudopodia are seen under a microscope. These
isolates would be morphologically classified as amoebozoans.
Slime Molds
Asubsetoftheamoebozoans,theslimemolds,hasseveralmorphologicalsimilaritiestofungithatarethought
to be the result of convergent evolution. For instance, during times of stress, some slime molds develop into
spore-generating fruiting bodies, much like fungi.
The slime molds are categorized on the basis of their life cycles into plasmodial or cellular types. Plasmodial
slime molds are composed of large, multinucleate cells and move along surfaces like an amorphous blob of
slime during their feeding stage (Figure 23.14). Food particles are lifted and engulfed into the slime mold as it
glidesalong.The"dogvomit"slimemoldseeninFigure23.14isaparticularlycolorfulspecimenanditsability
to creep about might well trigger suspicion of alien invasion. Upon maturation, the plasmodium takes on a net-
likeappearance with the ability toformfruiting bodies, orsporangia, duringtimes ofstress. Haploid sporesare
PAGE: 655
644 Chapter 23 | Protists
producedbymeiosiswithinthesporangia,andsporescanbedisseminatedthroughtheairorwatertopotentially
landinmorefavorableenvironments.Ifthisoccurs,thesporesgerminatetoformameboidorflagellatehaploid
cells that can combine with each other and produce a diploid zygotic slime mold to complete the life cycle.
Figure 23.14 Plasmodial slime molds. The life cycle of the plasmodial slime mold is shown. The brightly colored
plasmodiumintheinsetphotoisasingle-celled,multinucleatemass.(credit:modificationofworkbyDr.JonathaGott
and the Center for RNA Molecular Biology, Case Western Reserve University)
The cellular slime molds function as independent amoeboid cells when nutrients are abundant. When food is
depleted,cellularslimemoldsaggregateintoamassofcellsthatbehavesasasingleunit,calledaslug.Some
cells in the slug contribute to a 2–3-millimeter stalk, drying up and dying in the process. Cells atop the stalk
formanasexualfruiting bodythatcontainshaploidspores(Figure 23.15).Aswithplasmodialslimemolds,the
spores are disseminated and can germinate if they land in a moist environment. One representative genus of
the cellular slime molds isDictyostelium, which commonly exists in the damp soil of forests.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 656
Chapter 23 | Protists 645
Figure 23.15 Cellular Slime Mold. The image shows several stages in the life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum,
includingaggregatedcells,mobileslugsandtheirtransformationintofruitingbodieswithaclusterofsporessupported
by a stalk. (credit: By Usman Bashir (Own work) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0
(http://openstax.org/l/CCBY))], via Wikimedia Commons)
View this video to see the formation of a fruiting body by a cellular slime mold.
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66555/1.3/#eip-
id1165237746084)
Opisthokonta
TheOpisthokontsarenamedforthesingleposteriorflagellumseeninflagellatedcellsofthegroup.Theflagella
ofotherprotistsareanteriorandtheirmovementpullsthecellsalong,whiletheopisthokontsarepushed.Protist
members of the opisthokonts include the animal-like choanoflagellates, which are believed to resemble the
commonancestorofspongesandperhaps,allanimals.Choanoflagellatesincludeunicellularandcolonialforms
(Figure 23.16), and number about 244 described species. In these organisms, the single, apical flagellum is
surrounded by a contractile collar composed of microvilli. The collar is used to filter and collect bacteria for
ingestion by the protist. A similar feeding mechanism is seen in the collar cells of sponges, which suggests a
possible connection between choanoflagellates and animals.
TheMesomycetozoaformasmallgroupofparasites,primarilyoffish,andatleastoneformthatcanparasitize
humans.Theirlifecyclesarepoorlyunderstood.Theseorganismsareofspecialinterest,becausetheyappear
to be so closely related to animals. In the past, they were grouped with fungi and other protists based on their
morphology.
PAGE: 657
646 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure 23.16 A Colonial Choanoflagellate. (credit: By Dhzanette (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choanoflagellate
(http://openstax.org/l/choano)) [Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons)
Theprevioussupergroupsarealltheproductsofprimaryendosymbionticeventsandtheirorganelles—nucleus,
mitochondria,andchloroplasts—arewhatwouldbeconsidered"typical,"i.e.,matchingthediagramsyouwould
find in an introductory biology book. The next three supergroups all contain at least some photosynthetic
members whose chloroplasts were derived by secondary endosymbiosis. They also show some interesting
variations in nuclear structure, and modification of mitochondria or chloroplasts.
Rhizaria
TheRhizariasupergroupincludesmanyoftheamoebaswiththinthreadlike,needle-likeorroot-likepseudopodia
(Figure23.17),ratherthanthebroaderlobedpseudopodiaoftheAmoebozoa.Manyrhizariansmakeelaborate
and beautiful tests—armor-like coverings for the body of the cell—composed of calcium carbonate, silicon,
or strontium salts. Rhizarians have important roles in both carbon and nitrogen cycles. When rhizarians die,
and their tests sink into deep water, the carbonates are out of reach of most decomposers, locking carbon
dioxideawayfromtheatmosphere.Ingeneral,thisprocessbywhichcarbonistransporteddeepintotheocean
is described as the biological carbon pump, because carbon is “pumped” to the ocean depths where it is
inaccessible to the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The biological carbon pump is a crucial component of the
carboncyclethatmaintainsloweratmosphericcarbondioxidelevels.Foraminiferansareunusualinthattheyare
the only eukaryotes known to participate in the nitrogen cycle by denitrification, an activity usually served only
by prokaryotes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 658
Chapter 23 | Protists 647
Figure 23.17 Rhizaria. Ammonia tepida, a Rhizaria species viewed here using phase contrast light microscopy,
exhibitsmanythreadlikepseudopodia.Italsohasachamberedcalciumcarbonateshellortest.(credit:modificationof
work by Scott Fay, UC Berkeley; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Foraminiferans
Foraminiferans, or forams, are unicellular heterotrophic protists, ranging from approximately 20 micrometers to
several centimeters in length, and occasionally resembling tiny snails (Figure 23.18). As a group, the forams
exhibit porous shells, called tests that are built from various organic materials and typically hardened with
calcium carbonate. The tests may house photosynthetic algae, which the forams can harvest for nutrition.
Foram pseudopodia extend through the pores and allow the forams to move, feed, and gather additional
buildingmaterials.Typically,foramsareassociatedwithsandorotherparticlesinmarineorfreshwaterhabitats.
Foraminiferans are also useful as indicators of pollution and changes in global weather patterns.
Figure 23.18 Foraminiferan Tests. These shells from foraminifera sank to the sea floor. (credit: Deep East 2001,
NOAA/OER)
Radiolarians
A second subtype of Rhizaria, the radiolarians, exhibit intricate exteriors of glassy silica with radial or bilateral
symmetry (Figure 23.19). Needle-like pseudopods supported by microtubules radiate outward from the cell
bodies of these protists and function to catch food particles. The shells of dead radiolarians sink to the ocean
floor, where they may accumulate in 100 meter-thick depths. Preserved, sedimented radiolarians are very
common in the fossil record.
PAGE: 659
648 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure 23.19 Radiolarian shell. This fossilized radiolarian shell was imaged using a scanning electron microscope.
(credit: modification of work by Hannes Grobe, Alfred Wegener Institute; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Cercozoa
The Cercozoa are both morphologically and metabolically diverse, and include both naked and shelled forms.
The Chlorarachniophytes (Figure 23.20) are photosynthetic, having acquired chloroplasts by secondary
endosymbiosis. The chloroplast contains a remnant of the chlorophyte endosymbiont nucleus, sandwiched
between the two sets of chloroplast membranes. Vampyrellids or "vampire amoebae," as their name suggests,
obtain their nutrients by thrusting a pseudopod into the interior of other cells and sucking out their contents.
Figure 23.20 A Chlorarachniophyte. This rhizarian is mixotrophic, and can obtain nutrients both by photosynthesis
and by trapping various microorganisms with its network of pseudopodia. (credit: By ja:User:NEON /
commons:User:NEON_ja (Own work) [CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5
(http://openstax.org/l/CCBY_25) ) or CC BY-SA 2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5
(http://openstax.org/l/CCBY_25))], via Wikimedia Commons)
Chromalveolata
Currentevidencesuggeststhatspeciesclassifiedaschromalveolatesarederivedfromacommonancestorthat
engulfed a photosynthetic red algal cell, which itself had already evolved chloroplasts from an endosymbiotic
relationship with a photosynthetic prokaryote. Therefore, the ancestor of chromalveolates is believed to have
resultedfromasecondaryendosymbioticevent.However,somechromalveolatesappeartohavelostredalga-
derived plastid organelles or lack plastid genes altogether. Therefore, this supergroup should be considered
a hypothesis-based working group that is subject to change. Chromalveolates include very important
photosyntheticorganisms,suchasdiatoms,brownalgae,andsignificantdiseaseagentsinanimalsandplants.
The chromalveolates can be subdivided into alveolates and stramenopiles.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 660
Chapter 23 | Protists 649
Alveolates: Dinoflagellates, Apicomplexians, and Ciliates
A large body of data supports that the alveolates are derived from a shared common ancestor. The alveolates
are named for the presence of an alveolus, or membrane-enclosed sac, beneath the cell membrane. The
exact function of the alveolus is unknown, but it may be involved in osmoregulation. The alveolates are further
categorized into some of the better-known protists: the dinoflagellates, the apicomplexans, and the ciliates.
Dinoflagellates exhibit extensive morphological diversity and can be photosynthetic, heterotrophic, or
mixotrophic. The chloroplast of photosynthetic dinoflagellates was derived by secondary endosymbiosis of
a red alga. Many dinoflagellates are encased in interlocking plates of cellulose. Two perpendicular flagella
fit into the grooves between the cellulose plates, with one flagellum extending longitudinally and a second
encirclingthedinoflagellate(Figure23.21).Together,theflagellacontributetothecharacteristicspinningmotion
ofdinoflagellates.Theseprotistsexistinfreshwaterandmarinehabitats,andareacomponentofplankton,the
typicallymicroscopicorganismsthatdriftthroughthewaterandserveasacrucialfoodsourceforlargeraquatic
organisms.
Figure23.21Dinoflagellates.Thedinoflagellatesexhibitgreatdiversityinshape.Manyareencasedincellulosearmor
and have two flagella that fit in grooves between the plates. Movement of these two perpendicular flagella causes a
spinning motion.
Dinoflagellates have a nuclear variant called a dinokaryon. The chromosomes in the dinokaryon are highly
condensedthroughoutthecellcycleanddonothavetypicalhistones.Mitosisindinoflagellatesisclosed,thatis,
thespindleseparatesthechromosomesfromoutsideofthenucleuswithoutbreakdownofthenuclearenvelope.
Somedinoflagellatesgeneratelight,calledbioluminescence,whentheyarejarredorstressed.Largenumbers
ofmarinedinoflagellates(billionsortrillionsofcellsperwave)canemitlightandcauseanentirebreakingwave
totwinkleortakeonabrilliantbluecolor(Figure23.22).Forapproximately20speciesofmarinedinoflagellates,
populationexplosions(alsocalledblooms)duringthesummermonthscantinttheoceanwithamuddyredcolor.
This phenomenon is called a red tide, and it results from the abundant red pigments present in dinoflagellate
plastids.Inlargequantities,thesedinoflagellatespeciessecreteanasphyxiatingtoxinthatcankillfish,birds,and
marine mammals. Red tides can be massively detrimental to commercial fisheries, and humans who consume
these protists may become poisoned.
PAGE: 661
650 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure23.22Dinoflagellatebioluminescence.Bioluminescenceisemittedfromdinoflagellatesinabreakingwave,as
seen from the New Jersey coast. (credit: “catalano82”/Flickr)
The apicomplexan protists are named for a structure called an apical complex (Figure 23.23), which appears
to be a highly modified secondary chloroplast. The apicoplast genome is similar to those of dinoflagellate
chloroplasts. The apical complex is specialized for entry and infection of host cells. Indeed, all apicomplexans
are parasitic. This group includes the genus Plasmodium, which causes malaria in humans. Apicomplexan life
cycles are complex, involving multiple hosts and stages of sexual and asexual reproduction.
Figure 23.23 Apicomplexa. (a) Apicomplexans are parasitic protists. They have a characteristic apical complex that
enablesthemtoinfecthostcells.(b)Plasmodium,thecausativeagentofmalaria,hasacomplexlifecycletypicalof
apicomplexans. (credit b: modification of work by CDC)
The ciliates, which include Paramecium and Tetrahymena, are a group of protists 10 to 3,000 micrometers
in length that are covered in rows, tufts, or spirals of tiny cilia. By beating their cilia synchronously or in
waves, ciliates can coordinate directed movements and ingest food particles. Certain ciliates have fused cilia-
basedstructuresthatfunctionlikepaddles,funnels,orfins.Ciliatesalsoaresurroundedbyapellicle,providing
protectionwithoutcompromisingagility.ThegenusParameciumincludesprotiststhathaveorganizedtheircilia
into a plate-like primitive mouth, called an oral groove, which is used to capture and digest bacteria (Figure
23.24). Food captured in the oral groove enters a food vacuole, where it combines with digestive enzymes.
Wasteparticlesareexpelledbyanexocyticvesiclethatfusesataspecificregiononthecellmembrane,called
the anal pore. In addition to a vacuole-based digestive system, Paramecium also uses contractile vacuoles,
which are osmoregulatory vesicles that fill with water as it enters the cell by osmosis and then contract to
squeezewaterfromthecell.Ciliatesthereforeexhibitconsiderablestructuralcomplexitywithouthavingachieved
multicellularity.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 662
Chapter 23 | Protists 651
Figure 23.24 Paramecium. Paramecium has a primitive mouth (called an oral groove) to ingest food, and an anal
poretoeliminatewaste.Contractilevacuolesallowtheorganismtoexcreteexcesswater.Ciliaenabletheorganismto
move. (credit “paramecium micrograph”: modification of work by NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Watch the video of the contractile vacuole of Paramecium expelling water to keep the cell osmotically
balanced. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.)(http://cnx.org/content/m66555/1.3/#eip-
id1165792853951)
Paramecium has two nuclei, a macronucleus and a micronucleus, in each cell. The micronucleus is essential
for sexual reproduction, and is in many ways a typical eukaryotic nucleus, except that its genes are not
transcribed. The transcribed nucleus is the macronucleus, which directs asexual binary fission and all other
biologicalfunctions.Themacronucleusisamultiploidnucleusconstructedfromthemicronucleusduringsexual
reproduction. Periodic reconstruction of the macronucleus is necessary because the macronucleus divides
amitotically,andthusbecomesgeneticallyunbalancedoveraperiodofsuccessivecellreplications.Paramecium
and most other ciliates reproduce sexually by conjugation. This process begins when two different mating
types of Paramecium make physical contact and join with a cytoplasmic bridge (Figure 23.25). The diploid
micronucleus in each cell then undergoes meiosis to produce four haploid micronuclei. Three of these
degenerate in each cell, leaving one micronucleus that then undergoes mitosis, generating two haploid
micronuclei. The cells each exchange one of these haploid nuclei and move away from each other. Fusion of
the haploid micronuclei generates a completely novel diploid pre-micronucleus in each conjugative cell. This
pre-micronucleus undergoes three rounds of mitosis to produce eight copies, and the original macronucleus
disintegrates.Fouroftheeightpre-micronucleibecomefull-fledgedmicronuclei,whereastheotherfourperform
multiple rounds of DNA replication. The copies of the micronuclear chromosomes are severely edited to
form hundreds of smaller chromosomes that contain only the protein coding genes. Each of these smaller
chromosomesgetsnewtelomeresasthemacronucleusdifferentiates.Twocyclesofcelldivisionthenyieldfour
newParameciafrom each original conjugative cell.
PAGE: 663
652 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure 23.25 Conjugation in Paramecium. The complex process of sexual reproduction in Paramecium creates
eight daughter cells from two original cells. Each cell has a macronucleus and a micronucleus. During sexual
reproduction,themacronucleusdissolvesandisreplacedbyamicronucleus.(credit“micrograph”:modificationof
work by Ian Sutton; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Which of the following statements aboutParameciumsexual reproduction is false?
a. The macronuclei are derived from micronuclei.
b. Both mitosis and meiosis occur during sexual reproduction.
c. The conjugate pair swaps macronucleii.
d. Each parent produces four daughter cells.
Stramenopiles: Diatoms, Brown Algae, Golden Algae and Oomycetes
The other subgroup of chromalveolates, the stramenopiles, includes photosynthetic marine algae and
heterotrophic protists. The chloroplast of these algae is derived from red alga. The identifying feature of this
groupisthepresenceofatextured,or“hairy,”flagellum.Manystramenopilesalsohaveanadditionalflagellum
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 664
Chapter 23 | Protists 653
thatlackshair-likeprojections(Figure23.26).Membersofthissubgrouprangeinsizefromsingle-celleddiatoms
to the massive and multicellular kelp.
Figure 23.26 Stramenopile flagella. This stramenopile cell has a single hairy flagellum and a secondary smooth
flagellum.
The diatoms are unicellular photosynthetic protists that encase themselves in intricately patterned, glassy cell
wallscomposedofsilicondioxideinamatrixoforganicparticles(Figure23.27).Theseprotistsareacomponent
of freshwater and marine plankton. Most species of diatoms reproduce asexually, although some instances of
sexualreproductionandsporulationalsoexist.Somediatomsexhibitaslitintheirsilicashell,calledaraphe.By
expellingastreamofmucopolysaccharidesfromtheraphe,thediatomcanattachtosurfacesorpropelitselfin
one direction.
Figure 23.27 Diatoms. Assorted diatoms, visualized here using light microscopy, live among annual sea ice in
McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. Diatoms range in size from 2 to 200 µm. (credit: Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook
University, NSF, NOAA)
During periods of nutrient availability, diatom populations bloom to numbers greater than can be consumed by
aquatic organisms. The excess diatoms die and sink to the sea floor where they are not easily reached by
saprobes that feed on dead organisms. As a result, the carbon dioxide that the diatoms had consumed and
incorporated into their cells during photosynthesis is not returned to the atmosphere. Along with rhizarians and
other shelled protists, diatoms help to maintain a balanced carbon cycle.
Like diatoms, golden algae are largely unicellular, although some species can form large colonies. Their
characteristicgoldcolorresultsfromtheirextensiveuseofcarotenoids,agroupofphotosyntheticpigmentsthat
PAGE: 665
654 Chapter 23 | Protists
are generally yellow or orange in color. Golden algae are found in both freshwater and marine environments,
where they form a major part of the plankton community.
The brown algae are primarily marine, multicellular organisms that are known colloquially as seaweeds. Giant
kelps are a type of brown alga. Some brown algae have evolved specialized tissues that resemble terrestrial
plants, with root-like holdfasts, stem-like stipes, and leaf-like blades that are capable of photosynthesis. The
stipes of giant kelps are enormous, extending in some cases for 60 meters. Like the green algae, brown algae
have a variety of life cycles, including alternation of generations. In the brown algae genus Laminaria, haploid
sporesdevelopintomulticellulargametophytes,whichproducehaploidgametesthatcombinetoproducediploid
organisms that then become multicellular organisms with a different structure from the haploid form (Figure
23.28).
Figure23.28Alternationofgenerationsinabrownalga.Severalspeciesofbrownalgae,suchastheLaminaria
shown here, have evolved life cycles in which both the haploid (gametophyte) and diploid (sporophyte) forms
are multicellular. The gametophyte is different in structure than the sporophyte. (credit “laminaria photograph”:
modification of work by Claire Fackler, CINMS, NOAA Photo Library)
Which of the following statements about theLaminarialife cycle is false?
a. 1nzoospores form in the sporangia.
b. The sporophyte is the 2nplant.
c. The gametophyte is diploid.
d. Both the gametophyte and sporophyte stages are multicellular.
The water molds, oomycetes (“egg fungus”), were so-named based on their fungus-like morphology, but
molecular data have shown that the water molds are not closely related to fungi. The oomycetes are
characterizedbyacellulose-basedcellwallandanextensivenetworkoffilamentsthatallowfornutrientuptake.
As diploid spores, many oomycetes have two oppositely directed flagella (one hairy and one smooth) for
locomotion. The oomycetes are nonphotosynthetic and include many saprobes and parasites. The saprobes
appear as white fluffy growths on dead organisms (Figure 23.29). Most oomycetes are aquatic, but some
parasitize terrestrial plants. One plant pathogen is Phytophthora infestans, the causative agent of late blight of
potatoes, such as occurred in the nineteenth century Irish potato famine.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 666
Chapter 23 | Protists 655
Figure 23.29 Oomycetes. A saprobic oomycete engulfs a dead insect. (credit: modification of work by Thomas
Bresson)
Excavata
Many of the protist species classified into the supergroup Excavata are asymmetrical, single-celled organisms
with a feeding groove “excavated” from one side. This supergroup includes heterotrophic predators,
photosynthetic species, and parasites. Its subgroups are the diplomonads, parabasalids, and euglenozoans.
The group includes a variety of modified mitochondria, as well as chloroplasts derived from green algae by
secondary endosymbiosis. Many of the euglenozoans are free-living, but most diplomonads and parabasalids
are symbionts or parasites.
Diplomonads
Among the Excavata are the diplomonads, which include the intestinal parasite, Giardia lamblia (Figure
23.30). Until recently, these protists were believed to lack mitochondria. Mitochondrial remnant organelles,
called mitosomes, have since been identified in diplomonads, but although these mitosomes are essentially
nonfunctional as respiratory organelles, they do function in iron and sulfur metabolism. Diplomonads exist in
anaerobicenvironmentsandusealternativepathways,suchasglycolysis,togenerateenergy.Eachdiplomonad
cell has two similar, but not identical haploid nuclei. Diplomonads have four pairs of locomotor flagella that are
fairly deeply rooted in basal bodies that lie between the two nuclei.
Figure 23.30 Giardia. The mammalian intestinal parasite Giardia lamblia, visualized here using scanning electron
microscopy,isawaterborneprotistthatcausesseverediarrheawheningested.(credit:modificationofworkbyJanice
Carr, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
PAGE: 667
656 Chapter 23 | Protists
Parabasalids
A second Excavata subgroup, the parabasalids, are named for the parabasal apparatus, which consists of a
Golgi complex associated with cytoskeletal fibers. Other cytoskeletal features include an axostyle, a bundle
of fibers that runs the length of the cell and may even extend beyond it. Parabasalids move with flagella and
membranerippling,andtheseandothercytoskeletalmodificationsmayassistlocomotion.Likethediplomonads,
theparabasalidsexhibitmodifiedmitochondria.Inparabasalidsthesestructuresfunctionanaerobicallyandare
called hydrogenosomes because they produce hydrogen gas as a byproduct.
TheparabasalidTrichomonasvaginaliscausestrichomoniasis,asexuallytransmitteddiseaseinhumans,which
appears in an estimated 180 million cases worldwide each year. Whereas men rarely exhibit symptoms during
aninfectionwiththisprotist,infectedwomenmaybecomemoresusceptibletosecondaryinfectionwithhuman
immunodeficiencyvirus(HIV)andmaybemorelikelytodevelopcervicalcancer.Pregnantwomeninfectedwith
T. vaginalisare at an increased risk of serious complications, such as pre-term delivery.
Some of the most complex of the parabasalids are those that colonize the rumen of ruminant animals and the
gutsoftermites.Theseorganismscandigestcellulose,ametabolictalentthatisunusualamongeukaryoticcells.
Theyhavemultipleflagellaarrangedincomplexpatternsandsomeadditionallyrecruitspirochetesthatattachto
their surface to act as accessory locomotor structures.
Termite gut endosymbionts
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66555/1.3/#med-
id1167232288213)
Euglenozoans
Euglenozoans includes parasites, heterotrophs, autotrophs, and mixotrophs, ranging in size from 10 to 500
µm. Euglenoids move through their aquatic habitats using two long flagella that guide them toward light
sources sensed by a primitive ocular organ called an eyespot. The familiar genus, Euglena, encompasses
some mixotrophic species that display a photosynthetic capability only when light is present. The chloroplast
of Euglena descends from a green alga by secondary endosymbiosis. In the dark, the chloroplasts of Euglena
shrink up and temporarily cease functioning, and the cells instead take up organic nutrients from their
environment. Euglena has a tough pellicle composed of bands of protein attached to the cytoskeleton. The
bands spiral around the cell and give Euglena its exceptional flexibility.
The human parasite, Trypanosoma brucei, belongs to a different subgroup of Euglenozoa, the kinetoplastids.
The kinetoplastid subgroup is named after the kinetoplast, a large modified mitochondrion carrying multiple
circular DNAs. This subgroup includes several parasites, collectively called trypanosomes, which cause
devastatinghumandiseasesandinfectaninsectspeciesduringaportionoftheirlifecycle.T.bruceidevelopsin
thegutofthetsetseflyaftertheflybitesaninfectedhumanorothermammalianhost.Theparasitethentravels
to the insect salivary glands to be transmitted to another human or other mammal when the infected tsetse
fly consumes another blood meal. T. brucei is common in central Africa and is the causative agent of African
sleeping sickness, a disease associated with severe chronic fatigue, coma, and can be fatal if left untreated.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 668
Chapter 23 | Protists 657
Figure23.31Sleepingsickness.Trypanosomabrucei,thecausativeagentofsleepingsickness,spendspartofitslife
cycle in the tsetse fly and part in humans. (credit: modification of work by CDC)
Watch this video to see T. brucei swimming. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://
cnx.org/content/m66555/1.3/#eip-id1167232288213)
23.4 | Ecology of Protists
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the role that protists play in the ecosystem
• Describe important pathogenic species of protists
Protists function in various ecological niches. Whereas some protist species are essential components of the
food chain and generators of biomass, others function in the decomposition of organic materials. Still other
protists are dangerous human pathogens or causative agents of devastating plant diseases.
Primary Producers/Food Sources
Protists are essential sources of food and provide nutrition for many other organisms. In some cases, as
with zooplankton, protists are consumed directly. Alternatively, photosynthetic protists serve as producers of
nutrition for other organisms. Paramecium bursaria and several other species of ciliates are mixotrophic due
to a symbiotic relationship with green algae. This is a temporary version of the secondarily endosymbiotic
PAGE: 669
658 Chapter 23 | Protists
chloroplast found in Euglena. But these symbiotic associations are not restricted to protists. For instance,
photosynthetic dinoflagellates called zooxanthellae provide nutrients for the coral polyps (Figure 23.32) that
house them, giving corals a boost of energy to secrete their calcium carbonate skeleton. In turn, the corals
provide the protist with a protected environment and the compounds needed for photosynthesis. This type of
symbiotic relationship is important in nutrient-poor environments. Without dinoflagellate symbionts, corals lose
algalpigmentsinaprocesscalledcoralbleaching,andtheyeventuallydie.Thisexplainswhyreef-buildingcorals
typicallydonotresideinwatersdeeperthan20meters:insufficientlightreachesthosedepthsfordinoflagellates
to photosynthesize.
Figure 23.32 Coral with symbiotic dinoflagellates. Coral polyps obtain nutrition through a symbiotic relationship with
dinoflagellates.
The protists and their products of photosynthesis are essential—directly or indirectly—to the survival of
organisms ranging from bacteria to mammals (Figure 23.33). As primary producers, protists feed a large
proportion of the world’s aquatic species. (On land, terrestrial plants serve as primary producers.) In fact,
approximately 25 percent of the world’s photosynthesis is conducted by photosynthetic protists, particularly
dinoflagellates, diatoms, and multicellular algae.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 670
Chapter 23 | Protists 659
Figure 23.33 Protists contribute to the food chain. Virtually all aquatic organisms depend directly or indirectly on
protists for food. (credit “mollusks”: modification of work by Craig Stihler, USFWS; credit “crab”: modification of work
by David Berkowitz; credit “dolphin”: modification of work by Mike Baird; credit “fish”: modification of work by Tim
Sheerman-Chase; credit “penguin”: modification of work by Aaron Logan)
Protists do not create food sources only for sea-dwelling organisms. Recall that certain anaerobic parabasalid
speciesexistinthedigestivetractsoftermitesandwood-eatingcockroaches,wheretheycontributeanessential
step in the digestion of cellulose ingested by these insects as they consume wood.
Human Pathogens
As we have seen, a pathogen is anything that causes disease. Parasitic organisms live in or on a host
organism and harm the organism. A small number of protists are serious pathogenic parasites that must
infect other organisms to survive and propagate. For example, protist parasites include the causative agents
of malaria, African sleeping sickness, amoebic encephalitis, and waterborne gastroenteritis in humans. Other
protist pathogens prey on plants, effecting massive destruction of food crops.
PlasmodiumSpecies
In 2015 WHO reported over 200 million cases of malaria, mostly in Africa, South America, and southern Asia.
However, it is not well known that malaria was also a prevalent and debilitating disease of the North Central
regionoftheUnitedStates,particularlyMichigan,withitsthousandsoflakesandnumerousswamps.Priortothe
civil war, and the drainage of many swamps, virtually everyone who immigrated to Michigan picked up malaria
(ague as it was called in the late 1800s), and the pale, sallow, bloated faces of that period were the rule. The
PAGE: 671
660 Chapter 23 | Protists
onlyhealthyfaceswerewornbythoseimmigrantswhohadjustarrived.Infact,thereweremoredeathsdueto
malaria in Michigan than those from the Civil War.
We now know that malaria is caused by several species of the apicomplexan protist genus Plasmodium.
MembersofPlasmodiummustsequentiallyrequirebothamosquitoandavertebratetocompletetheirlifecycle.
In vertebrates, the parasite develops in liver cells (the exoerythrocytic stage) and goes on to infect red blood
cells (the erythrocytic stage), bursting from and destroying the blood cells with each asexual replication cycle
(Figure23.34).OfthefourPlasmodiumspeciesknowntoinfecthumans,P.falciparumaccountsfor50percent
ofallmalariacasesandistheprimary(anddeadliest)causeofdisease-relatedfatalitiesintropicalregionsofthe
world.In2015,itwasestimatedthatmalariacausedover400,000deaths,mostlyinAfricanchildren.Duringthe
courseofmalaria,P.falciparumcaninfectanddestroymorethanone-halfofahuman’scirculatingbloodcells,
leading to severe anemia. In response to waste products released as the parasites burst from infected blood
cells, the host immune system mounts a massive inflammatory response with episodes of delirium-inducing
fever (paroxysms) as parasites lyse red blood cells, spilling parasite waste into the bloodstream. P. falciparum
is transmitted to humans by the African mosquito, Anopheles gambiae. Techniques to kill, sterilize, or avoid
exposure to this highly aggressive mosquito species are crucial to malaria control. Ironically, a type of genetic
control has arisen in parts of the world where malaria is endemic. Possession of one copy of the HbS beta
globinalleleresultsinmalariaresistance.Unfortunately,thisallelealsohasanunfortunatesecondeffect;when
homozygous it causes sickle cell disease.
Figure 23.34 Malaria parasite. Red blood cells are shown to be infected with P. falciparum, the causative agent of
malaria. In this light microscopic image taken using a 100× oil immersion lens, the ring-shaped P. falciparum stains
purple. (credit: modification of work by Michael Zahniser; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
This movie (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/malaria) depicts the pathogenesis of Plasmodium falciparum, the
causative agent of malaria.
Trypanosomes
Trypanosomabrucei(Figure23.35),transmittedbytsetseflies(Glossinaspp)inAfrica,andrelatedfliesinSouth
America,isanflagellatedendoparasiteresponsibleforthedeadlydiseasenaganaincattleandhorses,andfor
African sleeping sicknessinhumans. This trypanosome confounds the humanimmunesystembychanging its
thick layer of surface glycoproteins with each infectious cycle. (The glycoproteins are identified by the immune
systemasforeignantigens,andaspecificantibodydefenseismountedagainsttheparasite.)However,T.brucei
hasthousandsofpossibleantigens,andwitheachsubsequentgeneration,theprotistswitchestoaglycoprotein
coating with a different molecular structure. In this way, T. brucei is capable of replicating continuously without
the immune system ever succeeding in clearing the parasite. Without treatment, T. brucei attacks red blood
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 672
Chapter 23 | Protists 661
cells, causing the patient to lapse into a coma and eventually die. During epidemic periods, mortality from the
diseasecanbehigh.Greatersurveillanceandcontrolmeasuresleadtoareductioninreportedcases;someof
thelowestnumbersreportedin50years(fewerthan10,000casesinallofsub-SaharanAfrica)havehappened
since 2009.
This movie (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/African_sleep) discusses the pathogenesis of Trypanosoma
brucei, the causative agent of African sleeping sickness.
InLatinAmerica,anotherspeciesoftrypanosome,T.cruzi,isresponsibleforChagasdisease.T.cruziinfections
aremainlycausedbyablood-sucking“kissingbug”inthegenusTriatoma.These“truebugs”bitethehostduring
thenightandthendefecateonthewound,transmittingthetrypanosometothevictim.Thevictimscratchesthe
wound,furtherinoculatingthesitewithtrypanosomesatthelocationofthebite.Afterabout10weeks,individuals
enter the chronic phase but most never develop further symptoms. In about 30 percent of cases, however, the
trypanosomecausesfurtherdamage,especiallytotheheartanddigestivesystemtissuesinthechronicphase
of infection, leading to malnutrition and heart failure due to abnormal heart rhythms. An estimated 10 million
people are infected with Chagas disease, and it caused 10,000 deaths in 2008.
Figure 23.35 Trypanosomes. Trypanosomes are shown among red blood cells. (credit: modification of work by Dr.
Myron G. Shultz; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Plant Parasites
Protist parasites of terrestrial plants include agents that destroy food crops. The oomycete Plasmopara viticola
parasitizes grape plants, causing a disease called downy mildew (Figure 23.36). Grape plants infected with P.
viticolaappearstuntedandhavediscolored,witheredleaves.Thespreadofdownymildewnearlycollapsedthe
French wine industry in the nineteenth century.
PAGE: 673
662 Chapter 23 | Protists
Figure23.36Protistplantinfections.Bothdownyandpowderymildewsonthisgrapeleafarecausedbyaninfection
ofP.viticola. (credit: modification of work by USDA)
Phytophthorainfestansisanoomyceteresponsibleforpotatolateblight,whichcausespotatostalksandstems
todecayintoblackslime(Figure23.37).WidespreadpotatoblightcausedbyP.infestansprecipitatedthewell-
knownIrishpotatofamineinthenineteenthcenturythatclaimedthelivesofapproximately1millionpeopleand
led to the emigration of at least 1 million more from Ireland. Late blight continues to plague potato crops in
certainpartsoftheUnitedStatesandRussia,wipingoutasmuchas70percentofcropswhennopesticidesare
applied.
Figure23.37Potatoblight.TheseunappetizingremnantsresultfromaninfectionwithP.infestans,thecausativeagent
of potato late blight. (credit: USDA)
Protist Decomposers
Thefungus-likeprotistsaprobesarespecializedtoabsorbnutrientsfromnonlivingorganicmatter,suchasdead
organisms or their wastes. For instance, many types of oomycetes grow on dead animals or algae. Saprobic
protistshavetheessentialfunctionofreturninginorganicnutrientstothesoilandwater.Thisprocessallowsfor
newplantgrowth,whichinturngeneratessustenanceforotherorganismsalongthefoodchain.Indeed,without
saprobe species, such as protists, fungi, and bacteria, life would cease to exist as all organic carbon became
“tied up” in dead organisms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 674
Chapter 23 | Protists 663
KEY TERMS
biological carbon pump process by which inorganic carbon is fixed by photosynthetic species that then die
andfalltotheseafloorwheretheycannotbereachedbysaprobesandtheircarbondioxideconsumption
cannot be returned to the atmosphere
bioluminescence generation and emission of light by an organism, as in dinoflagellates
contractile vacuole vesiclethatfillswithwater(asitentersthecellbyosmosis)andthencontractstosqueeze
water from the cell; an osmoregulatory vesicle
cytoplasmic streaming movement of cytoplasm into an extended pseudopod such that the entire cell is
transported to the site of the pseudopod
endosymbiosis engulfment of one cell within another such that the engulfed cell survives, and both cells
benefit; the process responsible for the evolution of mitochondria and chloroplasts in eukaryotes
endosymbiotic theory theory that states that eukaryotes may have been a product of one cell engulfing
another, one living within another, and evolving over time until the separate cells were no longer
recognizable as such
hydrogenosome organelle carried by parabasalids (Excavata) that functions anaerobically and outputs
hydrogen gas as a byproduct; likely evolved from mitochondria
kinetoplast mass of DNA carried within the single, oversized mitochondrion, characteristic of kinetoplastids
(phylum: Euglenozoa)
mitosome nonfunctional organelle carried in the cells of diplomonads (Excavata) that likely evolved from a
mitochondrion
mixotroph organism that can obtain nutrition by autotrophic or heterotrophic means, usually facultatively
pellicle outer cell covering composed of interlocking protein strips that function like a flexible coat of armor,
preventing cells from being torn or pierced without compromising their range of motion
phagolysosome cellular body formed by the union of a phagosome containing the ingested particle with a
lysosome that contains hydrolytic enzymes
plankton diversegroupofmostlymicroscopicorganismsthatdriftinmarineandfreshwatersystemsandserve
as a food source for larger aquatic organisms
plastid one of a group of related organelles in plant cells that are involved in the storage of starches, fats,
proteins, and pigments
raphe slitinthesilicashellofdiatomsthroughwhichtheprotistsecretesastreamofmucopolysaccharidesfor
locomotion and attachment to substrates
test porous shell of a foram that is built from various organic materials and typically hardened with calcium
carbonate
CHAPTER SUMMARY
23.1Eukaryotic Origins
The oldest fossil evidence of eukaryotes is about 2 billion years old. Fossils older than this all appear to be
prokaryotes. It is probable that today’s eukaryotes are descended from an ancestor that had a prokaryotic
organization. The last common ancestor of today’s Eukarya had several characteristics, including cells with
nuclei and an endomembrane system (which includes the nuclear envelope). Its chromosomes were linear and
contained DNA associated with histones. The nuclear genome seems to be descended from an archaean
ancestor. This ancestor would have had a cytoskeleton and divided its chromosomes mitotically.
The ancestral cytoskeletal system included the ability to make cilia/flagella during at least part of its life cycle. It
PAGE: 675
664 Chapter 23 | Protists
was aerobic because it had mitochondria derived from an aerobic alpha-proteobacterium that lived inside a
host cell. Whether this host had a nucleus at the time of the initial symbiosis remains unknown. The last
common ancestor may have had a cell wall for at least part of its life cycle, but more data are needed to
confirm this hypothesis. Today’s eukaryotes are very diverse in their shapes, organization, life cycles, and
number of cells per individual.
23.2Characteristics of Protists
Protists are extremely diverse in terms of their biological and ecological characteristics, partly because they are
an artificial assemblage of phylogenetically unrelated groups. Protists display highly varied cell structures,
several types of reproductive strategies, virtually every possible type of nutrition, and varied habitats. Most
single-celled protists are motile, but these organisms use diverse structures for transportation.
23.3Groups of Protists
The process of classifying protists into meaningful groups is ongoing, but genetic data in the past 20 years
have clarified many relationships that were previously unclear or mistaken. The majority view at present is to
order all eukaryotes into six supergroups: Archaeplastida, Amoebozoa, Opisthokonta, Rhizaria,
Chromalveolata, and Excavata. The goal of this classification scheme is to create clusters of species that all
are derived from a common ancestor. At present, the monophyly of some of the supergroups are better
supported by genetic data than others. Although tremendous variation exists within the supergroups,
commonalities at the morphological, physiological, and ecological levels can be identified.
23.4Ecology of Protists
Protists function at several levels of the ecological food web: as primary producers, as direct food sources, and
as decomposers. In addition, many protists are parasites of plants and animals and can cause deadly human
diseases or destroy valuable crops.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 23.5What evidence is there that 3.Figure 23.28Which of the following statements
mitochondria were incorporated into the ancestral about theLaminarialife cycle is false?
eukaryotic cell before chloroplasts? a. 1nzoospores form in the sporangia.
b. The sporophyte is the2nplant.
2.Figure 23.25Which of the following statements
c. The gametophyte is diploid.
aboutParameciumsexual reproduction is false?
d. Both the gametophyte and sporophyte
stages are multicellular.
a. The macronuclei are derived from
micronuclei.
b. Both mitosis and meiosis occur during
sexual reproduction.
c. The conjugate pair swaps macronuclei.
d. Each parent produces four daughter cells.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.What event is thought to have contributed to the 6.Mitochondria most likely evolved by
evolution of eukaryotes? _____________.
a. global warming a. a photosynthetic cyanobacterium
b. glaciation b. cytoskeletal elements
c. volcanic activity c. endosymbiosis
d. oxygenation of the atmosphere d. membrane proliferation
5.Which characteristic is shared by prokaryotes and 7.Which of these protists is believed to have evolved
eukaryotes? following a secondary endosymbiosis?
a. cytoskeleton a. green algae
b. nuclear envelope b. cyanobacteria
c. DNA-based genome c. red algae
d. mitochondria d. chlorarachniophytes
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 676
Chapter 23 | Protists 665
8.In 2016, scientists published the genome of a. Anaerobic heterotroph
Monocercomonoides, and demonstrated that this b. Mixotroph
organism has no detectable mitochondrial genes. c. Aerobic phototroph
However, its genome was arranged in linear d. Phagocytic autotroph
chromosomes wrapped around histones which are
15.Which protist group exhibits mitochondrial
contained within the nucleus.Monocercomonoidesis
remnants with reduced functionality?
therefore a(n) _________.
a. slime molds
a. Bacteria
b. diatoms
b. Archea
c. parabasalids
c. Eukaryote
d. dinoflagellates
d. Endosymbiont
16.Conjugation between twoParameciaproduces
9.Which of the following observations about a
________ total daughter cells.
bacterium would distinguish it from the last eukaryotic
a. 2
common ancestor?
b. 4
a. A double-stranded DNA genome
c. 8
b. Lack of a membrane-bound structure
d. 16
surrounding the genome
c. Fatty acids in the lipid bilayer of the plasma 17.What is the function of the raphe in diatoms?
membrane
d. Enclosed by a cell wall a. locomotion
b. defense
10.Protists that have a pellicle are surrounded by
c. capturing food
______________.
d. photosynthesis
a. silica dioxide
b. calcium carbonate 18.What genus of protists appears to contradict the
c. carbohydrates statement that unicellularity restricts cell size?
d. proteins
a. Dictyostelium
11.Protists with the capabilities to perform
b. Ulva
photosynthesis and to absorb nutrients from dead
c. Plasmodium
organisms are called ______________.
d. Caulerpa
a. photoautotrophs
b. mixotrophs 19.A marine biologist analyzing water samples
c. saprobes notices a protist with a calcium carbonate shell that
d. heterotrophs moves by pseudopodia extension. The protist is likely
to be closely related to which species?
12.Which of these locomotor organs would likely be
a. Fuligo septica(Dog Vomit slime mold)
the shortest?
b. Circogonia icosahedra(Radiolarian)
a. a flagellum
c. Euglena viridis
b. a cilium
d. Ammonia tepida
c. an extended pseudopod
d. a pellicle 20.An example of carbon fixation is _____________.
13.Alternation of generations describes which of the
a. photosynthesis
following?
b. decomposition
a. The haploid form can be multicellular; the
c. phagocytosis
diploid form is unicellular.
d. parasitism
b. The haploid form is unicellular; the diploid
form can be multicellular. 21.Which parasitic protist evades the host immune
c. Both the haploid and diploid forms can be system by altering its surface proteins with each
multicellular. generation?
d. Neither the haploid nor the diploid forms can a. Paramecium caudatum
be multicellular. b. Trypanosoma brucei
c. Plasmodium falciparum
14.The amoebaE. histolyticais a pathogen that
d. Phytophthora infestans
forms liver abscesses in infected individuals. Its
metabolic classification is most likely ______. 22.Which of the following isnota way that protists
contribute to the food web?
PAGE: 677
666 Chapter 23 | Protists
a. They fix carbon into organic molecules.
b. They occupy the apex producer niche.
c. They enter symbiotic relationships with
animals.
d. They recycle nutrients back into the carbon
and nitrogen cycles.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
23.Describe the hypothesized steps in the origin of like structures, but onlyUlvaspecies are considered
eukaryotic cells. truly multicellular. Explain why.
24.Some aspects of eukaryotes are more similar to 29.Why might a light-sensing eyespot be ineffective
Archaea, while other aspects of eukaryotic cell for an obligate saprobe? Suggest an alternative
composition appear more closely related to Bacteria. organ for a saprobic protist.
Explain how endosymbiosis could resolve this
30.Opisthokonta includes animals and fungi, as well
paradox.
as protists. Describe the key feature of this phylum,
25.Explain in your own words why sexual and an example of how an organism in each kingdom
reproduction can be useful if a protist’s environment uses this feature.
changes.
31.Describe two ways in which paramecium differs
26.Giardia lambliais a cyst-forming protist parasite from the projected traits of the last eukaryotic
that causes diarrhea if ingested. Given this common ancestor.
information, against what type(s) of environments
32.How does killingAnophelesmosquitoes affect the
mightG. lambliacysts be particularly resistant?
Plasmodiumprotists?
27.Explain how the definition of protists ensures that
33.Without treatment, why does African sleeping
the kingdom Protista includes a wide diversity of
sickness invariably lead to death?
cellular structures. Provide an example of two
different structures that perform the same function for 34.Describe how increasing stress to the ocean
their respective protist. would affect a food chain containing zooxanthellae,
corals, parrotfish, and sharks.
28.The chlorophyte (green algae) generaUlvaand
Caulerpaboth have macroscopic leaf-like and stem-
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 678
Chapter 24 | Fungi 667
24 | FUNGI
Figure 24.1 Many species of fungus produce the familiar mushroom (a) which is a reproductive structure. This (b)
coralfungusdisplaysbrightlycoloredfruitingbodies.Thiselectronmicrographshows(c)thespore-bearingstructures
ofAspergillus,atypeoftoxicfungusfoundmostlyinsoilandplants.(credit“mushroom”:modificationofworkbyChris
Wee; credit “coral fungus”: modification of work by Cory Zanker; credit “Aspergillus”: modification of work by Janice
Haney Carr, Robert Simmons, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Chapter Outline
24.1:Characteristics of Fungi
24.2:Classifications of Fungi
24.3:Ecology of Fungi
24.4:Fungal Parasites and Pathogens
24.5:Importance of Fungi in Human Life
Introduction
The word fungus comes from the Latin word for mushrooms. Indeed, the familiar mushroom is a reproductive
structure used by many types of fungi. However, there are also many fungus species that don't produce
mushrooms at all. Being eukaryotes, a typical fungal cell contains a true nucleus and many membrane-bound
organelles. The kingdom Fungi includes an enormous variety of living organisms collectively referred to as
Eucomycota,ortrueFungi.Whilescientistshaveidentifiedabout100,000speciesoffungi,thisisonlyafraction
of the 1.5 million species of fungus likely present on Earth. Edible mushrooms, yeasts, black mold, and the
producer of the antibiotic penicillin, Penicillium notatum, are all members of the kingdom Fungi, which belongs
to the domain Eukarya.
Fungi, once considered plant-like organisms, are more closely related to animals than plants. Fungi are not
capableofphotosynthesis:theyareheterotrophicbecausetheyusecomplexorganiccompoundsassourcesof
energyandcarbon.Fungishareafewothertraitswithanimals.Theircellwallsarecomposedofchitin,whichis
found in the exoskeletons of arthropods. Fungi produce a number of pigments, including melanin,also found in
the hair and skin of animals. Like animals, fungi also store carbohydrates as glycogen. However, like bacteria,
fungiabsorbnutrientsacrossthecellsurfaceandactasdecomposers,helpingtorecyclenutrientsbybreaking
down organic materials to simple molecules.
Somefungalorganismsmultiplyonlyasexually,whereasothersundergobothasexualreproductionandsexual
reproduction with alternation of generations. Most fungi produce a large number of spores, which are haploid
cells that can undergo mitosis to form multicellular, haploid individuals.
Fungi often interact with other organisms, forming beneficial or mutualistic associations. For example, most
PAGE: 679
668 Chapter 24 | Fungi
terrestrial plants form symbiotic relationships with fungi. The roots of the plant connect with the underground
parts of the fungus, which form mycorrhizae. Through mycorrhizae, the fungus and plant exchange nutrients
andwater,greatlyaidingthesurvivalofbothspecies.Alternatively,lichensareanassociationbetweenafungus
and its photosynthetic partner (usually an alga).
Fungialsocauseseriousinfectionsinplantsandanimals.Forexample,Dutchelmdisease,whichiscausedby
the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi, is a particularly devastating type of fungal infestation that destroys many native
species of elm (Ulmus sp.) by infecting the tree’s vascular system. The elm bark beetle acts as a vector,
transmittingthediseasefromtreetotree.Accidentallyintroducedinthe1900s,thefungusdecimatedelmtrees
acrossthecontinent.ManyEuropeanandAsiaticelmsarelesssusceptibletoDutchelmdiseasethanAmerican
elms.
Inhumans,fungalinfectionsaregenerallyconsideredchallengingtotreat.Unlikebacteria,fungidonotrespond
to traditional antibiotic therapy, since they are eukaryotes. Fungal infections may prove deadly for individuals
with compromised immune systems.
Fungi have many commercial applications. The food industry uses yeasts in baking, brewing, and cheese and
wine making. Many industrial compounds are byproducts of fungal fermentation. Fungi are the source of many
commercial enzymes and antibiotics.
24.1 | Characteristics of Fungi
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the characteristics of fungi
• Describe the composition of the mycelium
• Describe the mode of nutrition of fungi
• Explain sexual and asexual reproduction in fungi
Although humans have used yeasts and mushrooms since prehistoric times, until recently, the biology of fungi
was poorly understood. In fact, up until the mid-20th century, many scientists classified fungi as plants! Fungi,
like plants, are mostly sessile and seemingly rooted in place. They possess a stem-like structure similar to
plants, as well as having a root-like fungal mycelium in the soil. In addition, their mode of nutrition was poorly
understood. Progress in the field of fungal biology was the result of mycology: the scientific study of fungi.
Based on fossil evidence, fungi appeared in the pre-Cambrian era, about 450 million years ago. Molecular
biologyanalysisofthefungalgenomedemonstrates thatfungiaremorecloselyrelatedtoanimalsthanplants.
Under some current systematic phylogenies, they continue to be a polyphyletic group of organisms that share
characteristics, rather than sharing a single common ancestor.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 680
Chapter 24 | Fungi 669
Mycologist
Mycologists are biologists who study fungi. Historically, mycology was a branch of microbiology, and
many mycologists start their careers with a degree in microbiology. To become a mycologist, a bachelor's
degreeinabiologicalscience(preferablymajoringinmicrobiology)andamaster'sdegreeinmycologyare
minimally necessary. Mycologists can specialize in taxonomy and fungal genomics, molecular and cellular
biology, plant pathology, biotechnology, or biochemistry. Some medical microbiologists concentrate on the
study of infectious diseases caused by fungi, called mycoses. Mycologists collaborate with zoologists and
plant pathologists to identify and control difficult fungal infections, such as the devastating chestnut blight,
the mysterious decline in frog populations in many areas of the world, or the deadly epidemic called white
nose syndrome, which is decimating bats in the Eastern United States.
Governmentagencieshiremycologistsasresearchscientistsandtechnicianstomonitorthehealthofcrops,
national parks, and national forests. Mycologists are also employed in the private sector by companies
that develop chemical and biological control products or new agricultural products, and by companies that
provide disease control services. Because of the key role played by fungi in the fermentation of alcohol
and the preparation of many important foods, scientists with a good understanding of fungal physiology
routinelyworkinthefoodtechnologyindustry.Oenology,thescienceofwinemaking,reliesnotonlyonthe
knowledgeofgrapevarietalsandsoilcomposition,butalsoonasolidunderstandingofthecharacteristics
ofthewildyeaststhatthriveindifferentwine-makingregions.Itispossibletopurchaseyeaststrainsisolated
from specific grape-growing regions. The great French chemist and microbiologist, Louis Pasteur, made
many of his essential discoveries working on the humble brewer’s yeast, thus discovering the process of
fermentation.
Cell Structure and Function
Fungi are eukaryotes, and as such, have a complex cellular organization. As eukaryotes, fungal cells contain
a membrane-bound nucleus. The DNA in the nucleus is wrapped around histone proteins, as is observed in
othereukaryoticcells.Afewtypesoffungihaveaccessorygenomicstructurescomparabletobacterialplasmids
(loops of DNA); however, the horizontal transfer of genetic information that occurs between one bacterium
and another rarely occurs in fungi. Fungal cells also contain mitochondria and a complex system of internal
membranes, including the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus.
Unlike plant cells, fungal cells do not have chloroplasts or chlorophyll. Many fungi display bright colors arising
from other cellular pigments, ranging from red to green to black. The poisonous Amanita muscaria (fly agaric)
isrecognizablebyitsbrightredcapwithwhitepatches(Figure24.2).Pigmentsinfungiareassociatedwiththe
cell wall and play a protective role against ultraviolet radiation. Some fungal pigments are toxic to humans.
Figure 24.2 Amanita. The poisonous Amanita muscaria is native to temperate and boreal regions of North America.
(credit: Christine Majul)
Like plant cells, fungal cells have a thick cell wall. The rigid layers of fungal cell walls contain complex
PAGE: 681
670 Chapter 24 | Fungi
polysaccharides called chitin and glucans. Chitin (N-acetyl-D-glucosamine), also found in the exoskeleton of
arthropods such as insects, gives structural strength to the cell walls of fungi. The wall protects the cell from
desiccation and some predators. Fungi have plasma membranes similar to those of other eukaryotes, except
thatthestructureisstabilizedbyergosterol:asteroidmoleculethatreplacesthecholesterolfoundinanimalcell
membranes.MostmembersofthekingdomFungiarenonmotile.However,flagellaareproducedbythespores
and gametes in the primitive Phylum Chytridiomycota.
Growth
The vegetative body of a fungus is a unicellular or multicellular thallus. Unicellular fungi are called yeasts.
Multicellularfungiproducethreadlikehyphae(singularhypha).Dimorphicfungicanchangefromtheunicellular
to multicellular state depending on environmental conditions. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast) and
Candida species (the agents of thrush, a common fungal infection) are examples of unicellular fungi (Figure
24.3).
Figure24.3Candidaalbicans.Candidaalbicansisayeastcellandtheagentofcandidiasisandthrush.Thisorganism
has a similar morphology to coccus bacteria; however, yeast is a eukaryotic organism (note the nucleus). (credit:
modification of work by Dr. Godon Roberstad, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Most fungi are multicellular organisms. They display two distinct morphological stages: the vegetative and
reproductive.Thevegetativestageconsistsofatangleofhyphae,whereasthereproductivestagecanbemore
conspicuous. The mass of hyphae is a mycelium (Figure 24.4). It can grow on a surface, in soil or decaying
material,inaliquid,orevenonlivingtissue.Althoughindividualhyphaemustbeobservedunderamicroscope,
the mycelium of a fungus can be very large, with some species truly being “the fungus humongous.” The giant
Armillariasolidipes(honeymushroom)isconsideredthelargestorganismonEarth,spreadingacrossmorethan
2,000 acres of underground soil in eastern Oregon; it is estimated to be at least 2,400 years old.
Figure24.4Afungalmycelium.ThemyceliumofthefungusNeotestudinarosaticanbepathogenictohumans.The
fungus enters through a cut or scrape and develops amycetoma, a chronic subcutaneous infection. (credit: CDC)
Mostfungalhyphaearedividedintoseparatecellsbyendwallscalledsepta(singular,septum)(Figure 24.5a,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 682
Chapter 24 | Fungi 671
c). In most phyla of fungi, tiny holes in the septa allow for the rapid flow of nutrients and small molecules from
celltocellalongthehypha.Theyaredescribedasperforatedsepta.Thehyphaeinbreadmolds(whichbelong
tothePhylumZygomycota)arenotseparatedbysepta.Instead,theyareformedbylargecellscontainingmany
nuclei (multinucleate), an arrangement described ascoenocytic hyphae(Figure 24.5b).
Figure24.5Fungalhyphae.Fungalhyphaemaybe(a)septatedor(b)coenocytic(coeno-="common";-cytic="cell")
withmanynucleipresentinasinglehypha.Abrightfieldlightmicrographof(c)Phialophorarichardsiaeshowssepta
that divide the hyphae. (credit c: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Fungi thrive in environments that are moist and slightly acidic, and can grow with or without light. They vary in
theiroxygenrequirement.Mostfungiareobligateaerobes,requiringoxygentosurvive.Otherspecies,suchas
membersoftheChytridiomycotathatresideintherumenofcattle,areobligateanaerobes,inthattheyonlyuse
anaerobic respiration because oxygen will disrupt their metabolism or kill them. Yeasts are intermediate, being
facultative anaerobes. This means that they grow best in the presence of oxygen using aerobic respiration,
but can survive using anaerobic respiration when oxygen is not available. The alcohol produced from yeast
fermentation is used in wine and beer production.
Nutrition
Like animals, fungi are heterotrophs; they use complex organic compounds as a source of carbon, rather than
fix carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as do some bacteria and most plants. In addition, fungi do not fix
nitrogen from the atmosphere. Like animals, they must obtain it from their diet. However, unlike most animals,
which ingest food and then digest it internally in specialized organs, fungi perform these steps in the reverse
order; digestion precedes ingestion. First, exoenzymes are transported out of the hyphae, where they process
nutrients in the environment. Then, the smaller molecules produced by this external digestion are absorbed
throughthelargesurfaceareaofthemycelium.Aswithanimalcells,thepolysaccharideofstorageisglycogen,
a branched polysaccaride, rather than amylopectin, a less densely branched polysaccharide, and amylose, a
linear polysaccharide, as found in plants.
Fungi are mostly saprobes (saprophyte is an equivalent term): organisms that derive nutrients from decaying
organic matter. They obtain their nutrients from dead or decomposing organic material derived mainly from
plants. Fungal exoenzymes are able to break down insoluble compounds, such as the cellulose and lignin
of dead wood, into readily absorbable glucose molecules. The carbon, nitrogen, and other elements are thus
released into the environment. Because of their varied metabolic pathways, fungi fulfill an important ecological
role and are being investigated as potential tools in bioremediation of chemically damaged ecosystems. For
example, some species of fungi can be used to break down diesel oil and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(PAHs). Other species take up heavy metals, such as cadmium and lead.
Somefungiareparasitic,infectingeitherplantsoranimals.SmutandDutchelmdiseaseaffectplants,whereas
athlete’sfootandcandidiasis(thrush)aremedicallyimportantfungalinfectionsinhumans.Inenvironmentspoor
PAGE: 683
672 Chapter 24 | Fungi
in nitrogen, some fungi resort to predation of nematodes (small non-segmented roundworms). In fact, species
of Arthrobotrys fungi have a number of mechanisms to trap nematodes: One mechanism involves constricting
ringswithinthenetworkofhyphae.Theringsswellwhentheytouchthenematode,grippingitinatighthold.The
fungusthenpenetratesthetissueofthewormbyextendingspecializedhyphaecalledhaustoria.Manyparasitic
fungipossesshaustoria,asthesestructurespenetratethetissuesofthehost,releasedigestiveenzymeswithin
the host's body, and absorb the digested nutrients.
Reproduction
Fungi reproduce sexually and/or asexually. Perfect fungi reproduce both sexually and asexually, while the so-
called imperfect fungi reproduce only asexually (by mitosis).
Inbothsexualandasexualreproduction,fungiproducesporesthatdispersefromtheparentorganismbyeither
floatingonthewindorhitchingarideonananimal.Fungalsporesaresmallerandlighterthanplantseeds.For
example, the giant puffball mushroom bursts open and releases trillions of spores in a massive cloud of what
looks like finely particulate dust. The huge number of spores released increases the likelihood of landing in an
environment that will support growth (Figure 24.6).
Figure 24.6 Puffball and spores. The (a) giant puffball mushroom releases (b) a cloud of spores when it reaches
maturity. (credit a: modification of work by Roger Griffith; credit b: modification of work by Pearson Scott Foresman,
donated to the Wikimedia Foundation)
Asexual Reproduction
Fungireproduceasexuallybyfragmentation,budding,orproducingspores.Fragmentsofhyphaecangrownew
colonies.Somaticcellsinyeastformbuds.Duringbudding(anexpandedtypeofcytokinesis),abulgeformson
the side of the cell, the nucleus divides mitotically, and the bud ultimately detaches itself from the mother cell
(Figure 24.7).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 684
Chapter 24 | Fungi 673
Figure 24.7 Budding in Histoplasma. The dark cells in this bright field light micrograph are the pathogenic yeast
Histoplasma capsulatum, seen against a backdrop of light blue tissue. Histoplasma primarily infects lungs but can
spreadtoothertissues,causinghistoplasmosis,apotentiallyfataldisease.(credit:modificationofworkbyDr.Libero
Ajello, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Themostcommonmodeofasexualreproductionisthroughtheformationofasexualspores,whichareproduced
by a single individual thallus (through mitosis) and are genetically identical to the parent thallus (Figure 24.8).
Sporesallowfungitoexpandtheirdistributionandcolonizenewenvironments.Theymaybereleasedfromthe
parent thallus either outside or within a special reproductive sac called asporangium.
PAGE: 685
674 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure 24.8Generalized fungal life cycle. Fungi may have both asexual and sexual stages of reproduction.
Therearemanytypesofasexualspores.Conidiosporesareunicellularormulticellularsporesthatarereleased
directlyfromthetiporsideofthehypha.Otherasexualsporesoriginateinthefragmentationofahyphatoform
single cells that are released as spores; some of these have a thick wall surrounding the fragment. Yet others
bud off the vegetative parent cell. In contrast to conidiospores, sporangiospores are produced directly from a
sporangium (Figure 24.9).
Figure24.9Sporangiospores.Thisbrightfieldlightmicrographshowsthereleaseofsporesfromasporangiumatthe
end of a hypha called a sporangiophore. The organism is a Mucor sp. fungus, a mold often found indoors. (credit:
modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 686
Chapter 24 | Fungi 675
Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction introduces genetic variation into a population of fungi. In fungi, sexual reproduction often
occurs in response to adverse environmental conditions. During sexual reproduction, two mating types are
produced. When both mating types are present in the same mycelium, it is called homothallic, or self-fertile.
Heterothallicmycelia require two different, but compatible, mycelia to reproduce sexually.
Althoughtherearemanyvariationsinfungalsexualreproduction,allincludethefollowingthreestages(Figure
24.8). First, during plasmogamy (literally, “marriage or union of cytoplasm”), two haploid cells fuse, leading to
adikaryoticstagewheretwohaploidnucleicoexistinasinglecell.Duringkaryogamy(“nuclearmarriage”),the
haploid nuclei fuse to form a diploid zygote nucleus. Finally, meiosis takes place in the gametangia (singular,
gametangium) organs, in which gametes of different mating types are generated. At this stage, spores are
disseminated into the environment.
Review the characteristics of fungi by visiting this interactive site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
fungi_kingdom)from Wisconsin-online.
24.2 | Classifications of Fungi
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify fungi and place them into the five major phyla according to current classification
• Describe each phylum in terms of major representative species and patterns of reproduction
The kingdom Fungi contains five major phyla that were established according to their mode of sexual
reproduction orusingmoleculardata. Polyphyletic, unrelated fungi that reproducewithout asexualcycle,were
onceplacedforconvenienceinasixthgroup,theDeuteromycota,calleda“formphylum,”becausesuperficially
they appeared to be similar. However, most mycologists have discontinued this practice. Rapid advances in
molecular biology and the sequencing of 18S rRNA (ribosomal RNA) continue to show new and different
relationships among the various categories of fungi.
The five true phyla of fungi are the Chytridiomycota (Chytrids), the Zygomycota (conjugated fungi), the
Ascomycota (sac fungi), the Basidiomycota (club fungi) and the recently described Phylum Glomeromycota
(Figure 24.10).
PAGE: 687
676 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure24.10Fungalphyla.Note:“-mycota”isusedtodesignateaphylumwhile“-mycetes”formallydenotesaclass
or is used informally to refer to all members of the phylum.
Chytridiomycota: The Chytrids
TheonlyclassinthePhylumChytridiomycotaistheChytridiomycetes.Thechytridsarethesimplestandmost
primitive Eumycota, or true fungi. The evolutionary record shows that the first recognizable chytrids appeared
duringthelatepre-Cambrianperiod,morethan500millionyearsago.Likeallfungi,chytridshavechitinintheir
cell walls, but one group of chytrids has both cellulose and chitin in the cell wall. Most chytrids are unicellular;
however,afewformmulticellularorganismsandhyphae,whichhavenoseptabetweencells(coenocytic).The
Chytrids are the only fungi that have retained flagella. They produce both gametes and diploid zoospores that
swimwiththehelpofasingleflagellum.Anunusualfeatureofthechytridsisthatbothmaleandfemalegametes
are flagellated.
Theecologicalhabitatandcellstructureofchytridshavemuchincommonwithprotists.Chytridsusuallylivein
aquaticenvironments,althoughsomespeciesliveonland.Somespeciesthriveasparasitesonplants,insects,
oramphibians(Figure24.11),whileothersaresaprobes.ThechytridspeciesAllomycesiswellcharacterizedas
anexperimentalorganism.Itsreproductivecycleincludesbothasexualandsexualphases.Allomycesproduces
diploid or haploid flagellated zoospores in a sporangium.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 688
Chapter 24 | Fungi 677
Figure24.11Chytrids.ThechytridBatrachochytriumdendrobatidisisseenintheselightmicrographsastransparent
spheresgrowingon(a)afreshwaterarthropod(watermite)and(b)algae.Thischytridcausesskindiseasesinmany
speciesofamphibians,resultinginspeciesdeclineandextinction.(credit:modificationofworkbyJohnsonML,Speare
R., CDC)
Zygomycota: The Conjugated Fungi
The zygomycetes are a relatively small group of fungi belonging to the Phylum Zygomycota. They include
the familiar bread mold, Rhizopus stolonifer, which rapidly propagates on the surfaces of breads, fruits, and
vegetables. Most species are saprobes, living off decaying organic material; a few are parasites, particularly
of insects. Zygomycetes play a considerable commercial role. For example, the metabolic products of some
species ofRhizopusare intermediates in the synthesis of semi-synthetic steroid hormones.
Zygomycetes have a thallus of coenocytic hyphae in which the nuclei are haploid when the organism is in the
vegetative stage. The fungi usually reproduce asexually by producing sporangiospores (Figure 24.12). The
black tips of bread mold are the swollen sporangia packed with black spores (Figure 24.13). When spores
land on a suitable substrate, they germinate and produce a new mycelium. Sexual reproduction starts when
environmentalconditionsbecomeunfavorable.Twoopposingmatingstrains(type+andtype–)mustbeinclose
proximity for gametangia from the hyphae to be produced and fuse, leading to karyogamy. Each zygospore
can contain several diploid nuclei. The developing diploid zygospores have thick coats that protect them from
desiccation and other hazards. They may remain dormant until environmental conditions are favorable. When
the zygospore germinates, it undergoes meiosis and produces haploid spores, which will, in turn, grow into a
neworganism. This formofsexualreproduction infungi iscalledconjugation (although itdiffersmarkedlyfrom
conjugation in bacteria and protists), giving rise to the name “conjugated fungi”.
PAGE: 689
678 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure24.12Zygomycetelifecycle.Zygomyceteshaveasexualandsexualphasesintheirlifecycles.Intheasexual
phase, spores are produced from haploid sporangia by mitosis (not shown). In the sexual phase, plus and minus
haploidmatingtypesconjugatetoformaheterokaryoticzygosporangium.Karyogamythenproducesadiploidzygote.
Diploid cells in the zygote undergo meiosis and germinate to form a haploid sporangium, which releases the next
generation of haploid spores.
Figure24.13Rhizopusspores.Asexualsporangiagrowattheendofstalks,whichappearas(a)whitefuzzseenon
this bread mold, Rhizopus stolonifer. The black tips (b) of bread mold are the spore-containing sporangia. (credit b:
modification of work by "polandeze"/Flickr)
Ascomycota: The Sac Fungi
The majority of known fungi belong to the Phylum Ascomycota, which is characterized by the formation of an
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 690
Chapter 24 | Fungi 679
ascus (plural, asci), a sac-like structure that contains haploid ascospores. Filamentous ascomycetes produce
hyphaedividedbyperforatedsepta,allowingstreamingofcytoplasmfromonecelltoanother.Conidiaandasci,
which are used respectively for asexual and sexual reproduction, are usually separated from the vegetative
hyphae by blocked (non-perforated) septa. Many ascomycetes are of commercial importance. Some play a
beneficialroleforhumanity,suchastheyeastsusedinbaking,brewing,andwinefermentation,anddirectlyas
food delicacies such as truffles and morels. Aspergillus oryzae is used in the fermentation of rice to produce
sake. Other ascomycetes parasitize plants and animals, including humans. For example, fungal pneumonia
poses a significant threat to AIDS patients who have a compromised immune system. Ascomycetes not only
infest and destroy crops directly; they also produce poisonous secondary metabolites that make crops unfit for
consumption.
Asexual reproduction is frequent and involves the production of conidiophores that release haploid
conidiospores (Figure 24.14). Sexual reproduction starts with the development of special hyphae from either
oneof two types of mating strains (Figure 24.14).The “male”strain producesanantheridium andthe “female”
strain develops an ascogonium. At fertilization, the antheridium and the ascogonium combine in plasmogamy,
without nuclear fusion. Special dikaryotic ascogenous (ascus-producing) hyphae arise from this dikaryon, in
whicheachcellhaspairsofnuclei:onefromthe“male”strainandonefromthe“female”strain.Ineachascus,
two haploid nuclei fuse in karyogamy. Thousands of asci fill a fruiting body called the ascocarp. The diploid
nucleus in each ascus gives rise to haploid nuclei by meiosis, and spore walls form around each nucleus. The
sporesineachascuscontainthemeioticproductsofasinglediploidnucleus.Theascosporesarethenreleased,
germinate, and form hyphae that are disseminated in the environment and start new mycelia (Figure 24.15).
PAGE: 691
680 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure 24.14 Ascomycete life cycle. The lifecycle of an ascomycete is characterized by the production of asci
duringthesexualphase.Ineachascus,thefournucleiproducedbymeiosisdivideoncemitoticallyforatotalof
eight haploid ascospores. The haploid phase is the predominant phase of the life cycle in Ascomycetes.
Which of the following statements is true?
a. Adikaryoticascusthatformsintheascocarpundergoeskaryogamy,meiosis,andmitosistoformeight
ascospores.
b. A diploid ascus that forms in the ascocarp undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form eight
ascospores.
c. Ahaploidzygotethatformsintheascocarpundergoeskaryogamy,meiosis,andmitosistoformeight
ascospores.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 692
Chapter 24 | Fungi 681
d. A dikaryotic ascus that forms in the ascocarp undergoes plasmogamy, meiosis, and mitosis to form
eight ascospores.
Figure24.15Ascospores.Thebrightfieldlightmicrographshowsascosporesbeingreleasedfromasciinthefungus
Talaromyces flavus var. flavus. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
Basidiomycota: The Club Fungi
The fungi in the Phylum Basidiomycota are easily recognizable under a light microscope by their club-
shapedfruitingbodiescalledbasidia(singular,basidium),whicharetheswollenterminalcellsofhyphae.The
basidia, which are the reproductive organs of these fungi, are often contained within the familiar mushroom,
commonlyseeninfieldsafterrain,onthesupermarketshelves,andgrowingonyourlawn(Figure24.16).These
mushroom-producing basidiomycetes are sometimes referred to as “gill fungi” because of the presence of gill-
like structures on the underside of the cap. The gills are actually compacted hyphae on which the basidia are
borne. This group also includes shelf fungi, which cling to the bark of trees like small shelves. In addition, the
basidiomycota include smuts and rusts, which are important plant pathogens. Most edible fungi belong to the
Phylum Basidiomycota; however, some basidiomycota are inedible and produce deadly toxins. For example,
Cryptococcus neoformans causes severe respiratory illness. The infamous death cap mushroom (Amanita
phalloides) is related to the fly agaric seen at the beginning of the previous section.
PAGE: 693
682 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure24.16Fairyring.Thefruitingbodiesofabasidiomyceteformaringinameadow,commonlycalled“fairyring.”
Thebest-knownfairyringfungushasthescientificnameMarasmiusoreades.Thebodyofthisfungus,itsmycelium,is
undergroundandgrowsoutwardinacircle.Asitgrows,themyceliumdepletesthesoilofnitrogen,causingthemycelia
to grow away from the center and leading to the “fairy ring” of fruiting bodies where there is adequate soil nitrogen.
(Credit: "Cropcircles"/Wikipedia Commons)]
The lifecycle of basidiomycetes includes alternation of generations (Figure 24.17). Most fungi are haploid
through most of their life cycles, but the basidiomycetes produce both haploid and dikaryotic mycelia, with
the dikaryotic phase being dominant. (Note: The dikaryotic phase is technically not diploid, since the nuclei
remainunfused until shortly before sporeproduction.) Inthe basidiomycetes, sexualsporesaremorecommon
than asexual spores. The sexual spores form in the club-shaped basidium and are called basidiospores. In
the basidium, nuclei of two different mating strains fuse (karyogamy), giving rise to a diploid zygote that then
undergoesmeiosis.Thehaploidnucleimigrateintofourdifferentchambersappendedtothebasidium,andthen
become basidiospores.
Eachbasidiosporegerminatesandgeneratesmonokaryotichaploidhyphae.Themyceliumthatresultsiscalled
a primary mycelium. Mycelia of different mating strains can combine and produce a secondary mycelium that
containshaploidnucleioftwodifferentmatingstrains.Thisisthedominantdikaryoticstageofthebasidiomycete
life cycle. Thus, each cell in this mycelium has two haploid nuclei, which will not fuse until formation of the
basidium.Eventually,thesecondarymyceliumgeneratesabasidiocarp,afruitingbodythatprotrudesfromthe
ground—thisiswhatwethinkofasamushroom.Thebasidiocarpbearsthedevelopingbasidiaonthegillsunder
its cap.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 694
Chapter 24 | Fungi 683
Figure24.17Basidiomycetelifecycle.Thelifecycleofabasidiomycetehasalternategenerationswithhaploidand
dikaryoticmycelia.Haploidprimarymyceliafusetoformadikaryoticsecondarymycelium,whichisthedominant
stage of the life cycle, and produces the basidiocarp.
Which of the following statements is true?
a. A basidium is the fruiting body of a mushroom-producing fungus, and it forms four basidiocarps.
b. The result of the plasmogamy step is four basidiospores.
c. Karyogamy results directly in the formation of mycelia.
d. A basidiocarp is the fruiting body of a mushroom-producing fungus.
PAGE: 695
684 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Asexual Ascomycota and Basidiomycota
Imperfect fungi—those that do not display a sexual phase—were formerly classified in the form phylum
Deuteromycota, an invalid taxon no longer used in the present, ever-developing classification of organisms.
While Deuteromycota was once a classification taxon, recent molecular analysis has shown that some of the
membersclassifiedinthisgroupbelongtotheAscomycota(Figure24.18)ortheBasidiomycota.Becausesome
membersofthisgrouphavenotyetbeenappropriatelyclassified,theyarelesswelldescribedincomparisonto
membersofotherfungaltaxa.Mostimperfectfungiliveonland,withafewaquaticexceptions.Theyformvisible
mycelia with a fuzzy appearance and are commonly known asmold.
Figure24.18Aspergillus.Aspergillusnigerisanasexuallyreproducingfungus(phylumAscomycota)commonlyfound
asafoodcontaminant.Thesphericalstructureinthislightmicrographisanasexualconidiophore.Molecularstudies
have placed Aspergillus with the ascomycetes and sexual cycles have been identified in some species. (credit:
modification of work by Dr. Lucille Georg, CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Thefungiinthisgrouphavealargeimpactoneverydayhumanlife.Thefoodindustryreliesonthemforripening
some cheeses. The blue veins in Roquefort cheese and the white crust on Camembert are the result of fungal
growth. The antibiotic penicillin was originally discovered on an overgrown Petri plate, on which a colony of
Penicilliumfungihadkilledthebacterialgrowthsurroundingit.Otherfungiinthisgroupcauseseriousdiseases,
either directly as parasites (which infect both plants and humans), or as producers of potent toxic compounds,
as seen in the aflatoxins released by fungi of the genusAspergillus.
Glomeromycota
TheGlomeromycotaisanewlyestablishedphylumthatcomprisesabout230species,allofwhichareinvolved
in close associations with the roots of trees. Fossil records indicate that trees and their root symbionts share
a long evolutionary history. It appears that nearly all members of this family form arbuscular mycorrhizae:
the hyphae interact with the root cells forming a mutually beneficial association in which the plants supply the
carbonsourceandenergyintheformofcarbohydratestothefungus,andthefungussuppliesessentialminerals
fromthesoiltotheplant.TheexceptionisGeosiphonpyriformis,whichhoststhecyanobacteriumNostocasan
endosymbiont.
Theglomeromycetesdonotreproducesexuallyanddonotsurvivewithoutthepresenceofplantroots.Although
they have coenocytic hyphae like the zygomycetes, they do not form zygospores. DNA analysis shows that all
glomeromycetes probably descended from a common ancestor, making them a monophyletic lineage.
24.3 | Ecology of Fungi
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the role of fungi in various ecosystems
• Describe mutualistic relationships of fungi with plant roots and photosynthetic organisms
• Describe the beneficial relationship between some fungi and insects
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 696
Chapter 24 | Fungi 685
Fungi play a crucial role in the constantly changing “balance” of ecosystems. They colonize most habitats on
Earth,preferringdark,moistconditions.Theycanthriveinseeminglyhostileenvironments,suchasthetundra,
thankstoamostsuccessfulsymbiosiswithphotosyntheticorganismslikealgaetoproducelichens.Withintheir
communities,fungiarenotasobviousasarelargeanimalsortalltreas.Likebacteria,theyactbehindthescene
asmajordecomposers.Withtheirversatilemetabolism,fungibreakdownorganicmatter,whichwouldotherwise
not be recycled.
Habitats
Although fungi are primarily associated with humid and cool environments that provide a supply of organic
matter, they colonize a surprising diversity of habitats, from seawater to human skin and mucous membranes.
Chytrids are found primarily in aquatic environments. Other fungi, such as Coccidioides immitis, which causes
pneumonia when its spores are inhaled, thrive in the dry and sandy soil of the southwestern United States.
Fungi that parasitize coral reefs live in the ocean. However, most members of the Kingdom Fungi grow on the
forest floor, where the dark and damp environment is rich in decaying debris from plants and animals. In these
environments, fungi play a major role as decomposers and recyclers, making it possible for members of the
other kingdoms to be supplied with nutrients and live.
Decomposers and Recyclers
The food web would be incomplete without organisms that decompose organic matter (Figure 24.19). Some
elements—such as nitrogen and phosphorus—are required in large quantities by biological systems, and yet
arenotabundantintheenvironment.Theactionoffungireleasestheseelementsfromdecayingmatter,making
themavailabletootherlivingorganisms.Traceelementspresentinlowamountsinmanyhabitatsareessential
for growth, and would remain tied up in rotting organic matter if fungi and bacteria did not return them to the
environment via their metabolic activity.
Figure24.19Bracketfungi.Fungiareanimportantpartofecosystemnutrientcycles.Thesebracketfungigrowingon
thesideofatreearethefruitingstructuresofabasidiomycete.Theyreceivetheirnutrientsthroughtheirhyphae,which
invade and decay the tree trunk. (credit: Cory Zanker)
The ability of fungi to degrade many large and insoluble molecules is due to their mode of nutrition. As seen
earlier, digestion precedes ingestion. Fungi produce a variety of exoenzymes to digest nutrients. The enzymes
areeitherreleasedintothesubstrateorremainboundtotheoutsideofthefungalcellwall.Largemoleculesare
brokendownintosmallmolecules,whicharetransportedintothecellbyasystemofproteincarriersembedded
in the cell membrane. Because the movement of small molecules and enzymes is dependent on the presence
of water, active growth depends on a relatively high percentage of moisture in the environment.
As saprobes, fungi help maintain a sustainable ecosystem for the animals and plants that share the same
habitat.Inadditiontoreplenishingtheenvironmentwithnutrients,fungiinteractdirectlywithotherorganismsin
beneficial, and sometimes damaging, ways (Figure 24.20).
PAGE: 697
686 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Figure24.20Shelffungi.Shelffungi,socalledbecausetheygrowontreesinastack,attackanddigestthetrunkor
branchesofatree.Whilesomeshelffungiarefoundonlyondeadtrees,otherscanparasitizelivingtreesandcause
eventual death, so they are considered serious tree pathogens. (credit: Cory Zanker)
Mutualistic Relationships
Symbiosis is the ecological interaction between two organisms that live together. This definition does not
describe the type or quality of the interaction. When both members of the association benefit, the symbiotic
relationship is called mutualistic. Fungi form mutualistic associations with many types of organisms, including
cyanobacteria, algae, plants, and animals.
Fungus/Plant Mutualism
One of the most remarkable associations between fungi and plants is the establishment of mycorrhizae.
Mycorrhiza, which is derived from the Greek words myco meaning fungus and rhizo meaning root, refers to
thefungalpartnerofamutualisticassociationbetweenvascularplantrootsandtheirsymbioticfungi.Nearly90
percentofallvascularplantspecieshavemycorrhizalpartners.Inamycorrhizalassociation,thefungalmycelia
use their extensive network of hyphae and large surface area in contact with the soil to channel water and
minerals from the soil into the plant. In exchange, the plant supplies the products of photosynthesis to fuel the
metabolism of the fungus.
There are several basic types of mycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae (“outside” mycorrhizae) depend on fungi
enveloping the roots in a sheath (called a mantle). Hyphae grow from the mantle into the root and envelope
the outer layers of the root cells in a network of hyphae called a Hartig net (Figure 24.21). The fungal partner
can belong to the Ascomycota, Basidiomycota or Zygomycota. Endomycorrhizae ("inside" mycorrhizae), also
calledarbuscularmycorrhizae,areproducedwhenthefungigrowinsidetherootinabranchedstructurecalled
an arbuscule (from the Latin for “little trees”). The fungal partners of endomycorrhizal associates all belong to
theGlomeromycota.Thefungalarbusculespenetraterootcellsbetweenthecellwallandtheplasmamembrane
andarethesiteofthemetabolicexchangesbetweenthefungusandthehostplant(Figure24.21bandFigure
24.22b). Orchids rely on a third type of mycorrhiza. Orchids are epiphytes that typically produce very small
airborneseedswithoutmuchstoragetosustaingerminationandgrowth.Theirseedswillnotgerminatewithouta
mycorrhizalpartner(usuallyaBasidiomycete).Afternutrientsintheseedaredepleted,fungalsymbiontssupport
the growth of the orchid by providing necessary carbohydrates and minerals. Some orchids continue to be
mycorrhizal throughout their life cycle.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 698
Chapter 24 | Fungi 687
Figure 24.21 Two types of mycorrhizae. (a) Ectomycorrhizae and (b) arbuscular or endomycorrhizae have
different mechanisms for interacting with the roots of plants. (credit b: MS Turmel, University of Manitoba, Plant
Science Department)
If symbiotic fungi were absent from the soil, what impact do you think this would have on plant growth?
Figure24.22Mycorrhizae.The(a)infectionofPinusradiata(Montereypine)rootsbythehyphaeofAmanitamuscaria
(flyamanita)causesthepinetreetoproducemanysmall,branchedrootlets.TheAmanitahyphaecoverthesesmall
roots with a white mantle. (b) Spores (the round bodies) and hyphae (thread-like structures) are evident in this light
micrographofanarbuscularmycorrhizabyafungusontherootofacornplant.(credita:modificationofworkbyRandy
Molina, USDA; credit b: modification of work by Sara Wright, USDA-ARS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Other examples of fungus–plant mutualism include the endophytes: fungi that live inside tissue without
damagingthehostplant.Endophytesreleasetoxinsthatrepelherbivores,orconferresistancetoenvironmental
stress factors, such as infection by microorganisms, drought, or heavy metals in soil.
PAGE: 699
688 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Coevolution of Land Plants and Mycorrhizae
As we have seen, mycorrhizae are the fungal partners of a mutually beneficial symbiotic association that
coevolved between roots of vascular plants and fungi. A well-supported theory proposes that fungi were
instrumental in the evolution of the root system in plants and contributed to the success of Angiosperms.
The bryophytes (mosses and liverworts), which are considered the most ancestral plants and the first to
surviveandadaptonland,havesimpleundergroundrhizoids,ratherthanatruerootsystem,andtherefore
cannot survive in dry areas. However, some bryophytes have arbuscular mycorrhizae and some do not.
True roots first appeared in the ancestral vascular plants: Vascular plants that developed a system of thin
extensions from their roots would have had a selective advantage over nonvascular plants because they
hadagreatersurfaceareaofcontactwiththefungalpartnersthandidtherhizoidsofmossesandliverworts.
The first true roots would have allowed vascular plants to obtain more water and nutrients in the ground.
Fossilrecordsindicatethatfungiactuallyprecededtheinvasionofancestralfreshwaterplantsontodryland.
The first association between fungi and photosynthetic organisms on land involved moss-like plants and
endophytes.Theseearlyassociationsdevelopedbeforerootsappearedinplants.Slowly,thebenefitsofthe
endophyte and rhizoid interactions for both partners led to present-day mycorrhizae: About 90 percent of
today’s vascular plants have associations with fungi in their rhizosphere.
The fungi involved in mycorrhizae display many characteristics of ancestral fungi; they produce simple
spores, show little diversification, do not have a sexual reproductive cycle, and cannot live outside of a
mycorrhizal association. The plants benefited from the association because mycorrhizae allowed them to
move into new habitats and allowed the increased uptake of nutrients, which gave them an enormous
selective advantage over plants that did not establish symbiotic relationships.
Lichens
Lichensdisplayarangeofcolorsandtextures(Figure24.23)andcansurviveinthemostunusualandhostile
habitats. They cover rocks, gravestones, tree bark, and the ground in the tundra where plant roots cannot
penetrate.Lichenscansurviveextendedperiodsofdrought,whentheybecomecompletelydesiccated,andthen
rapidly become active once water is available again.
Explore the world of lichens using this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/lichenland) from Oregon State
University.
Figure 24.23 Lichens. Lichens have many forms. They may be (a) crust-like, (b) hair-like, or (c) leaf-like. (credit a:
modificationofworkbyJoNaylor;creditb:modificationofworkby"djpmapleferryman"/Flickr;creditc:modificationof
work by Cory Zanker)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 700
Chapter 24 | Fungi 689
It is important to note that lichens are not a single organism, but rather another wonderful example of a
mutualism, in which a fungus (usually a member of the Ascomycota or Basidiomycota) lives in a physical and
physiological relationship with a photosynthetic organism (a eukaryotic alga or a prokaryotic cyanobacterium)
(Figure 24.24). Generally, neither the fungus nor the photosynthetic organism can survive alone outside of the
symbiotic relationship. The body of a lichen, referred to as a thallus, is formed of hyphae wrapped around the
photosyntheticpartner.Thephotosyntheticorganismprovidescarbonandenergyintheformofcarbohydrates.
Some cyanobacteria additionally fix nitrogen from the atmosphere, contributing nitrogenous compounds to the
association.Inreturn,thefungussuppliesmineralsandprotectionfromdrynessandexcessivelightbyencasing
the algae in its mycelium. The fungus also attaches the lichen to its substrate.
Figure24.24Structureofalichen.Thiscross-sectionofalichenthallusshowsthe(a)uppercortexoffungalhyphae,
whichprovidesprotection;the(b)algalzonewherephotosynthesisoccurs,the(c)medullaoffungalhyphae,andthe
(d) lower cortex, which also provides protection and may have (e)rhizinesto anchor the thallus to the substrate.
The thallus of lichens grows very slowly, expanding its diameter a few millimeters per year. Both the fungus
andthealgaparticipateintheformationofdispersalunits,calledsoredia—clustersofalgalcellssurroundedby
mycelia. Soredia are dispersed by wind and water and form new lichens.
Lichens are extremely sensitive to air pollution, especially to abnormal levels of nitrogenous and sulfurous
compounds.TheU.S.ForestServiceandNationalParkServicecanmonitorairqualitybymeasuringtherelative
abundance and health of the lichen population in an area. Lichens fulfill many ecological roles. Caribou and
reindeereatlichens,andtheyprovidecoverforsmallinvertebratesthathideinthemycelium.Intheproduction
oftextiles,weaversusedlichenstodyewoolformanycenturiesuntiltheadventofsyntheticdyes.Thepigments
used in litmus paper are also extracted from lichens.
Lichens are used to monitor the quality of air. Read more on this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
lichen_monitrng)from the United States Forest Service.
PAGE: 701
690 Chapter 24 | Fungi
Fungus/Animal Mutualism
Fungi have evolved mutualisms with numerous insects in Phylum Arthropoda: joint-legged invertebrates with
a chitinous exoskeleton. Arthropods depend on the fungus for protection from predators and pathogens, while
thefungusobtainsnutrientsandawaytodisseminatesporesintonewenvironments.Theassociationbetween
speciesofBasidiomycotaandscaleinsectsisoneexample.Thefungalmyceliumcoversandprotectstheinsect
colonies. The scale insects foster a flow of nutrients from the parasitized plant to the fungus.
In a second example, leaf-cutter ants of Central and South America literally farm fungi. They cut disks of
leavesfromplantsandpilethemupinsubterraneangardens(Figure24.25).Fungiarecultivatedinthesedisk
gardens, digesting the cellulose in the leaves that the ants cannot break down. Once smaller sugar molecules
areproducedandconsumedbythefungi,thefungiinturnbecomeamealfortheants.Theinsectsalsopatrol
their garden, preying on competing fungi. Both ants and fungi benefit from this mutualistic association. The
fungusreceivesasteadysupplyofleavesandfreedomfromcompetition, whiletheantsfeedonthefungithey
cultivate.
Figure 24.25 Leaf-cutter ant. A leaf-cutter ant transports a leaf that will feed a farmed fungus. (credit: Scott Bauer,
USDA-ARS)
Fungivores
Animaldispersalisimportantforsomefungibecauseananimalmaycarryfungalsporesconsiderabledistances
from the source. Fungal spores are rarely completely degraded in the gastrointestinal tract of an animal, and
many are able to germinate when they are passed in the feces. Some “dung fungi” actually require passage
through the digestive system of herbivores to complete their lifecycle. The black truffle—a prized gourmet
delicacy—is the fruiting body of an underground ascomycete. Almost all truffles are ectomycorrhizal, and are
usually found in close association with trees. Animals eat truffles and disperse the spores. In Italy and France,
truffle hunters use female pigs to sniff out truffles (female pigs are attracted to truffles because the fungus
releases a volatile compound closely related to a pheromone produced by male pigs.)
24.4 | Fungal Parasites and Pathogens
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe some fungal parasites and pathogens of plants
• Describe the different types of fungal infections in humans
• Explain why antifungal therapy is hampered by the similarity between fungal and animal cells
Parasitismdescribesasymbioticrelationshipinwhichonememberoftheassociationbenefitsattheexpense
oftheother.Bothparasitesandpathogensharmthehost;however,pathogenscausedisease,damagetohost
tissuesorphysiology,whereasparasitesusuallydonot,butcancauseseriousdamageanddeathbycompetition
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 702
Chapter 24 | Fungi 691
for nutrients or other resources.Commensalismoccurs when one member benefits without affecting the other.
Plant Parasites and Pathogens
The production of sufficient high-quality crops is essential to human existence. Unfortunately, plant diseases
have ruined many crops throughout human agricultural history, sometimes creating widespread famine. Many
plantpathogensarefungithatcausetissuedecayandtheeventualdeathofthehost(Figure24.26).Inaddition
todestroyingplanttissuedirectly,someplantpathogensspoilcropsbyproducingpotenttoxinsthatcanfurther
damageandkillthehostplant.Fungiarealsoresponsibleforfoodspoilageandtherottingofstoredcrops.For
example, the fungus Claviceps purpurea causes ergot, a disease of cereal crops (especially of rye). Although
the fungus reduces the yield of cereals, the effects of the ergot's alkaloid toxins on humans and animals are
of much greater significance. In animals, the disease is referred to as ergotism. The most common signs and
symptoms are convulsions, hallucination, gangrene, and loss of milk in cattle. The active ingredient of ergot
is lysergic acid, which is a precursor of the drug LSD. Smuts, rusts, and powdery or downy mildew are other
examples of common fungal pathogens that affect crops.
Figure24.26Fungalpathogens.Somefungalpathogensinclude(a)greenmoldongrapefruit,(b)powderymildewon
azinnia,(c)stemrustonasheafofbarley,and(d)greyrotongrapes.InwetconditionsBotrytiscinerea,thefungus
thatcausesgreyrot,candestroyagrapecrop.However,controlledinfectionofgrapesbyBotrytisresultsinnoblerot,
aconditionthatproducesstrongandmuch-prizeddessertwines.(credita:modificationofworkbyScottBauer,USDA-
ARS;creditb:modificationofworkbyStephenAusmus,USDA-ARS;creditc:modificationofworkbyDavidMarshall,
USDA-ARS; credit d: modification of work by Joseph Smilanick, USDA-ARS)
Aflatoxins aretoxic, carcinogenic compoundsreleasedbyfungi ofthegenusAspergillus.Periodically,harvests
ofnutsandgrainsaretaintedbyaflatoxins,leadingtomassiverecallofproduce.Thissometimesruinsproducers
and causes food shortages in developing countries.
Animal and Human Parasites and Pathogens
Fungi can affect animals, including humans, in several ways. A mycosis is a fungal disease that results from
infection and direct damage due to the growth and infiltration of the fungus. Fungi attack animals directly by
colonizing and destroying tissues. Mycotoxicosis is the poisoning of humans (and other animals) by foods
contaminated by fungal toxins (mycotoxins). Mycetismus specifically describes the ingestion of preformed
toxins in poisonous mushrooms. In addition, individuals who display hypersensitivity to molds and spores may
PAGE: 703
692 Chapter 24 | Fungi
develop strong and dangerous allergic reactions. Fungal infections are generally very difficult to treat because,
unlikebacteria,fungiareeukaryotes.Antibioticsonlytargetprokaryoticcells,whereascompoundsthatkillfungi
also harm the eukaryotic animal host.
Many fungal infections are superficial; that is, they occur on the animal’s skin. Termed cutaneous (“skin”)
mycoses, they can have devastating effects. For example, the decline of the world’s frog population in recent
years is caused (in part) by the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. This deadly fungus infects the
skin of frogs and presumably interferes with cutaneous gaseous exchange, which is essential for amphibian
survival.Similarly,morethanamillionbatsintheUnitedStateshavebeenkilledbywhite-nosesyndrome,which
appearsasawhiteringaroundthemouthofthebat.Itiscausedbythecold-lovingfungusPseudogymnoascus
destructans, which disseminates its deadly spores in caves where bats hibernate. Mycologists are researching
the transmission, mechanism, and control ofP. destructansto stop its spread.
Fungithatcausethesuperficialmycosesoftheepidermis,hair,andnailsrarelyspreadtotheunderlyingtissue
(Figure 24.27). These fungi are often misnamed “dermatophytes”, from the Greek words dermis meaning skin
and phyte meaning plant, although they are not plants. Dermatophytes are also called “ringworms” because of
theredringtheycauseonskin.Theysecreteextracellularenzymesthatbreakdownkeratin(aproteinfoundin
hair,skin,andnails),causingconditionssuchasathlete’sfootandjockitch.Theseconditionsareusuallytreated
withover-the-countertopicalcreamsandpowders,andareeasilycleared.Morepersistentsuperficialmycoses
may require prescription oral medications.
Figure 24.27Fungaldiseasesofhumans.(a)Ringwormpresentsasaredringonskin;(b)Trichophytonviolaceum,
showninthisbrightfieldlightmicrograph,causessuperficialmycosesonthescalp;(c)Histoplasmacapsulatumisan
ascomycetethatinfectsairwaysandcausessymptomssimilartoinfluenza.(credita:modificationofworkbyDr.Lucille
K.Georg,CDC;creditb:modificationofworkbyDr.LucilleK.Georg,CDC;creditc:modificationofworkbyM.Renz,
CDC; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Systemicmycosesspreadtointernalorgans,mostcommonlyenteringthebodythroughtherespiratorysystem.
For example, coccidioidomycosis (often called valley fever) is commonly found in the southwestern United
States, but as far north as Washington, where the fungus resides in the dust. Once inhaled, the spores
develop in the lungs and cause symptoms similar to those of tuberculosis. Histoplasmosis is caused by the
dimorphicfungusHistoplasmacapsulatum.Initshumanhost,Histoplasmagrowsasayeast,causingpulmonary
infections, and in rarer cases, swelling of the membranes of the brain and spinal cord. Treatment of these and
many other fungal diseases requires the use of antifungal medications that have serious side effects.
Opportunistic mycoses are fungal infections that are either common in all environments, or part of the normal
biota. They mainly affect individuals who have a compromised immune system. Patients in the late stages of
AIDSsufferfromopportunisticmycosesthatcanbelifethreatening.TheyeastCandidasp.,acommonmember
ofthenaturalbiota,cangrowuncheckedandinfectthevaginaormouth(oralthrush)ifthepHofthesurrounding
environment, the person’s immune defenses, or the normal population of bacteria are altered.
Mycetismus can occur when poisonous mushrooms are eaten. It causes a number of human fatalities during
mushroom-picking season. Many edible fruiting bodies of fungi resemble highly poisonous relatives, and
amateur mushroom hunters are cautioned to carefully inspect their harvest and avoid eating mushrooms of
doubtful origin. The adage “there are bold mushroom pickers and old mushroom pickers, but are there no old,
bold mushroom pickers” is unfortunately true.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 704
Chapter 24 | Fungi 693
Dutch Elm Disease
Question: Do trees resistant to Dutch elm disease secrete antifungal compounds?
Hypothesis: Construct a hypothesis that addresses this question.
Background: Dutch elm disease is a fungal infestation that affects many species of elm (Ulmus) in North
America. The fungus infects the vascular system of the tree, which blocks water flow within the plant and
mimicsdroughtstress.AccidentlyintroducedtotheUnitedStatesintheearly1930s,itdecimatedAmerican
elm shade trees across the continent. It is caused by the fungus Ophiostoma ulmi. The elm bark beetle
acts as a vector and transmits the disease from tree to tree. Many European and Asiatic elms are less
susceptible to the disease than are American elms.
Test the hypothesis: A researcher testing this hypothesis might do the following. Inoculate several Petri
platescontainingamediumthatsupportsthegrowthoffungiwithfragmentsofOphiostomamycelium.Cut
(with a metal punch) several disks from the vascular tissue of susceptible varieties of American elms and
resistantEuropeanandAsiaticelms.IncludecontrolPetriplatesinoculatedwithmyceliawithoutplanttissue
toverifythatthemediumandincubationconditionsdonotinterferewithfungalgrowth.Asapositivecontrol,
add paper disks impregnated with a known fungicide to Petri plates inoculated with the mycelium.
Incubatetheplatesforasetnumberofdaystoallowfungalgrowthandspreadingofthemyceliumoverthe
surfaceoftheplate.Recordthediameterofthezoneofclearing,ifany,aroundthetissuesamplesandthe
fungicide control disk.
Record your observations in the following table.
Results of Antifungal Testing of Vascular Tissue from Different Species of
Elm
Disk Zone of Inhibition (mm)
Distilled Water
Fungicide
Tissue from Susceptible Elm #1
Tissue from Susceptible Elm #2
Tissue from Resistant Elm #1
Tissue from Resistant Elm #2
Table 24.1
Analyze the data and report the results. Compare the effect of distilled water to the fungicide. These are
negativeandpositivecontrolsthatvalidatetheexperimentalsetup.Thefungicideshouldbesurroundedby
a clear zone where the fungus growth was inhibited. Is there a difference among different species of elm?
Draw a conclusion: Was there antifungal activity as expected from the fungicide? Did the results support
the hypothesis? If not, how can this be explained? There are several possible explanations.
PAGE: 705
694 Chapter 24 | Fungi
24.5 | Importance of Fungi in Human Life
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the importance of fungi to the balance of the environment
• Summarize the role of fungi in agriculture and food and beverage preparation
• Describe the importance of fungi in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries
• Discuss the role of fungi as model organisms
Although we often think of fungi as organisms that cause disease and rot food, they are vitally important to
human life on many levels. As we have seen, fungi influence the well-being of human populations on a large
scale because they are part of the nutrient cycle in ecosystems. They have other ecosystem roles as well. As
animal pathogens, fungi help to control the population of damaging pests. These fungi are very specific to the
insects they attack, and do not infect animals or plants. Fungi are currently under investigation as potential
microbialinsecticides,withseveralalreadyonthemarket.Forexample,thefungusBeauveriabassianaisbeing
tested as a possible biological control agent for the recent spread of emerald ash borer a beetle that feeds on
ash trees. It has been released in Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, West Virginia, and Maryland (Figure 24.28).
Figure24.28Fungalinsectcontrol.Theemeraldashborer(Agrilusplanipennis)isaninsectthatattacksashtrees.It
isinturnparasitizedbyapathogenicfungus(Beauveriabassiana)thatholdspromiseasabiologicalinsecticide.The
parasitic fungus appears as white fuzz on the body of the insect. (credit: Houping Liu, USDA Agricultural Research
Service)
Themycorrhizalrelationshipbetweenfungiandplantrootsisessentialfortheproductivityoffarmland.Without
the fungal partner in root systems, 80–90 percent of trees and grasses would not survive. Mycorrhizal fungal
inoculants are available as soil amendments from gardening supply stores and are promoted by supporters of
organic agriculture.
Wealsoeatsometypesoffungi.Mushroomsfigureprominentlyinthehumandiet.Morels,shiitakemushrooms,
chanterelles, and truffles are considered delicacies (Figure 24.29). The humble meadow mushroom, Agaricus
campestris,appearsinmanydishes.MoldsofthegenusPenicilliumripenmanycheeses.Theyoriginateinthe
naturalenvironmentsuchasthecavesofRoquefort,France,wherewheelsofsheepmilkcheesearestackedin
order to capture the molds responsible for the blue veins and pungent taste of the cheese.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 706
Chapter 24 | Fungi 695
Figure24.29Ediblefungi.Themorelmushroom(a)isanascomycetegreatlyappreciatedforitsdelicatetaste.(credit:
Jason Hollinger). Basidiocarps ofAgaricusready for an omelet (credit: Mary Anne Clark)
Fermentation—of grains to produce beer, and of fruits to produce wine—is an ancient art that humans in most
cultureshavepracticedformillennia.Wildyeastsareacquiredfromtheenvironmentandusedtofermentsugars
into CO2 and ethyl alcohol under anaerobic conditions. It is now possible to purchase isolated strains of wild
yeasts from different wine-making regions. Louis Pasteur was instrumental in developing a reliable strain of
brewer’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, for the French brewing industry in the late 1850s. This was one of
the first examples of biotechnology patenting.
Many secondary metabolites of fungi are of great commercial importance. Antibiotics are naturally produced
by fungi to kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria, limiting their competition in the natural environment. Important
antibiotics,suchaspenicillinandthecephalosporins,areisolatedfromfungi.Valuabledrugsisolatedfromfungi
include the immunosuppressant drug cyclosporine (which reduces the risk of rejection after organ transplant),
theprecursorsofsteroidhormones,andergotalkaloidsusedtostopbleeding.Psilocybinisacompoundfoundin
fungisuchasPsilocybesemilanceataandGymnopilusjunonius,whichhavebeenusedfortheirhallucinogenic
properties by various cultures for thousands of years.
As simple eukaryotic organisms, fungi are important model research organisms. Many advances in modern
genetics were achieved by the use of the red bread mold Neurospora crassa. Additionally, many important
genes originally discovered in S. cerevisiae served as a starting point in discovering analogous human genes.
As a eukaryotic organism, the yeast cell produces and modifies proteins in a manner similar to human cells,
as opposed to the bacterium Escherichia coli, which lacks the internal membrane structures and enzymes to
tag proteins for export. This makes yeast a much better organism for use in recombinant DNA technology
experiments. Like bacteria, yeasts grow easily in culture, have a short generation time, and are amenable to
genetic modification.
PAGE: 707
696 Chapter 24 | Fungi
KEY TERMS
arbuscular mycorrhiza mycorrhizal association in which the fungal hyphae enter the root cells and form
extensive networks
Arbuscular mycorrhizae mycorrhizae commonly involving Glomeromycetes in which the fungal hyphae
penetrate the cell walls of the plant root cells (but not the cell membranes)
ascocarp fruiting body of ascomycetes
Ascomycota (also, sac fungi) phylum of fungi that store spores in a sac called ascus
basidiocarp fruiting body that protrudes from the ground and bears the basidia
Basidiomycota (also, club fungi) phylum of fungi that produce club-shaped structures (basidia) that contain
spores
basidium club-shaped fruiting body of basidiomycetes
Chytridiomycota (also, chytrids) primitive phylum of fungi that live in water and produce gametes with flagella
coenocytic hypha single hypha that lacks septa and contains many nuclei
commensalism symbiotic relationship in which one member benefits while the other member is not affected
Deuteromycota former form phylum of fungi that do not have a known sexual reproductive cycle (presently
members of two phyla: Ascomycota and Basidiomycota)
ectomycorrhiza mycorrhizalfungithatsurroundtherootswithamantleandhaveaHartignetthatextendsinto
the roots between cells
Ectomycorrhizae mycorrhizae in which the fungal hyphae do not penetrate the root cells of the plant
facultative anaerobes organisms that can perform both aerobic and anaerobic respiration and can survive in
oxygen-rich and oxygen-poor environment
Glomeromycota phylum of fungi that form symbiotic relationships with the roots of trees
haustoria modified hyphae on many parasitic fungi that penetrate the tissues of their hosts, release digestive
enzymes, and/or absorb nutrients from the host
heterothallic describes when only one mating type is present in an individual mycelium
homothallic describes when both mating types are present in mycelium
hypha fungal filament composed of one or more cells
karyogamy fusion of nuclei
lichen close association of a fungus with a photosynthetic alga or bacterium that benefits both partners
mold tangle of visible mycelia with a fuzzy appearance
mycelium mass of fungal hyphae
mycetismus ingestion of toxins in poisonous mushrooms
mycology scientific study of fungi
mycorrhiza mutualistic association between fungi and vascular plant roots
mycorrhizae a mutualistic relationship between a plant and a fungus. Mycorrhizae are connections between
fungalhyphae,whichprovidesoilmineralstotheplant,andplantroots,whichprovidecarbohydratestothe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 708
Chapter 24 | Fungi 697
fungus
mycosis fungal infection
mycotoxicosis poisoning by a fungal toxin released in food
obligate aerobes organisms, such as humans, that must perform aerobic respiration to survive
obligate anaerobes organisms that only perform anaerobic respiration and often cannot survive in the
presence of oxygen
parasitism symbiotic relationship in which one member of the association benefits at the expense of the other
plasmogamy fusion of cytoplasm
saprobe organism that derives nutrients from decaying organic matter; also saprophyte
septa cell wall division between hyphae
soredia clusters of algal cells and mycelia that allow lichens to propagate
sporangium reproductive sac that contains spores
spore a haploid cell that can undergo mitosis to form a multicellular, haploid individual
thallus vegetative body of a fungus
yeast general term used to describe unicellular fungi
Zygomycota (also, conjugated fungi) phylum of fungi that form a zygote contained in a zygospore
zygospore structure with thick cell wall that contains the zygote in zygomycetes
CHAPTER SUMMARY
24.1Characteristics of Fungi
Fungi are eukaryotic organisms that appeared on land more than 450 million years ago, but clearly have an
evolutionary history far greater. They are heterotrophs and contain neither photosynthetic pigments such as
chlorophyll, nor organelles such as chloroplasts. Because fungi feed on decaying and dead matter, they are
termed saprobes. Fungi are important decomposers that release essential elements into the environment.
External enzymes called exoenzymes digest nutrients that are absorbed by the body of the fungus, which is
called a thallus. A thick cell wall made of chitin surrounds the cell. Fungi can be unicellular as yeasts, or
develop a network of filaments called a mycelium, which is often described as mold. Most species multiply by
asexual and sexual reproductive cycles and display an alternation of generations. In one group of fungi, no
sexual cycle has been identified. Sexual reproduction involves plasmogamy (the fusion of the cytoplasm),
followed by karyogamy (the fusion of nuclei). Following these processes, meiosis generates haploid spores.
24.2Classifications of Fungi
Chytridiomycota (chytrids) are considered the most ancestral group of fungi. They are mostly aquatic, and their
gametes are the only fungal cells known to have flagella. They reproduce both sexually and asexually; the
asexual spores are called zoospores. Zygomycota (conjugated fungi) produce non-septate hyphae with many
nuclei. Their hyphae fuse during sexual reproduction to produce a zygospore in a zygosporangium.
Ascomycota (sac fungi) form spores in sacs called asci during sexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction is
their most common form of reproduction. In the Basidiomycota (club fungi), the sexual phase predominates,
producing showy fruiting bodies that contain club-shaped basidia, within which spores form. Most familiar
mushrooms belong to this division. Fungi that have no known sexual cycle were originally classified in the “form
phylum” Deuteromycota, but many have been classified by comparative molecular analysis with the
Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. Glomeromycota form tight associations (called mycorrhizae) with the roots of
plants.
PAGE: 709
698 Chapter 24 | Fungi
24.3Ecology of Fungi
Fungi have colonized nearly all environments on Earth, but are frequently found in cool, dark, moist places with
a supply of decaying material. Fungi are saprobes that decompose organic matter. Many successful mutualistic
relationships involve a fungus and another organism. Many fungi establish complex mycorrhizal associations
with the roots of plants. Some ants farm fungi as a supply of food. Lichens are a symbiotic relationship between
a fungus and a photosynthetic organism, usually an alga or cyanobacterium. The photosynthetic organism
provides energy from stored carbohydrates, while the fungus supplies minerals and protection. Some animals
that consume fungi help disseminate spores over long distances.
24.4Fungal Parasites and Pathogens
Fungi establish parasitic relationships with plants and animals. Fungal diseases can decimate crops and spoil
food during storage. Compounds produced by fungi can be toxic to humans and other animals. Mycoses are
infections caused by fungi. Superficial mycoses affect the skin, whereas systemic mycoses spread through the
body. Fungal infections are difficult to cure, since fungi, like their hosts, are eukaryotic, and cladistically related
closely to Kingdom Animalia.
24.5Importance of Fungi in Human Life
Fungi are important to everyday human life. Fungi are important decomposers in most ecosystems. Mycorrhizal
fungi are essential for the growth of most plants. Fungi, as food, play a role in human nutrition in the form of
mushrooms, and also as agents of fermentation in the production of bread, cheeses, alcoholic beverages, and
numerous other food preparations. Secondary metabolites of fungi are used as medicines, such as antibiotics
and anticoagulants. Fungi are model organisms for the study of eukaryotic genetics and metabolism.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 24.14Which of the following statements is 2.Figure 24.17Which of the following statements is
true? true?
a. A dikaryotic ascus that forms in the a. A basidium is the fruiting body of a
ascocarp undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, mushroom-producing fungus, and it forms
and mitosis to form eight ascospores. four basidiocarps.
b. A diploid ascus that forms in the ascocarp b. The result of the plasmogamy step is four
undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis basidiospores.
to form eight ascospores. c. Karyogamy results directly in the formation
c. A haploid zygote that forms in the ascocarp of mycelia.
undergoes karyogamy, meiosis, and mitosis d. A basidiocarp is the fruiting body of a
to form eight ascospores. mushroom-producing fungus.
d. A dikaryotic ascus that forms in the
3.Figure 24.21If symbiotic fungi are absent from the
ascocarp undergoes plasmogamy, meiosis,
soil, what impact do you think this would have on
and mitosis to form eight ascospores.
plant growth?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which polysaccharide is usually found in the cell filament is called a
wall of fungi? a. thallus
a. starch b. hypha
b. glycogen c. mycelium
c. chitin d. septum
d. cellulose
7.During sexual reproduction, a homothallic
5.Which of these organelles is not found in a fungal mycelium contains
cell? a. all septated hyphae
a. chloroplast b. all haploid nuclei
b. nucleus c. both mating types
c. mitochondrion d. none of the above
d. Golgi apparatus
8.The life cycles of perfect fungi are most similar to
6.The wall dividing individual cells in a fungal which other organism?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 710
Chapter 24 | Fungi 699
a. Hydra that undergo asexual budding a. Nitrogen intake would increase.
b. Diploid-dominant pea plants b. Nitrogen intake would not change.
c. Haploid-dominant green algae c. Nitrogen intake would decrease.
d. Bacteria undergoing binary fission d. Nitrogen intake would stop.
9.The most primitive phylum of fungi is the 17.A fungus that climbs up a tree reaching higher
________. elevation to release its spores in the wind and does
a. Chytridiomycota not receive any nutrients from the tree or contribute
b. Zygomycota to the tree’s welfare is described as a ________.
c. Glomeromycota
d. Ascomycota a. commensal
b. mutualist
10.Members of which phylum produce a club-
c. parasite
shaped structure that contains spores?
d. pathogen
a. Chytridiomycota
b. Basidiomycota 18.A fungal infection that affects nails and skin is
c. Glomeromycota classified as ________.
d. Ascomycota a. systemic mycosis
b. mycetismus
11.Members of which phylum establish a successful
c. superficial mycosis
symbiotic relationship with the roots of trees?
d. mycotoxicosis
a. Ascomycota 19.The targets for anti-fungal drugs are much more
b. Deuteromycota limited than antibiotics or anti-viral medications.
c. Basidiomycota Why?
d. Glomeromycota a. There are more bacteria and viruses than
fungi.
12.The fungi that do not reproduce sexually used to
b. Fungi can only be targeted during sexual
be classified as ________.
reproduction, while bacteria and viruses can
a. Ascomycota
be targeted at any point in their lifespan.
b. Deuteromycota
c. Fungi cause topical infections, while viruses
c. Basidiomycota
and bacteria cause systemic infections.
d. Glomeromycota
d. Human cells are much more similar to fungi
13.A scientist discovers a new species of fungus that cells than bacteria or viruses.
introduces genetic diversity during reproduction by
20.Yeast is a facultative anaerobe. This means that
creating a diploid zygote. This new species cannot
alcohol fermentation takes place only if:
belong to which modern phylum of fungi?
a. the temperature is close to 37°C
a. Zygomycota
b. the atmosphere does not contain oxygen
b. Glomeromycota
c. sugar is provided to the cells
c. Chytridiomycota
d. light is provided to the cells
d. Deuteromycota
21.The advantage of yeast cells over bacterial cells
14.What term describes the close association of a
to express human proteins is that:
fungus with the root of a tree?
a. yeast cells grow faster
a. a rhizoid
b. yeast cells are easier to manipulate
b. a lichen
genetically
c. a mycorrhiza
c. yeast cells are eukaryotic and modify
d. an endophyte
proteins similarly to human cells
15.Why are fungi important decomposers? d. yeast cells are easily lysed to purify the
a. They produce many spores. proteins
b. They can grow in many different
22.Why are fungal insecticides an attractive
environments.
alternative to chemical pesticides for growing food
c. They produce mycelia.
crops?
d. They recycle carbon and inorganic minerals
by the process of decomposition.
16.Consider an ecosystem where all the fungi not
involved in mycorrhizae are eliminated. How would
this affect nitrogen intake by plants?
PAGE: 711
700 Chapter 24 | Fungi
a. Human consumption of fungal insecticides
would not make a person sick, but ingestion
of chemical pesticides can be harmful to
humans.
b. A single fungal insecticide would kill a wider
variety of insects than a chemical pesticide.
c. Fungal insecticides can eliminate both
harmful insects and plant pathogens, while
chemical pesticides only kill insects.
d. Fungal insecticides will decompose dying
plants, enhancing the nitrogen content of
the soil, while chemical pesticides are not
decomposers.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
23.What are the evolutionary advantages for an how this relationship can be classified as mutualistic.
organism to reproduce both asexually and sexually?
30.Ecologists often attempt to introduce new plants
24.Compare plants, animals, and fungi, considering to restore degraded land. In an arid climate,
these components: cell wall, chloroplasts, plasma scientists recommend introducing plants with
membrane, food source, and polysaccharide storage. arbuscular mycorrhizae. How would the mycorrhizae
Be sure to indicate fungi’s similarities and differences increase the plants’ survival compared to plants
to plants and animals. without mycorrhizae?
25.Why is the large surface area of the mycelium 31.Why can superficial mycoses in humans lead to
essential for nutrient acquisition by fungi? bacterial infections?
26.What is the advantage for a basidiomycete to 32.Explain how the Red Queen Hypothesis
produce a showy and fleshy fruiting body? describes the continuously evolving relationship
between red grapes andBotrytis cinerea.
27.For each of the four groups of perfect fungi
(Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and 33.Historically, artisanal breads were produced by
Basidiomycota), compare the body structure and capturing wild yeasts from the air. Prior to the
features, and provide an example. development of modern yeast strains, the production
of artisanal breads was long and laborious because
28.Why does protection from light actually benefit
many batches of dough ended up being discarded.
the photosynthetic partner in lichens?
Can you explain this fact?
29.Ambrosia bark beetles carryAmbrosiellafungal
34.How would treating an area of a forest with a
spores to trees, then bore holes and lay their eggs
broad-spectrum fungicide alter the carbon and
with the fungus. When the new larvae hatch, they eat
nitrogen cycles in the area?
the fungus that has germinated in the holes. Describe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 712
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 701
25 | SEEDLESS PLANTS
Figure25.1Seedlessplants,likethesehorsetails(Equisetumsp.),thriveindamp,shadedenvironmentsunderatree
canopy where dryness is rare. (credit: modification of work by Jerry Kirkhart)
Chapter Outline
25.1:Early Plant Life
25.2:Green Algae: Precursors of Land Plants
25.3:Bryophytes
25.4:Seedless Vascular Plants
Introduction
An incredible variety of seedless plants populates the terrestrial landscape. Mosses may grow on a tree trunk,
and horsetails may display their jointed stems and spindly leaves across the forest floor. Today, seedless
plants represent only a small fraction of the plants in our environment; yet, 300 million years ago, seedless
plants dominated the landscape and grew in the enormous swampy forests of the Carboniferous period. Their
decomposition created large deposits of coal that we mine today.
Currentevolutionarythoughtholdsthatallplants—somegreenalgaeaswellaslandplants—aremonophyletic;
that is, they are descendants of a single common ancestor. The evolutionary transition from water to land
imposed severe constraints on plants. They had to develop strategies to avoid drying out, to disperse
reproductive cells in air, for structural support, and for capturing and filtering sunlight. While seed plants have
developedadaptationsthatallowthemtopopulateeventhemostaridhabitatsonEarth,fullindependencefrom
water did not happen in all plants. Most seedless plants still require a moist environment for reproduction.
PAGE: 713
702 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
25.1 | Early Plant Life
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the challenges to plant life on land
• Describe the adaptations that allowed plants to colonize the land
• Describe the timeline of plant evolution and the impact of land plants on other living things
ThekingdomPlantaeconstituteslargeandvariedgroupsoforganisms.Therearemorethan300,000speciesof
catalogued plants. Of these, more than 260,000 are seed plants. Mosses, ferns, conifers, and flowering plants
areallmembersoftheplantkingdom.LandplantsarosewithintheArchaeplastida,whichincludestheredalgae
(Rhodophyta) and two groups of green algae, Chlorophyta and Charaphyta. Most biologists also consider at
least some green algae to be plants, although others exclude all algae from the plant kingdom. The reason
for this disagreement stems from the fact that only green algae, the Chlorophytes and Charophytes, share
commoncharacteristicswithlandplants(suchasusingchlorophyllaandbpluscaroteneinthesameproportion
as plants). These characteristics are absent from other types of algae.
Algae and Evolutionary Paths to Photosynthesis
Some scientists consider all algae to be plants, while others assert that only the green algae belong in
thekingdomPlantae.StillothersincludeonlytheCharophytesamongtheplants.Thesedivergentopinions
are related to the different evolutionary paths to photosynthesis selected for in different types of algae.
Whileallalgaearephotosynthetic—thatis,theycontainsomeformofachloroplast—theydidn’tallbecome
photosynthetic via the same path.
TheancestorstotheArchaeplastidabecamephotosyntheticbyforminganendosymbioticrelationshipwitha
green,photosyntheticbacteriumabout1.65billionyearsago.Thatalgallineevolvedintotheredandgreen
algae, and eventually into the modern mosses, ferns, gymnosperms, and angiosperms. Their evolutionary
trajectory was relatively straight and monophyletic. In contrast, algae outside of the Archaeplastida, e.g.,
thebrownandgoldenalgaeofthestramenopiles, andsoon—allbecamephotosynthetic bysecondary,or
even tertiary, endosymbiotic events; that is, they engulfed cells that already contained an endosymbiotic
cyanobacterium. These latecomers to photosynthesis are parallels to the Archaeplastida in terms of
autotrophy,buttheydidnotexpandtothesameextentastheArchaeplastida,nordidtheycolonizetheland.
Scientists who solely track evolutionary straight lines (that is, monophyly), consider only the Charophytes
as plants. The common ancestor of Charophytes and land plants excludes the other members of the
Archaeplastida.Charophytesalsoshareotherfeatureswiththelandplants.Thesewillbediscussedinmore
detail in another section.
Go to this interactive website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/charophytes) to get a more in-depth view of
the Charophytes.
Plant Adaptations to Life on Land
Asorganismsadaptedtolifeonland,theyhadtocontendwithseveralchallengesintheterrestrialenvironment.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 714
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 703
Water has been described as “the stuff of life.” The cell’s interior is a thick soup: in this medium, most small
moleculesdissolveanddiffuse,andthemajorityofthechemicalreactionsofmetabolismtakeplace.Desiccation,
or drying out, is a constant danger for an organism exposed to air. Even when parts of a plant are close to a
sourceofwater,theaerialstructuresarelikelytodryout.Wateralsoprovidesbuoyancytoorganisms.Onland,
plantsneedtodevelopstructuralsupportinamediumthatdoesnotgivethesameliftaswater.Theorganismis
alsosubjecttobombardmentbymutagenicradiation, becauseairdoesnotfilteroutultraviolet raysofsunlight.
Additionally, the male gametes must reach the female gametes using new strategies, because swimming is no
longerpossible.Therefore,bothgametesandzygotesmustbeprotectedfromdesiccation.Thesuccessfulland
plants developed strategies to deal with all of these challenges. Not all adaptations appeared at once. Some
species never moved very far from the aquatic environment, whereas others went on to conquer the driest
environments on Earth.
To balance these survival challenges, life on land offers several advantages. First, sunlight is abundant. Water
actsasafilter,alteringthespectralqualityoflightabsorbedbythephotosyntheticpigmentchlorophyll.Second,
carbon dioxide is more readily available in air than in water, since it diffuses faster in air. Third, land plants
evolved before land animals; therefore, until dry land was colonized by animals, no predators threatened plant
life. This situation changed as animals emerged from the water and fed on the abundant sources of nutrients
in the established flora. In turn, plants developed strategies to deter predation: from spines and thorns to toxic
chemicals.
Early land plants, like the early land animals, did not live very far from an abundant source of water and
developedsurvivalstrategiestocombatdryness.Oneofthesestrategiesiscalledtolerance.Manymosses,for
example, can dry out to abrown and brittle mat, but assoon asrain or aflood makes water available, mosses
will absorb it and are restored to their healthy green appearance. Another strategy is to colonize environments
withhighhumidity,wheredroughtsareuncommon.Ferns,whichareconsideredanearlylineageofplants,thrive
in damp and cool places such as the understory of temperate forests. Later, plants moved away from moist or
aquatic environments using resistance to desiccation, rather than tolerance. These plants, like cacti, minimize
the loss of water to such an extent they can survive in extremely dry environments.
Themostsuccessfuladaptationsolutionwasthedevelopmentofnewstructuresthatgaveplantstheadvantage
when colonizing new and dry environments. Four major adaptations contribute to the success of terrestrial
plants. The first adaptation is that the life cycle in all land plants exhibits the alternation of generations, a
sporophyte in which the spores are formed and a gametophyte that produces gametes. Second is an apical
meristem tissue in roots and shoots. Third is the evolution of a waxy cuticle to resist desiccation (absent from
somemosses).Finallycellwallswithlignintosupportstructuresofftheground.Theseadaptationsallcontribute
tothesuccessofthelandplants,butarenoticeablylackinginthecloselyrelatedgreenalgae—anotherreason
forthedebate overtheir placement intheplant kingdom. Theyarealsonotallfound inthemosses,whichcan
be regarded as representing an intermediate stage in adaptation to land.
Alternation of Generations
All sexually reproducing organisms have both haploid and diploid cells in their life cycles. In organisms with
haplontic life cycles, the haploid stage is dominant, while in organisms with a diplontic life cycle, the diploid
stage is the dominant life stage. Dominant in this context means both the stage in which the organism spends
mostofitstime,andthestageinwhichmostmitoticcellreproductionoccurs—themulticellularstage.Inhaplontic
life cycles, the only diploid cell is the zygote, which undergoes immediate meiosis to restore the haploid state.
Indiplonticlifecycles,theonlyhaploidcellsarethegametes,whichcombinetorestorethediploidstateattheir
earliest convenience. Humans, for example, are diplontic.
Alternationofgenerationsdescribesalifecycleinwhichanorganismhasbothhaploidanddiploidmulticellular
stages (Figure 25.2). This type of life cycle, which is found in all plants, is described ashaplodiplontic.
PAGE: 715
704 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Figure 25.2 Alternation of generations between the 1n gametophyte and 2n sporophyte is shown. Mitosis occurs in
bothgametophyteandsporophytegenerations.Diploidsporophytesproducehaploidsporesbymeiosis,whilehaploid
gametophytes produce gametes by mitosis. (credit: Peter Coxhead)
In alternation of generations, the multicellular haploid form, known as a gametophyte, is followed in the
developmental sequence by a multicellular diploid form, the sporophyte. The gametophyte gives rise to the
gametes(reproductivecells)bymitosis.Thiscanbethemostobviousphaseofthelifecycleoftheplant,asin
themosses,oritcanoccurinamicroscopicstructure,suchasapollengrain,intheseedplants.Theevolution
of the land plants is marked by increasing prominence of the sporophyte generation. The sporophyte stage
is barely noticeable in non-vascular plants (the collective term for the plants that include the liverworts and
mosses). In the seed plants, the sporophyte phase can be a towering tree, as in sequoias and pines.
Protection of the embryo is a major requirement for land plants. The vulnerable embryo must be sheltered
from desiccation and other environmental hazards. In both seedless and seed plants, the female gametophyte
provides protection and nutrients to the embryo as it develops into the new sporophyte. This distinguishing
feature of land plants gave the group its alternate name ofembryophytes.
Sporangia in Seedless Plants
Thesporophyteofseedlessplantsisdiploidandresultsfromsyngamy(fusion)oftwogametes.Thesporophyte
bears the sporangia (singular, sporangium). The term “sporangia” literally means “a vessel for spores,” as it
is a reproductive sac in which spores are formed (Figure 25.3). Inside the multicellular sporangia, the diploid
sporocytes, or mother cells, produce haploid spores by meiosis, during which the 2n chromosome number is
reducedto1n(notethatinmanyplants,chromosomenumberiscomplicatedbypolyploidy:forexample,durum
wheatistetraploid,breadwheatishexaploid,andsomefernsare1000-ploid).Thesporesarelaterreleasedby
thesporangiaanddisperseintheenvironment.Whenthehaploidsporegerminatesinahospitableenvironment,
it generates a multicellular gametophyte by mitosis. The gametophyte supports the zygote formed from the
fusion of gametes and the resulting young sporophyte (vegetative form). The cycle then begins anew.
Figure25.3Sporangia.Spore-producingsacscalledsporangiagrowattheendsoflong,thinstalksinthisphotoofthe
mossEsporangios bryum. (credit: Javier Martin)
Plants that produce only one type of spore are called homosporous and the resultant gametophyte produces
bothmaleandfemalegametes,usuallyonthesameindividual.Non-vascularplantsarehomosporous,andthe
gametophyte is the dominant generation in the life cycle. Plants that produce two types of spores are called
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 716
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 705
heterosporous. The male spores are called microspores, because of their smaller size, and develop into the
malegametophyte;thecomparativelylargermegasporesdevelopintothefemalegametophyte.Afewseedless
vascular plants and all seed plants are heterosporous, and the sporophyte is the dominant generation.
The spores of seedless plants are surrounded by thick cell walls containing a tough polymer known as
sporopollenin. As the name suggests, it is also found in the walls of pollen grains. This complex substance is
characterizedbylongchainsoforganicmoleculesrelatedtofattyacidsandcarotenoids:hencetheyellowcolor
of most pollen. Sporopollenin is unusually resistant to chemical and biological degradation. In seed plants, in
whichpollenisthemalegametophyte,thetoughnessofsporopolleninexplainstheexistenceofwell-preserved
pollen fossils. Sporopollenin was once thought to be an innovation of land plants; however, the charophyte
Coleochaetesalso forms spores that contain sporopollenin.
Gametangia in Seedless Plants
Gametangia (singular, gametangium) are structures observed on multicellular haploid gametophytes. In the
gametangia, precursor cells give rise to gametes by mitosis. The male gametangium ( antheridium) releases
sperm.Seedlessplantsproducespermequippedwithflagellathatenablethemtoswiminamoistenvironment
to the archegonium: the female gametangium. The embryo develops inside the archegonium as the
sporophyte. Gametangia are prominent in seedless plants, but are absent or rudimentary in seed plants.
Apical Meristems
Shoots and roots of plants increase in length through rapid cell division in a tissue called the apical meristem,
which is a small mitotically active zone of cells found at the shoot tip or root tip (Figure 25.4). The apical
meristem is made of undifferentiated cells that continue to proliferate throughout the life of the plant.
Meristematic cells give rise to all the specialized tissues of the organism. Elongation of the shoots and roots
allowsaplanttoaccessadditionalspaceandresources:lightinthecaseoftheshoot,andwaterandminerals
inthecaseofroots.Aseparatemeristem,calledthelateralmeristem,producescellsthatincreasethediameter
of tree trunks.
Figure 25.4 Apical meristem at a root tip. Addition of new cells in a root occurs at the apical meristem. Subsequent
enlargementofthesecellscausestheorgantogrowandelongate.Therootcapprotectsthefragileapicalmeristem
as the root tip is pushed through the soil by cell elongation.
Additional Land Plant Adaptations
Asplants adapted todrylandandbecameindependent fromtheconstant presenceofwaterindamphabitats,
new organs and structures made their appearance. Early land plants did not grow more than a few inches off
the ground, competing for light on these low mats. By developing a shoot and growing taller, individual plants
capturedmorelight.Becauseairofferssubstantiallylesssupportthanwater,landplantsincorporatedmorerigid
molecules in their stems (and later, tree trunks). In small plants such as single-celled algae, simple diffusion
suffices to distribute water and nutrients throughout the organism. However, for plants to evolve larger forms,
theevolutionofaconductivetissueforthedistributionofwaterandsoluteswasaprerequisite.Theevolutionof
vasculartissueinplantsmetbothoftheseneeds.Thevascularsystemcontainstwotypesofconductivetissue:
xylem and phloem. Xylem conducts water and minerals absorbed from the soil up to the shoot, while phloem
transportsfoodderivedfromphotosynthesisthroughouttheentireplant.Inxylem,thecellswallsarereinforced
with lignin, whose tough hydrophobic polymers help prevent the seepage of water across the xylem cell walls.
PAGE: 717
706 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Lignin also adds to the strength of these tissues in supporting the plant. The vascular tissues extend into the
root of land plants. The root system evolved to take up water and minerals from the soil, and to anchor the
increasingly taller shoot in the soil.
In land plants, a waxy, waterproof cover called a cuticle protects the leaves and stems from desiccation.
However, the cuticle also prevents intake of carbon dioxide needed for the synthesis of carbohydrates through
photosynthesis. To overcome this, stomata or pores that open and close to regulate traffic of gases and water
vapor appeared in plants as they moved away from moist environments into drier habitats.
Water filters ultraviolet-B (UVB) light, which is harmful to all organisms, especially those that must absorb light
tosurvive.Thisfilteringdoesnotoccurforlandplants.Exposuretodamagingradiationpresentedanadditional
challenge to land colonization, which was met by the evolution of biosynthetic pathways for the synthesis of
protective flavonoids and other pigments that absorb UV wavelengths of light and protect the aerial parts of
plants from photodynamic damage.
Plants cannot avoid being eaten by animals. Instead, they synthesize a large range of poisonous secondary
metabolites: complex organic molecules such as alkaloids, whose noxious smells and unpleasant taste deter
animals.Thesetoxiccompoundscanalsocauseseverediseasesandevendeath,thusdiscouragingpredation.
Humans have used many of these compounds for centuries as drugs, medications, or spices. In contrast, as
plantsco-evolvedwithanimals,thedevelopmentofsweetandnutritiousmetabolitesluredanimalsintoproviding
valuable assistance in dispersing pollen grains, fruit, or seeds. Plants have been enlisting animals to be their
helpers in this way for hundreds of millions of years.
Evolution of Land Plants
No discussion of the evolution of plants on land can be undertaken without a brief review of the timeline of the
geological eras. The early era, known as the Paleozoic, is divided into six periods. It starts with the Cambrian
period, followed by the Ordovician, Silurian, Devonian, Carboniferous, and Permian. The major event to mark
theOrdovician,morethan500millionyearsago,wasthecolonizationoflandbytheancestorsofmodernland
plants.Fossilizedcells,cuticles,andsporesofearlylandplantshavebeendatedasfarbackastheOrdovician
period in the early Paleozoic era. The oldest-known vascular plants have been identified in deposits from the
Devonian. One of the richest sources of information is the Rhynie chert, a sedimentary rock deposit found in
Rhynie, Scotland (Figure 25.5), where embedded fossils of some of the earliest vascular plants have been
identified.
Figure 25.5 Early vascular plant fossils. This Rhynie chert (a) contains fossilized material from vascular plants.
Reconstruction of Cooksonia (b), the plant forms inside the circle. (credit b: modification of work by Peter Coxhead
based on original image by “Smith609”/Wikimedia Commons; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Paleobotanists distinguish between extinct species, as fossils, and extant species, which are still living. The
extinct vascular plants most probably lacked true leaves and roots and formed low vegetation mats similar
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 718
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 707
in size to modern-day mosses, although some could reach one meter in height. The later genus Cooksonia,
which flourished during the Silurian, has been extensively studied from well-preserved examples. Imprints
of Cooksonia show slender branching stems ending in what appear to be sporangia. From the recovered
specimens, it is not possible to establish for certain whether Cooksonia possessed vascular tissues. Fossils
indicate that by the end of the Devonian period, ferns, horsetails, and seed plants populated the landscape,
giving rising to trees and forests. This luxuriant vegetation helped enrich the atmosphere with oxygen, making
iteasierforair-breathinganimalstocolonizedryland.Plantsalsoestablishedearlysymbioticrelationshipswith
fungi,creatingmycorrhizae:arelationshipinwhichthefungalnetworkoffilamentsincreasestheefficiencyofthe
plant root system, and the plants provide the fungi with byproducts of photosynthesis.
Paleobotanist
How organisms acquired traits that allow them to colonize new environments—and how the contemporary
ecosystem is shaped—are fundamental questions of evolution. Paleobotany (the study of extinct plants)
addresses these questions through the analysis of fossilized specimens retrieved from field studies,
reconstitutingthemorphologyoforganismsthatdisappearedlongago.Paleobotaniststracetheevolutionof
plantsbyfollowingthemodificationsinplantmorphology:sheddinglightontheconnectionbetweenexisting
plants by identifying common ancestors that display the same traits. This field seeks to find transitional
species that bridge gaps in the path to the development of modern organisms. Fossils are formed when
organisms are trapped in sediments or environments where their shapes are preserved. Paleobotanists
collect fossil specimens in the field and place them in the context of the geological sediments and other
fossilized organisms surrounding them. The activity requires great care to preserve the integrity of the
delicate fossils and the layers of rock in which they are found.
One of the most exciting recent developments in paleobotany is the use of analytical chemistry and
molecular biology to study fossils. Preservation of molecular structures requires an environment free of
oxygen, since oxidation and degradation of material through the activity of microorganisms depend on its
presence. One example of the use of analytical chemistry and molecular biology is the identification of
oleanane, a compound that deters pests. Up to this point, oleanane appeared to be unique to flowering
plants; however, it has now been recovered from sediments dating from the Permian, much earlier than
thecurrentdatesgivenfortheappearanceofthefirstfloweringplants.Paleobotanistscanalsostudyfossil
DNA, which can yield a large amount of information, by analyzing and comparing the DNA sequences of
extinct plants with those of living and related organisms. Through this analysis, evolutionary relationships
can be built for plant lineages.
Some paleobotanists are skeptical of the conclusions drawn from the analysis of molecular fossils. For
example,thechemicalmaterialsofinterestdegraderapidlywhenexposedtoairduringtheirinitialisolation,
as well as in further manipulations. There is always a high risk of contaminating the specimens with
extraneous material, mostly from microorganisms. Nevertheless, as technology is refined, the analysis of
DNAfromfossilizedplantswillprovideinvaluableinformationontheevolutionofplantsandtheiradaptation
to an ever-changing environment.
The Major Divisions of Land Plants
The green algae and land plants are grouped together into a subphylum called the Streptophyta, and thus are
called Streptophytes. In a further division, land plants are classified into two major groups according to the
absence or presence of vascular tissue, as detailed in Figure 25.6. Plants that lack vascular tissue, which is
formed of specialized cells for the transport of water and nutrients, are referred to as non-vascular plants.
Liverworts, mosses, and hornworts are seedless, non-vascular plants that likely appeared early in land plant
evolution. Vascular plants developed a network of cells that conduct water and solutes. The first vascular
plants appeared in the late Ordovician (500 to 435 MYA) and were probably similar to lycophytes, which
include club mosses (not to be confused with the mosses) and the pterophytes (ferns, horsetails, and whisk
ferns). Lycophytes and pterophytes are referred to as seedless vascular plants, because they do not produce
seeds. The seed plants, or spermatophytes, form the largest group of all existing plants, and hence dominate
the landscape. Seed plants include gymnosperms, most notably conifers, which produce “naked seeds,” and
the most successful of all plants, the flowering plants (angiosperms). Angiosperms protect their seeds inside
PAGE: 719
708 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
chambers at the center of a flower; the walls of the chamber later develop into a fruit.
Figure 25.6Streptophytes. This table shows the major divisions of green plants.
Which of the following statements about plant divisions is false?
a. Lycophytes and pterophytes are seedless vascular plants.
b. All vascular plants produce seeds.
c. All non-vascular embryophytes are bryophytes.
d. Seed plants include angiosperms and gymnosperms.
25.2 | Green Algae: Precursors of Land Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the traits shared by green algae and land plants
• Explain why charophytes are considered the closest algal relative to land plants
• Explain how current phylogenetic relationships are reshaped by comparative analysis of DNA
sequences
Streptophytes
Until recently, all photosynthetic eukaryotes were classified as members of the kingdom Plantae. The brown
and golden algae, however, are now reassigned to the protist supergroup Chromalveolata. This is because
apart from their ability to capture light energy and fix CO2, they lack many structural and biochemical traits
that are characteristic of plants. The plants are now classified, along with the red and green algae, in the
protist supergroup Archaeplastida. Green algae contain the same carotenoids and chlorophyll a and b as land
plants, whereas other algae have different accessory pigments and types of chlorophyll molecules in addition
to chlorophyll a. Both green algae and land plants also store carbohydrates as starch. Their cells contain
chloroplasts that display a dizzying variety of shapes, and their cell walls contain cellulose, as do land plants.
Which of the green algae to include among the plants has not been phylogenetically resolved.
Green algae fall into two major groups, the chlorophytes and the charophytes. The chlorophytes include the
generaChlorella,Chlamydomonas,the“sealettuce”Ulva,andthecolonialalgaVolvox.Thecharophytesinclude
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 720
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 709
desmids, as well as the genera Spirogyra, Coleochaete, and Chara. There are familiar green algae in both
groups.Somegreenalgaearesinglecells,suchasChlamydomonasanddesmids,whichaddstotheambiguity
ofgreenalgaeclassification,becauseplantsaremulticellular.Othergreenalgae,likeVolvox,formcolonies,and
some, like Ulva are multicellular (Figure 25.7). Spirogyra is a long filament of colonial cells. Most members of
thisgenusliveinfreshwater,brackishwater,seawater,oreveninsnowpatches.Afewgreenalgaecansurvive
onsoil,provideditiscoveredbyathinfilmofmoisturewithinwhichtheycanlive.Periodicdryspellsprovidea
selective advantage to algae that can survive water stress.
Figure25.7Greenalgae.Charophytainclude(a)Spirogyraand(b)desmids.Chlorophytainclude(c)Chlamydomonas,
and (d) Ulva. Desmids and Chlamydomonas are single-celled organisms, Spirogyra forms chains of cells, and Ulva
forms multicellular structures resembling leaves, although the cells arenot differentiated asthey areinhigher plants
(creditb:modificationofworkbyDerekKeats;creditc:modificationofworkbyDartmouthElectronMicroscopeFacility,
Dartmouth College; credit d: modification of work by Holger Krisp; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The chlorophytes and the charophytes differ in a few respects that, in addition to molecular analysis, place the
landplantsasasistergroupofthecharophytes.First,cellsincharophytesandthelandplantsdividealongcell
plates called phragmoplasts, in which microtubules parallel to the spindle serve as guides for the vesicles of
theformingcellplate.Inthechlorophytes,thecellplateisorganizedbyaphycoplast,inwhichthemicrotubules
are perpendicular to the spindle. Second, only the charophytes and the land plants have plasmodesmata,
or intercellular channels that allow the transfer of materials from cell to cell. In the chlorophytes, intercellular
connections do not persist in mature multicellular forms. Finally, both charophytes and the land plants show
apicalgrowth—growthfromthetipsoftheplantratherthanthroughouttheplantbody.Consequently,landplants
and the charophytes are now part of a new monophyletic group called Streptophyta.
Reproduction of Green Algae
Green algae reproduce both asexually, by fragmentation or dispersal of spores, or sexually, by producing
gametes that fuse during fertilization. In a single-celled organism such as Chlamydomonas, there is no mitosis
after fertilization. In the multicellular Ulva, a sporophyte grows by mitosis after fertilization (and thus exhibits
PAGE: 721
710 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
alternation of generations). BothChlamydomonasandUlvaproduce flagellated gametes.
Charophytes
Thecharophytesincludeseveraldifferentalgalordersthathaveeachbeensuggestedtobetheclosestrelatives
ofthelandplants:theCharales,theZygnematales, andtheColeochaetales. TheCharalescanbetracedback
420millionyears.Theyliveinarangeoffreshwaterhabitatsandvaryinsizefromafewmillimeterstoameter
in length. The representative genus is Chara (Figure 25.8), often called muskgrass or skunkweed because of
its unpleasant smell. Large cells form the thallus: the main stem of the alga. Branches arising from the nodes
aremadeofsmallercells.Maleandfemalereproductivestructuresarefoundonthenodes,andthespermhave
flagella. Although Chara looks superficially like some land plants, a major difference is that the stem has no
supportivetissue.However,theCharalesexhibitanumberoftraitsthataresignificantforadaptationtolandlife.
Theyproducethecompoundsligninandsporopollenin,andformplasmodesmatathatconnectthecytoplasmof
adjacentcells.AlthoughthelifecycleoftheCharalesishaplontic(themainformishaploid,anddiploidzygotes
areformedbuthaveabriefexistence),theegg,andlater,thezygote,forminaprotectedchamberonthehaploid
parent plant.
Figure 25.8 Chara. The representative alga, Chara, is a noxious weed in Florida, where it clogs waterways. (credit:
South Florida Information Access, U.S. Geological Survey)
The Coleochaetes are branched or disclike multicellular forms. They can produce both sexually and asexually,
but the life cycle is basically haplontic. Recent extensive DNA sequence analysis of charophytes indicates that
the Zygnematales are more closely related to the embryophytes than the Charales or the Coleochaetales. The
Zygnematales include the familiar genus Spirogyra, as well as the desmids. As techniques in DNA analysis
improve and new information on comparative genomics arises, the phylogenetic connections between the
charophytesandthelandplantswillcontinuedtobeexaminedtoproduceasatisfactorysolutiontothemystery
of the origin of land plants.
25.3 | Bryophytes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the main characteristics of bryophytes
• Describe the distinguishing traits of liverworts, hornworts, and mosses
• Chart the development of land adaptations in the bryophytes
• Describe the events in the bryophyte lifecycle
Bryophytesaretheclosestextantrelativesofearlyterrestrialplants.Thefirstbryophytes(liverworts)mostlikely
appeared in the Ordovician period, about 450 million years ago. Because they lack lignin and other resistant
structures, the likelihood of bryophytes forming fossils is rather small. Some spores protected by sporopollenin
havesurvivedandareattributedtoearlybryophytes.BytheSilurianperiod(435MYA),however,vascularplants
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 722
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 711
hadspreadthroughthecontinents.Thiscompellingfactisusedasevidencethatnon-vascularplantsmusthave
preceded the Silurian period.
More than 25,000 species of bryophytes thrive in mostly damp habitats, although some live in deserts. They
constitute the major flora of inhospitable environments like the tundra, where their small size and tolerance
to desiccation offer distinct advantages. They generally lack lignin and do not have actual tracheids (xylem
cellsspecializedforwaterconduction).Rather,waterandnutrientscirculateinsidespecializedconductingcells.
Although the termnon-tracheophyteis more accurate, bryophytes are commonly callednon-vascular plants.
In a bryophyte, all the conspicuous vegetative organs—including the photosynthetic leaf-like structures, the
thallus (“plant body”), stem, and the rhizoid that anchors the plant to its substrate—belong to the haploid
organism or gametophyte. The male gametes formed by bryophytes swim with a flagellum, so fertilization
is dependent on the presence of water. The bryophyte embryo also remains attached to the parent plant,
which protects and nourishes it. The sporophyte that develops from the embryo is barely noticeable. The
sporangium—the multicellular sexual reproductive structure in which meiosis produces haploid spores—is
present in bryophytes and absent in the majority of algae. This is also a characteristic of land plants.
Thebryophytesaredividedintothreephyla:theliverwortsorHepaticophyta,thehornwortsorAnthocerotophyta,
and the mosses or true Bryophyta.
Liverworts
Liverworts(Hepaticophyta)arecurrentlyclassifiedastheplantsmostcloselyrelatedtotheancestorofvascular
plantsthatadaptedtoterrestrialenvironments.Infact,liverwortshavecolonizedeveryterrestrialhabitatonEarth
anddiversifiedtomorethan7000existingspecies(Figure25.9).Lobateliverwortsformaflatthallus,withlobes
that have a vague resemblance to the lobes of the liver (Figure 25.10), which accounts for the name given to
thephylum.Leafyliverwortshavetinyleaflikestructuresattachedtoastalk.Severalleafyliverwortsareshown
inFigure 25.9.
Figure 25.9Liverworts. This 1904 drawing shows the variety of forms of Hepaticophyta.
PAGE: 723
712 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Figure 25.10 Liverwort gametophyte. A liverwort, Lunularia cruciata, displays its lobate, flat thallus. The organism in
thephotographisinthegametophytestage,buthasnotyetproducedgametangia.Lunulariagametophytesproduce
crescent-shapedgemmae(circled),whichcontainasexualspores.Thetinywhitedotsonthesurfaceofthethallusare
air pores.
Openings in the thallus that allow the movement of gases may be observed in liverworts (Figure 25.10).
However, these are not stomata, because they do not actively open and close by the action of guard cells.
Instead, the thallus takes up water over its entire surface and has no cuticle to prevent desiccation, which
explainstheirpreferredwethabitats.Figure25.11representsthelifecycleofalobateliverwort.Haploidspores
germinate into flattened thalli attached to the substrate by thin, single-celled filaments. Stalk-like structures
(gametophores)growfromthethallusandcarrymaleandfemalegametangia,whichmaydeveloponseparate,
individual plants, or on the same plant, depending on the species. Flagellated male gametes develop within
antheridia (male gametangia). The female gametes develop within archegonia (female gametangia). Once
released, the male gametes swim with the aid of their flagella to an archegonium, and fertilization ensues.
The zygote grows into a small sporophyte still contained in the archegonium. The diploid zygote will give rise,
by meiosis, to the next generation of haploid spores, which can be disseminated by wind or water. In many
liverworts, spore dispersal is facilitated by elaters—long single cells that suddenly change shape as they dry
out and throw adjacent spores out of the spore capsule. Liverwort plants can also reproduce asexually, by the
breakingof“branches”orthespreadingofleaffragmentscalledgemmae.Inthislattertypeofreproduction,the
gemmae—small,intact,completepiecesofplantthatareproducedinacuponthesurfaceofthethallus(shown
in Figure 25.11 and Figure 25.12)—are splashed out of the cup by raindrops. The gemmae then land nearby
and develop into gametophytes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 724
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 713
Figure25.11Reproductivecycleofliverworts.Thelifecycleofatypicallobateliverwortisshown.Thisimageshowsa
liverwortinwhichantheridiaandarchegoniaareproducedonseparategametophytes.(credit:modificationofworkby
Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Hornworts
The defining characteristic of the hornworts (Anthocerotophyta) is the narrow, pipe-like sporophyte. Hornworts
have colonized a variety of habitats on land, although they are never far from a source of moisture. The short,
blue-greengametophyteisthedominantphaseofthelifecycleofahornwort.Thesporophytesemergefromthe
parent gametophyte and continue to grow throughout the life of the plant (Figure 25.12).
Figure 25.12 Hornwort sporophytes. Hornworts grow a tall and slender sporophyte. (credit: modification of work by
Jason Hollinger)
Stomata(airporesthatcanbeopenedandclosed)appearinthehornwortsandareabundantonthesporophyte.
Photosynthetic cells in the thallus each contain a single chloroplast. Meristem cells at the base of the plant
PAGE: 725
714 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
keepdividingandaddingtotheheightofthesporophyte.Thisgrowthpatternisuniquetothehornworts.Many
hornworts establish symbiotic relationships with cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen from the environment.
The lifecycle of hornworts (Figure 25.13) follows the general pattern of alternation of generations. The
gametophytes grow as flat thalli on the soil with embedded male and female gametangia. Flagellated sperm
swim to the archegonia and fertilize eggs. The zygote develops into a long and slender sporophyte that
eventually splits open down the side, releasing spores. Thin branched cells called pseudoelaters surround the
sporesandhelppropelthemfartherintheenvironment.Thehaploidsporesgerminateandgiverisetothenext
generation of gametophytes.
Figure 25.13 Reproductive cycle of hornworts. The alternation of generation in hornworts is shown. (credit:
modification of work by “Smith609”/Wikimedia Commons based on original work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Mosses
Themossesarethemostnumerousofthenon-vascularplants.Morethan10,000speciesofmosseshavebeen
catalogued.Theirhabitatsvaryfromthetundra,wheretheyarethemainvegetation,totheunderstoryoftropical
forests. In the tundra, the mosses’ shallow rhizoids allow them to fasten to a substrate without penetrating the
frozen soil. Mosses slow down erosion, store moisture and soil nutrients, and provide shelter for small animals
as well as food for larger herbivores, such as the musk ox. Mosses are very sensitive to air pollution and are
used to monitor air quality. They are also sensitive to copper salts, so these salts are a common ingredient of
compounds marketed to eliminate mosses from lawns.
Mossesformdiminutivegametophytes,whicharethedominantphaseofthelifecycle.Green,flatstructureswith
asimplemidrib—resemblingtrueleaves,butlackingstomataandvasculartissue—areattachedinaspiraltoa
central stalk. Mosses have stomata only on the sporophyte. Water and nutrients are absorbed directly through
the leaflike structures of the gametophyte. Some mosses have small branches. A primitive conductive system
thatcarrieswaterandnutrientsrunsupthegametophyte'sstalk,butdoesnotextendintotheleaves.Additionally,
mossesareanchoredtothesubstrate—whetheritissoil,rock,orrooftiles—bymulticellularrhizoids,precursors
ofroots.Theyoriginatefromthebaseofthegametophyte,butarenotthemajorroutefortheabsorptionofwater
andminerals.Thelackofatruerootsystemexplainswhyitissoeasytoripmossmatsfromatreetrunk.The
mosses therefore occupy a threshold position between other bryophytes and the vascular plants.
The moss lifecycle follows the pattern of alternation of generations as shown in Figure 25.14. The most
familiar structure is the haploid gametophyte, which germinates from a haploid spore and forms first a
protonema—usually, a tangle of single-celled filaments that hug the ground. Cells akin to an apical meristem
actively divide and give rise to a gametophore, consisting of a photosynthetic stem and foliage-like structures.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 726
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 715
Male and female gametangia develop at the tip of separate gametophores. The antheridia (male organs)
producemanysperm,whereasthearchegonia(thefemaleorgans)eachformasingleeggatthebase(venter)
of a flask-shaped structure. The archegonium produces attractant substances and at fertilization, the sperm
swims down the neck to the venter and unites with the egg inside the archegonium. The zygote, protected by
the archegonium, divides and grows into a sporophyte, still attached by its foot to the gametophyte.
Figure25.14Reproductivecycleofmosses.Thisillustrationshowsthelifecycleofmosses.(credit:modification
of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Which of the following statements about the moss life cycle is false?
a. The mature gametophyte is haploid.
b. The sporophyte produces haploid spores.
c. The calyptra buds to form a mature gametophyte.
d. The zygote is housed in the venter.
PAGE: 727
716 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Themosssporophyteisdependentonthegametophytefornutrients.Theslenderseta(plural,setae),asseen
in Figure 25.15, contains tubular cells that transfer nutrients from the base of the sporophyte (the foot) to the
sporangium orcapsule.
Figure25.15Mosssporophyte.Thisphotographshowsthelongslenderstems,calledsetae,connectedtocapsules
of the moss Thamnobryum alopecurum. The operculum and remnants of the calyptra are visible in some capsules.
(credit: modification of work by Hermann Schachner)
Sporemothercellsinthesporangiumundergomeiosistoproducehaploidspores.Thesporophytehasseveral
features that protect the developing spores and aid in their dispersal. The calyptra, derived from the walls of
the archegonium, covers the sporangium. A structure called the operculum is at the tip of the spore capsule.
The calyptra and operculum fall off when the spores are ready for dispersal. The peristome, tissue around the
mouthofthecapsule,ismadeoftriangular,close-fittingunitslikelittle“teeth.”Theperistomeopensandcloses,
depending on moisture levels, and periodically releases spores.
25.4 | Seedless Vascular Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the new traits that first appear in seedless tracheophytes
• Discuss how each trait is important for adaptation to life on land
• Identify the classes of seedless tracheophytes
• Describe the life cycle of a fern
• Explain the role of seedless plants in the ecosystem
Thevascularplants,ortracheophytes,arethedominantandmostconspicuousgroupoflandplants.Morethan
260,000 species of tracheophytes represent more than 90 percent of Earth’s vegetation. Several evolutionary
innovations explain their success and their ability to spread to all habitats.
Bryophytes may have been successful at the transition from an aquatic habitat to land, but they are still
dependentonwaterforreproduction,andmustabsorbmoistureandnutrientsthroughthegametophytesurface.
Thelackofrootsforabsorbingwaterandmineralsfromthesoil,aswellasalackoflignin-reinforcedconducting
cells, limit bryophytes to small sizes. Although they may survive in reasonably dry conditions, they cannot
reproduce and expand their habitat range in the absence of water. Vascular plants, on the other hand, can
achieve enormous heights, thus competing successfully for light. Photosynthetic organs become leaves, and
pipe-likecellsorvasculartissuestransportwater,minerals,andfixedcarbonorganiccompoundsthroughoutthe
organism.
Throughout plant evolution, there is a progressive increase in the dominance of the sporophyte generation. In
seedlessvascularplants,thediploidsporophyteisthedominantphaseofthelifecycle.Thegametophyteisnow
lessconspicuous,butstillindependentofthesporophyte.Seedlessvascularplantsstilldependonwaterduring
fertilization,astheflagellatedspermmustswimonalayerofmoisturetoreachtheegg.Thisstepinreproduction
explains why ferns and their relatives are more abundant in damp environments.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 728
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 717
Vascular Tissue: Xylem and Phloem
The first plant fossils that show the presence of vascular tissue date to the Silurian period, about 430million
years ago. The simplest arrangement of conductive cells shows a pattern of xylem at the center surrounded
by phloem. Xylem is the tissue responsible for the storage and long-distance transport of water and nutrients,
as well as the transfer of water-soluble growth factors from the organs of synthesis to the target organs. The
tissue consists of conducting cells, known as tracheids, and supportive filler tissue, called parenchyma. Xylem
conductivecellsincorporatethecompoundligninintotheirwalls,andarethusdescribedaslignified.Ligninitself
isacomplexpolymer:Itisimpermeabletowaterandconfersmechanicalstrengthonvasculartissue.Withtheir
rigidcellwalls,thexylemcellsprovidesupporttotheplantandallowittoachieveimpressiveheights.Tallplants
have a selective advantage by being able to reach unfiltered sunlight and disperse their spores or seeds away
from the parent plant, thus expanding the species’ range. By growing higher than other plants, tall trees cast
their shadows on shorter plants and thereby outcompete them for water and precious nutrients in the soil.
Phloem is the second type of vascular tissue; it transports sugars, proteins, and other solutes throughout the
plant.Phloemcellsaredividedintosieveelements(conductingcells)andcellsthatsupportthesieveelements.
Together, xylem and phloem tissues form the vascular system of plants (Figure 25.16).
Figure 25.16 Vascular bundles in celery. This cross section of a celery stalk shows a number of vascular bundles.
The xylem is on the inner part of each bundle. (credit: fir0002 | flagstaffotos.com.au [GFDL 1.2 (http://www.gnu.org/
licenses/old-licenses/fdl-1.2.html)], via Wikimedia Commons. Image modified from source.)
Roots: Support for the Plant
Roots are not well-preserved in the fossil record. Nevertheless, it seems that roots appeared later in evolution
than vascular tissue. The development of an extensive network of roots represented a significant new feature
of vascular plants. Thin rhizoids attached bryophytes to the substrate, but these rather flimsy filaments did not
provideastronganchorfortheplant;nordidtheyabsorbsubstantialamountsofwaterandnutrients.Incontrast,
roots, with their prominent vascular tissue system, transfer water and minerals from the soil to the rest of the
plant.Theextensivenetworkofrootsthatpenetratesdeepintothesoiltoreachsourcesofwateralsostabilizes
plantsbyactingasaballastoranchor.Themajorityofrootsestablishasymbioticrelationshipwithfungi,forming
mutualistic mycorrhizae, which benefit the plant by greatly increasing the surface area for absorption of water,
soil minerals, and nutrients.
Leaves, Sporophylls, and Strobili
Athirdinnovationmarkstheseedlessvascularplants.Accompanyingtheprominenceofthesporophyteandthe
developmentofvasculartissue,theappearanceoftrueleavesimprovedtheirphotosyntheticefficiency.Leaves
PAGE: 729
718 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
capturemoresunlightwiththeirincreasedsurfaceareabyemployingmorechloroplaststotraplightenergyand
convert it to chemical energy, which is then used to fix atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. The
carbohydrates are exported to the rest of the plant by the conductive cells of phloem tissue.
The existence of two types of leaf morphology—microphylls and megaphylls—suggests that leaves evolved
independently in several groups of plants. Microphylls ("little leaves") are small and have a simple vascular
system. The first microphylls in the fossil record can be dated to 350million years ago in the late Silurian. A
single unbranched vein—a bundle of vascular tissue made of xylem and phloem—runs through the center of
theleaf.Microphyllsmayhaveoriginatedfromtheflatteningoflateralbranches,orfromsporangiathatlosttheir
reproductivecapabilities.Microphyllsareseeninclubmosses.Microphyllsprobablyprecededthedevelopment
of megaphylls ("big leaves"), which are larger leaves with a pattern of multiple veins. Megaphylls most likely
appearedindependentlyseveraltimesduringthecourseofevolution.Theircomplexnetworksofveinssuggest
that several branches may have combined into a flattened organ, with the gaps between the branches being
filled with photosynthetic tissue. Megaphylls are seen in ferns and more derived vascular plants.
In addition to photosynthesis, leaves play another role in the life of the plants. Pine cones, mature fronds of
ferns, and flowers are all sporophylls—leaves that were modified structurally to bear sporangia. Strobili are
cone-likestructuresthatcontainsporangia.Theyareprominentinconifers,wheretheyarecommonlyknownas
pine cones.
Ferns and Other Seedless Vascular Plants
By the late Devonian period, plants had evolved vascular tissue, well-defined leaves, and root systems. With
these advantages, plants increased in height and size. During the Carboniferous period (360 to 300 MYA),
swamp forests of club mosses and horsetails—some specimens reaching heights of more than 30 m (100
ft)—coveredmostoftheland.TheseforestsgaverisetotheextensivecoaldepositsthatgavetheCarboniferous
its name. In seedless vascular plants, the sporophyte became the dominant phase of the life cycle.
Water is still required as a medium of sperm transport during the fertilization of seedless vascular plants, and
mostfavoramoistenvironment.Modern-dayseedlesstracheophytesincludeclubmosses,horsetails,ferns,and
whisk ferns.
Phylum Lycopodiophyta: Club Mosses
The club mosses, or phylum Lycopodiophyta, are the earliest group of seedless vascular plants. They
dominated the landscape of the Carboniferous, growing into tall trees and forming large swamp forests.
Today’s club mosses are diminutive, evergreen plants consisting of a stem (which may be branched) and
microphylls (Figure 25.17). The phylum Lycopodiophyta consists of close to 1,200 species, including the
quillworts(Isoetales),theclubmosses(Lycopodiales),andspikemosses(Selaginellales),noneofwhicharetrue
mosses or bryophytes.
Lycophytes follow the pattern of alternation of generations seen in the bryophytes, except that the sporophyte
is the major stage of the life cycle. Some lycophytes, like the club moss Lycopodium, produce gametophytes
that are independent of the sporophyte, developing underground or in other locations where they can form
mycorrhizalassociationswithfungi.Inmanyclubmosses,thesporophytegivesrisetosporophyllsarrangedin
strobili,cone-likestructuresthatgivetheclassitsname.Sporangiadevelopwithinthechamberformedbyeach
sporophyll.
Lycophytes can be homosporous (spores of the same size) or heterosporous (spores of different sizes). The
spike moss Selaginella is a heterosporous lycophyte. The same strobilus will contain microsporangia, which
producesporesthatwilldevelopintothemalegametophyte,andmegasporangia,whichproducesporesthatwill
develop into the female gametophyte. Both gametophytes develop within the protective strobilus.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 730
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 719
Figure 25.17 Lycopodium. In the club mosses such as Lycopodium clavatum, sporangia are arranged in clusters
calledstrobili.Thegenericnamemeans"wolf-foot" fromtheresemblanceofthebranchedsporophytetoapaw.The
specific epithet clavatum refers to the club-shaped strobilus, and reflects the common name of the phylum. (credit:
Cory Zanker)
Phylum Monilophyta: Class Equisetopsida (Horsetails)
Horsetails, whisk ferns, and ferns belong to the phylum Monilophyta, with horsetails placed in the class
Equisetopsida. The single genus Equisetum is the survivor of a large group of plants, known as Arthrophyta,
whichproducedlargetreesandentireswampforestsintheCarboniferous.Theplantsareusuallyfoundindamp
environments and marshes (Figure 25.18).
Figure 25.18 Horsetails. Horsetails, named for the brushy appearance of the sporophyte, thrive in a marsh. (credit:
Myriam Feldman)
Thestemofahorsetailischaracterizedbythepresenceofjointsornodes,hencethenameArthrophyta(arthro-
="joint";-phyta="plant").Leavesandbranchescomeoutaswhorlsfromtheevenlyspacedjoints.Theneedle-
shaped leaves do not contribute greatly to photosynthesis, the majority of which takes place in the green stem
(Figure 25.19).
PAGE: 731
720 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Figure25.19Thejointedstemofahorsetail.Thinleavesoriginatingatthejointsarenoticeableonthehorsetailplant.
Becausesilicadepositedinthecellwallsmadetheseplantsabrasive,horsetailswereonceusedasscrubbingbrushes
and were nicknamed scouring rushes. (credit: Myriam Feldman)
Silica collected by in the epidermal cells contributes to the stiffness of horsetail plants, but underground stems
known as rhizomes anchor the plants to the ground. Modern-day horsetails are homosporous. The spores are
attached to elaters—as we have seen, these are coiled threads that spring open in dry weather and casts
the spores to a location distant from the parent plants. The spores then germinate to produce small bisexual
gametophytes.
Phylum Monilophyta: Class Psilotopsida (Whisk Ferns)
Whilemostfernsformlargeleavesandbranchingroots,thewhiskferns,classPsilotopsida,lackbothrootsand
leaves,probablylostbyreduction.Photosynthesistakesplaceintheirgreenstems,whichbranchdichotomously.
Small yellow knobs form at the tip of a branch or at branch nodes and contain the sporangia (Figure 25.20).
Spores develop into gametophytes that are only a few millimeters across, but which produce both male and
femalegametangia.Whiskfernswereconsideredearlypterophytes.However,recentcomparativeDNAanalysis
suggests that this group may have lost both vascular tissue and roots through evolution, and is more closely
related to ferns.
Figure 25.20 Psilotum. The whisk fern Psilotum nudum has conspicuous green stems with knob-shaped sporangia.
(credit: Forest & Kim Starr)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 732
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 721
Phylum Monilophyta: Class Polypodiopsida (True Ferns)
Withtheirlargefronds,thetruefernsareperhapsthemostreadilyrecognizableseedlessvascularplants.They
are also considered to be the most advanced seedless vascular plants and display characteristics commonly
observed in seed plants. More than 20,000 species of ferns live in environments ranging from the tropics
to temperate forests. Although some species survive in dry environments, most ferns are restricted to moist,
shaded places. Ferns made their appearance in the fossil record during the Devonian period (420 MYA) and
expanded during the Carboniferous (360 to 300 MYA).
Thedominantstageofthelifecycleofafernisthesporophyte,whichconsistsoflargecompoundleavescalled
fronds.Frondsmaybeeitherfinelydividedorbroadlylobed.Frondsfulfilladoublerole;theyarephotosynthetic
organs that also carry reproductive organs. The stem may be buried underground as a rhizome, from which
adventitiousrootsgrowtoabsorbwaterandnutrientsfromthesoil;or,theymaygrowabovegroundasatrunk
intreeferns(Figure25.21).Adventitiousorgansarethosethatgrowinunusualplaces,suchasrootsgrowing
from the side of a stem.
Figure25.21Atreefern.Somespecimensofthisshorttree-fernspeciescangrowverytall.(credit:AdrianPingstone)
Thetipofadevelopingfernfrondisrolledintoacrozier,orfiddlehead(Figure25.22).Fiddleheadsunrollasthe
frond develops.
(a) (b)
Figure25.22Fernfiddleheads.Croziers,orfiddleheads,arethetipsoffernfronds.(credita:modificationofworkby
Cory Zanker; credit b: modification of work by Myriam Feldman)
On the underside of each mature fern frond are groups of sporangia called sori (Figure 25.23a). Most ferns
are homosporous. Spores are produced by meiosis and are released into the air from the sporangium. Those
that land on a suitable substrate germinate and form a heart-shaped gametophyte, or prothallus, which is
attachedtothegroundbythinfilamentousrhizoids(Figure25.23b).Gametophytesproducebothantheridiaand
archegonia. Like the sperm cells of other pterophytes, fern sperm have multiple flagella and must swim to the
archegonium, which releases a chemoattractant to guide them. The zygote develops into a fern sporophyte,
whichemergesfromthearchegoniumofthegametophyte.Maturationofantheridiaandarchegoniaatdifferent
times encourages cross-fertilization. The full life cycle of a fern is depicted inFigure 25.24.
PAGE: 733
722 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
Figure 25.23 Fern reproductive stages. Sori (a) appear as small bumps on the underside of a fern frond. (credit:
MyriamFeldman).(b)Ferngametophyteandyoungsporophyte.Thesporophyteandgametophytearelabeled.(credit:
modification of work by "Vlmastra"/Wikimedia Commons)
Figure 25.24 Reproductive cycle of a fern. This life cycle of a fern shows alternation of generations with a
dominantsporophytestage.(credit"fern":modificationofworkbyCoryZanker;credit"gametophyte":modification
of work by "Vlmastra"/Wikimedia Commons)
Which of the following statements about the fern life cycle is false?
a. Sporangia produce haploid spores.
b. The sporophyte grows from a gametophyte.
c. The sporophyte is diploid and the gametophyte is haploid.
d. Sporangia form on the underside of the gametophyte.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 734
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 723
To see an animation of the life cycle of a fern and to test your knowledge, go to the website
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/fern_life_cycle).
Landscape Designer
Lookingattheornamentalarrangementofflowerbedsandfountainstypicalofthegroundsofroyalcastles
and historic houses of Europe, it’s clear that the gardens’ creators knew about more than art and design.
They were also familiar with the biology of the plants they chose. Landscape design also has strong roots
in the United States’ tradition. A prime example of early American classical design is Monticello, Thomas
Jefferson’s private estate. Among his many interests, Jefferson maintained a strong passion for botany.
Landscape layout can encompass a small private space like a backyard garden, public gathering places
such as Central Park in New York City, or an entire city plan like Pierre L’Enfant’s design for Washington,
DC.
A landscape designer will plan traditional public spaces—such as botanical gardens, parks, college
campuses, gardens, and larger developments—as well as natural areas and private gardens. The
restoration of natural places encroached on by human intervention, such as wetlands, also requires the
expertise of a landscape designer.
Withsuchanarrayofnecessaryskills,alandscapedesigner’seducationshouldincludeasolidbackground
inbotany,soilscience,plantpathology,entomology,andhorticulture.Courseworkinarchitectureanddesign
softwareisalsorequiredforthecompletionofthedegree.Thesuccessfuldesignofalandscaperestsonan
extensiveknowledgeofplantgrowthrequirementssuchaslightandshade,moisturelevels,compatibilityof
differentspecies,andsusceptibilitytopathogensandpests.Mossesandfernswillthriveinashadedarea,
where fountains provide moisture; cacti, on the other hand, would not fare well in that environment. The
future growth of individual plants must be taken into account, to avoid crowding and competition for light
andnutrients.Theappearanceofthespaceovertimeisalsoofconcern.Shapes,colors,andbiologymust
be balanced for a well-maintained and sustainable green space. Art, architecture, and biology blend in a
beautifully designed and implemented landscape (Figure 25.25).
Figure 25.25 This landscaped border at a college campus was designed by students in the horticulture and
landscaping department of the college. (credit: Myriam Feldman)
PAGE: 735
724 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
The Importance of Seedless Plants
Mosses and liverworts are often the first macroscopic organisms to colonize an area, both in a primary
succession—where bare land is settled for the first time by living organisms, or in a secondary
succession—wheresoilremainsintactafteracatastrophiceventwipesoutmanyexistingspecies.Theirspores
are carried by the wind, birds, or insects. Once mosses and liverworts are established, they provide food and
shelterforotherplantspecies.Inahostileenvironment,likethetundrawherethesoilisfrozen,bryophytesgrow
well because they do not have roots and can dry and rehydrate quickly once water is again available. Mosses
are at the base of the food chain in the tundra biome. Many species—from small herbivorous insects to musk
oxenandreindeer—dependonmossesforfood.Inturn,predatorsfeedontheherbivores,whicharetheprimary
consumers.Somereportsindicatethatbryophytesmakethesoilmoreamenabletocolonizationbyotherplants.
Becausetheyestablishsymbioticrelationshipswithnitrogen-fixingcyanobacteria,mossesreplenishthesoilwith
nitrogen.
By the end of the nineteenth century, scientists had observed that lichens and mosses were becoming
increasingly rare in urban and suburban areas. Because bryophytes have neither a root system for absorption
of water and nutrients, nor a cuticular layer that protects them from desiccation, pollutants in rainwater readily
penetratetheirtissuesastheyabsorbmoistureandnutrientsthroughtheirentireexposedsurfaces.Therefore,
pollutants dissolved in rainwater penetrate plant tissues readily and have a larger impact on mosses than on
other plants. The disappearance of mosses can be considered a biological indicator for the level of pollution in
the environment.
Ferns contribute to the environment by promoting the weathering of rock, accelerating the formation of topsoil,
and slowing down erosion as rhizomes spread throughout the soil. The water ferns of the genus Azolla harbor
nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria and restore this important nutrient to aquatic habitats.
Seedlessplantshavehistoricallyplayedaroleinhumanlifewithusesastools,fuel,andmedicine.Forexample,
driedpeatmoss,Sphagnum,iscommonlyusedasfuelinsomepartsofEuropeandisconsideredarenewable
resource. Sphagnum bogs (Figure 25.26) are cultivated with cranberry and blueberry bushes. In addition, the
ability of Sphagnum to hold moisture makes the moss a common soil conditioner. Even florists use blocks of
Sphagnumto maintain moisture for floral arrangements!
Figure 25.26 Sphagnum moss. Sphagnum acutifolium is dried peat moss and can be used as fuel. (credit: Ken
Goulding)
The attractive fronds of ferns make them a favorite ornamental plant. Because they thrive in low light, they are
wellsuitedashouseplants.Moreimportantly,fiddleheadsofbrackenfern(Pteridiumaquilinum)areatraditional
springfoodofNativeAmericans,andarepopularasasidedishinFrenchcuisine.Thelicoricefern,Polypodium
glycyrrhiza, is part of the diet of the Pacific Northwest coastal tribes, owing in part to the sweetness of its
rhizomes.Ithasafaintlicoricetasteandservesasasweetener.Therhizomealsofiguresinthepharmacopeia
of Native Americans for its medicinal properties and is used as a remedy for sore throat.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 736
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 725
Go to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/fiddleheads) to learn how to identify fern species based
upon their fiddleheads.
By far the greatest impact of seedless vascular plants on human life, however, comes from their extinct
progenitors. The tall club mosses, horsetails, and tree-like ferns that flourished in the swampy forests of the
Carboniferousperiodgaverisetolargedepositsofcoalthroughouttheworld.Coalprovidedanabundantsource
ofenergyduringtheIndustrialRevolution,whichhadtremendousconsequencesonhumansocieties,including
rapid technological progress and growth of large cities, as well as the degradation of the environment. Coal is
still a prime source of energy and also a major contributor to global warming.
PAGE: 737
726 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
KEY TERMS
adventitious describes an organ that grows in an unusual place, such as a roots growing from the side of a
stem
antheridium male gametangium
archegonium female gametangium
capsule case of the sporangium in mosses
charophyte other term for green algae; considered the closest relative of land plants
club mosses earliest group of seedless vascular plants
diplontic diploid stage is the dominant stage
embryophyte other name for land plant; embryo is protected and nourished by the sporophyte
extant still-living species
extinct no-longer-existing species
fern seedless vascular plant that produces large fronds; the most advanced group of seedless vascular plants
gametangium structure on the gametophyte in which gametes are produced
gemma (plural, gemmae) leaf fragment that spreads for asexual reproduction
haplodiplodontic haploid and diploid stages alternate
haplontic haploid stage is the dominant stage
heterosporous produces two types of spores
homosporous produces one type of spore
hornworts group of non-vascular plants in which stomata appear
horsetail seedless vascular plant characterized by joints
lignin complex polymer impermeable to water
liverworts most primitive group of the non-vascular plants
lycophyte club moss
megaphyll larger leaves with a pattern of branching veins
megaspore female spore
microphyll small size and simple vascular system with a single unbranched vein
microspore male spore
mosses group of bryophytes in which a primitive conductive system appears
non-vascular plant plant that lacks vascular tissue, which is formed of specialized cells for the transport of
water and nutrients
peat moss Sphagnum
peristome tissue that surrounds the opening of the capsule and allows periodic release of spores
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 738
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 727
phloem tissue responsible for transport of sugars, proteins, and other solutes
protonema tangle of single-celled filaments that forms from the haploid spore
rhizoids thin filaments that anchor the plant to the substrate
seedless vascular plant plant that does not produce seeds
seta stalk that supports the capsule in mosses
sporocyte diploid cell that produces spores by meiosis
sporophyll leaf modified structurally to bear sporangia
sporopollenin tough polymer surrounding the spore
streptophytes group that includes green algae and land plants
strobili cone-like structures that contain the sporangia
tracheophyte vascular plant
vascular plant plant containing a network of cells that conducts water and solutes through the organism
vein bundle of vascular tissue made of xylem and phloem
whisk fern seedless vascular plant that lost roots and leaves by reduction
xylem tissue responsible for long-distance transport of water and nutrients
CHAPTER SUMMARY
25.1Early Plant Life
Land plants acquired traits that made it possible to colonize land and survive out of the water. All land plants
share the following characteristics: alternation of generations, with the haploid plant called a gametophyte, and
the diploid plant called a sporophyte; formation of haploid spores in a sporangium; formation of gametes in a
gametangium; protection of the embryo; and an apical meristem. Vascular tissues, roots, leaves, cuticle cover,
and a tough outer layer that protects the spores contributed to the adaptation of plants to dry land. Land plants
appeared about 500 million years ago in the Ordovician period.
25.2Green Algae: Precursors of Land Plants
Charophytes share more traits with land plants than do other algae, according to structural features and DNA
analysis. Within the charophytes, the Charales, the Coleochaetales, and the Zygnematales have been each
considered as sharing the closest common ancestry with the land plants. Charophytes form sporopollenin and
precursors of lignin, phragmoplasts, and have flagellated sperm. They do not exhibit alternation of generations.
25.3Bryophytes
Seedless non-vascular plants are small, having the gametophyte as the dominant stage of the lifecycle.
Without a vascular system and roots, they absorb water and nutrients on all their exposed surfaces.
Collectively known as bryophytes, the three main groups include the liverworts, the hornworts, and the mosses.
Liverworts are the most primitive plants and are closely related to the first land plants. Hornworts developed
stomata and possess a single chloroplast per cell. Mosses have simple conductive cells and are attached to
the substrate by rhizoids. They colonize harsh habitats and can regain moisture after drying out. The moss
sporangium is a complex structure that allows release of spores away from the parent plant.
25.4Seedless Vascular Plants
The seedless vascular plants show several features important to living on land: vascular tissue, roots, and
leaves. Vascular systems consist of xylem tissue, which transports water and minerals, and phloem tissue,
PAGE: 739
728 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
which transports sugars and proteins. With the development of the vascular system, leaves appeared to act as
large photosynthetic organs, and roots to access water from the ground. Small uncomplicated leaves are
termed microphylls. Large leaves with vein patterns are termed megaphylls. Modified leaves that bear
sporangia are called sporophylls. Some sporophylls are arranged in cone structures called strobili.
The support and conductive properties of vascular tissues have allowed the sporophyte generation of vascular
plants to become increasingly dominant. The seedless vascular plants include club mosses, which are the most
primitive; whisk ferns, which lost leaves and roots by reductive evolution; and horsetails and ferns. Ferns are
the most advanced group of seedless vascular plants. They are distinguished by large leaves called fronds and
small sporangia-containing structures called sori, which are found on the underside of the fronds.
Both mosses and ferns play an essential role in the balance of the ecosystems. Mosses are pioneering species
that colonize bare or devastated environments and make it possible for succession to occur. They contribute to
the enrichment of the soil and provide shelter and nutrients for animals in hostile environments. Mosses are
important biological indicators of environmental pollution. Ferns are important for providing natural habitats, as
soil stabilizers, and as decorative plants. Both mosses and ferns are part of traditional medical practice. In
addition to culinary, medical, and decorative purposes, mosses and ferns can be used as fuels, and ancient
seedless plants were important contributors to the fossil fuel deposits that we now use as an energy resource.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 25.6Which of the following statements a. The mature gametophyte is haploid.
about plant divisions is false? b. The sporophyte produces haploid spores.
a. Lycophytes and pterophytes are seedless c. The calyptra buds to form a mature
vascular plants. gametophyte.
b. All vascular plants produce seeds. d. The zygote is housed in the venter.
c. All non-vascular embryophytes are
3.Figure 25.24Which of the following statements
bryophytes.
about the fern life cycle is false?
d. Seed plants include angiosperms and
a. Sporangia produce haploid spores.
gymnosperms.
b. The sporophyte grows from a gametophyte.
2.Figure 25.14Which of the following statements c. The sporophyte is diploid and the
about the moss life cycle is false? gametophyte is haploid.
d. Sporangia form on the underside of the
gametophyte.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The land plants are probably descendants of which genetic diversity?
of these groups? a. Zygotes are produced by random fusion.
a. green algae b. Gametes are created through meiosis.
b. red algae c. Diploid spores undergo independent
c. brown algae assortment during mitosis.
d. angiosperms d. The zygote undergoes meiosis to generate
a haploid sporophyte.
5.Alternation of generations means that plants
produce: 8.What characteristic of Charales would enable them
a. only haploid multicellular organisms to survive a dry spell?
b. only diploid multicellular organisms a. sperm with flagella
c. only diploid multicellular organisms with b. phragmoplasts
single-celled haploid gametes c. sporopollenin
d. both haploid and diploid multicellular d. chlorophylla
organisms
9.Which one of these characteristics is present in
6.Which of the following traits of land plants allows land plants and not in Charales?
them to grow in height? a. alternation of generations
a. alternation of generations b. flagellated sperm
b. waxy cuticle c. phragmoplasts
c. tracheids d. plasmodesmata
d. sporopollenin
10.A scientist sequences the genome ofChara, red
7.How does a haplontic plant population maintain algae, and a tomato plant. What result would support
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 740
Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants 729
the conclusion that Charophytes should be included a. zygote
in thePlantaekingdom? b. gametophyte
a. TheCharagenome is more similar to the c. sporophyte
red algae than the tomato plant. d. archegonium
b. All three genomes are distinctly different.
17.Microphylls are characteristic of which types of
c. TheCharagenome is more similar to the
plants?
tomato plant genome than the red algae
a. mosses
genome.
b. liverworts
d. The tomato plant genome is distinct from
c. club mosses
the red algae genome.
d. ferns
11.Which of the following features does not support
18.A plant in the understory of a forest displays a
the inclusion of Charophytes in thePlantaekingdom?
segmented stem and slender leaves arranged in a
whorl. It is probably a ________.
a. Charophyte chloroplasts contain chlorophyll
a. club moss
a and b.
b. whisk fern
b. Charophyte plant cell walls contain
c. fern
plasmodesmata to allow transfer between
d. horsetail
cells within multicellular organisms.
c. Charophytes do not exhibit growth 19.The following structures are found on the
throughout the entire plant body. underside of fern leaves and contain sporangia:
d. Charophytes are multicellular organisms
that lack vascular tissue. a. sori
b. rhizomes
12.Which of the following structures is not found in
c. megaphylls
bryophytes?
d. microphylls
a. a cellulose cell wall
b. chloroplast 20.The dominant organism in fern is the ________.
c. sporangium
d. root a. sperm
b. spore
13.Stomata appear in which group of plants?
c. gamete
d. sporophyte
a. Charales
b. liverworts 21.What seedless plant is a renewable source of
c. hornworts energy?
d. mosses a. club moss
b. horsetail
14.The chromosome complement in a moss
c. sphagnum moss
protonema is:
d. fern
a. 1n
b. 2n 22.How do mosses contribute to returning nitrogen
c. 3n to the soil?
d. varies with the size of the protonema a. Mosses fix nitrogen from the air.
b. Mosses harbor cyanobacteria that fix
15.Why do mosses grow well in the Arctic tundra?
nitrogen.
c. Mosses die and return nitrogen to the soil.
a. They grow better at cold temperatures.
d. Mosses decompose rocks and release
b. They do not require moisture.
nitrogen.
c. They do not have true roots and can grow
on hard surfaces. 23.The production of megaphylls by many different
d. There are no herbivores in the tundra. species of plants is an example of _____.
a. parallel evolution
16.A botanist travels to an area that has experienced
b. analogy
a long, severe drought. While examining the
c. divergent evolution
bryophytes in the area, he notices that many are in
d. homology
the same life-cycle stage. Which life-cycle stage
shouldbe the most common?
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
24.Why did land plants lose some of the accessory pigments present in brown and red algae?
PAGE: 741
730 Chapter 25 | Seedless Plants
25.What is the difference between extant and 32.Bryophytes form a monophyletic group that
extinct? transitions between green algae and vascular plants.
Describe at least one similarity and one difference
26.Describe at least two challenges that cactuses
between bryophyte reproduction and green algae
had to overcome that cattails did not.
reproduction.
27.Describe a minimum of two ways that plants
33.How did the development of a vascular system
changed the land environment to support the
contribute to the increase in size of plants?
emergence of land animals.
34.Which plant is considered the most advanced
28.To an alga, what is the main advantage of
seedless vascular plant and why?
producing drought-resistant structures?
35.Ferns are simultaneously involved in promoting
29.In areas where it rains often, mosses grow on
rock weathering, while preventing soil erosion.
roofs. How do mosses survive on roofs without soil?
Explain how a single plant can perform both these
30.What are the three classes of bryophytes? functions, and how these functions are beneficial to
31.Describe two adaptations that are present in its ecosystem.
mosses, but not hornworts or liverworts, which reflect
steps of evolution toward land plants.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 742
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 731
26 | SEED PLANTS
Figure26.1Seedplantsdominatethelandscapeandplayanenormousandintegralroleinthesuccessofallhuman
societies. Here are a few examples: (a) Palm trees grow along the shoreline, serving numerous purposes for food,
shelter,andeventransportation;(b)wheatisanimportantcropgrownthroughoutmostoftheworld;(c)thefruitofthe
cottonplantproducesfibersthatarewovenintofabric;(d)thepotentalkaloidsofthebeautifulopiumpoppyhavelong
influencedhumanlifebothasamedicinalremedyandasadangerouslyaddictivedrug.(credita:modificationofwork
byRyanKozie;creditb:modificationofworkbyStephenAusmus;creditc:modificationofworkbyDavidNance;credit
d: modification of work by Jolly Janner)
Chapter Outline
26.1:Evolution of Seed Plants
26.2:Gymnosperms
26.3:Angiosperms
26.4:The Role of Seed Plants
Introduction
The lush palms on tropical shorelines do not depend on water for the dispersal of their pollen, fertilization, or
thesurvivalofthezygote—unlikemosses,liverworts,andfernslivingwithinthesameterrain.Thesepalmsare
seedplants,whichhavebrokenfreefromtheneedtorelyonwaterfortheirreproductiveneeds.Theseedplants
playanintegralroleinallaspectsoflifeontheplanet,shapingthephysicalterrain,influencingtheclimate,and
maintaining life as we know it. For millennia, human societies have depended on seed plants for nutrition and
medicinalcompounds.Somewhatmorerecently,seedplantshaveservedasasourceofmanufacturedproducts
such as timber and paper, dyes, and textiles. As an example, multiple uses have been found for each of the
plantsshownabove.Palmsprovidematerialsincludingrattans, oils,anddates.Grainslikewheataregrownto
feed both human and animal populations or fermented to produce alcoholic beverages. The fruit of the cotton
flowerisharvestedasaboll,withitsfiberstransformedintoclothingorpulpforpaper.Theshowyopiumpoppy
is valued both as an ornamental flower and as a source of potent opiate compounds.
PAGE: 743
732 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
26.1 | Evolution of Seed Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the two major innovations that allowed seed plants to reproduce in the absence of water
• Explain when seed plants first appeared and when gymnosperms became the dominant plant group
• Discuss the purpose of pollen grains and seeds
• Describe the significance of angiosperms bearing both flowers and fruit
The first plants to colonize land were most likely related to the ancestors of modern day mosses (bryophytes),
which are thought to have appeared about 500 million years ago. They were followed by liverworts (also
bryophytes) and primitive vascular plants—the pterophytes—from which modern ferns are descended. The life
cycleofbryophytesandpterophytesischaracterizedbythealternationofgenerations,whichisalsoexhibitedin
thegymnospermsandangiosperms.However,whatsetsbryophytesandpterophytesapartfromgymnosperms
and angiosperms is their reproductive requirement for water. The completion of the bryophyte and pterophyte
life cycle requires water because the male gametophyte releases flagellated sperm, which must swim to reach
andfertilizethefemalegameteoregg.Afterfertilization,thezygoteundergoescellulardivisionandgrowsintoa
diploidsporophyte,whichinturnwillformsporangiaor"sporevessels."Inthesporangia,mothercellsundergo
meiosis and produce the haploid spores. Release of spores in a suitable environment will lead to germination
and a new generation of gametophytes.
Inseedplants,theevolutionarytrendledtoadominantsporophytegenerationaccompaniedbyacorresponding
reductioninthesizeofthegametophytefromaconspicuousstructuretoamicroscopicclusterofcellsenclosed
in the tissues of the sporophyte. Whereas lower vascular plants, such as club mosses and ferns, are mostly
homosporous (producing only one type of spore), all seed plants, or spermatophytes, are heterosporous,
producingtwotypesofspores:megaspores(female)andmicrospores(male).Megasporesdevelopintofemale
gametophytes that produce eggs, and microspores mature into male gametophytes that generate sperm.
Becausethegametophytesmaturewithinthespores,theyarenotfree-living,asarethegametophytesofother
seedless vascular plants.
Ancestral heterosporous seedless plants, represented by modern-day plants such as the spike moss
Selaginella, are seen as the evolutionary forerunners of seed plants. In the life cycle of Selaginella, both
male and female sporangia develop within the same stem-like strobilus. In each male sporangium, multiple
microsporesareproducedbymeiosis.Eachmicrosporeproducesasmallantheridiumcontainedwithinaspore
case. As it develops it is released from the strobilus, and a number of flagellated sperm are produced that
then leave the spore case. In the female sporangium, a single megaspore mother cell undergoes meiosis to
produce four megaspores. Gametophytes develop within each megaspore, consisting of a mass of tissue that
will later nourish the embryo and a few archegonia. The female gametophyte may remain within remnants of
the spore wall in the megasporangium until after fertilization has occurred and the embryo begins to develop.
Thiscombinationofanembryoandnutritionalcellsisalittledifferentfromtheorganizationofaseed,sincethe
nutritiveendospermin a seed is formed from a single cell rather than multiple cells.
Both seeds and pollen distinguish seed plants from seedless vascular plants. These innovative structures
allowedseedplantstoreduceoreliminatetheirdependenceonwaterforgametefertilizationanddevelopmentof
theembryo,andtoconquerdryland.Pollengrainsaremalegametophytes,whichcontainthesperm(gametes)
of the plant. The small haploid (1n) cells are encased in a protective coat that prevents desiccation (drying
out) and mechanical damage. Pollen grains can travel far from their original sporophyte, spreading the plant’s
genes.Seedsoffertheembryoprotection,nourishment,andamechanismtomaintaindormancyfortensoreven
thousands of years, ensuring that germination can occur when growth conditions are optimal. Seeds therefore
allow plants to disperse the next generation through both space and time. With such evolutionary advantages,
seed plants have become the most successful and familiar group of plants.
Both adaptations expanded the colonization of land begun by the bryophytes and their ancestors. Fossils
place the earliest distinct seed plants at about 350 million years ago. The first reliable record of gymnosperms
datestheirappearancetothePennsylvanianperiod,about319millionyearsago(Figure26.2).Gymnosperms
were preceded by progymnosperms, the first naked seed plants, which arose about 380 million years ago.
Progymnosperms were a transitional group of plants that superficially resembled conifers (cone bearers)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 744
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 733
becausetheyproducedwoodfromthesecondarygrowthofthevasculartissues;however,theystillreproduced
likeferns,releasingsporesintotheenvironment.Atleastsomespecieswereheterosporous.Progymnosperms,
like the extinct Archaeopteris (not to be confused with the ancient bird Archaeopteryx), dominated the forests
of the late Devonian period. However, by the early (Triassic, c. 240 MYA) and middle (Jurassic, c. 205 MYA)
Mesozoicera,thelandscapewasdominatedbythetruegymnosperms.Angiospermssurpassedgymnosperms
by the middle of the Cretaceous (c. 100 MYA) in the late Mesozoic era, and today are the most abundant and
biologically diverse plant group in most terrestrial biomes.
Figure 26.2 Plant timeline. Various plant species evolved in different eras. (credit: United States Geological Survey)
Figure modified from source.
Evolution of Gymnosperms
The fossil plant Elkinsia polymorpha, a "seed fern" from the Devonian period—about 400 million years ago—is
considered the earliest seed plant known to date. Seed ferns (Figure 26.3) produced their seeds along their
branches, in structures called cupules that enclosed and protected the ovule—the female gametophyte and
associated tissues—which develops into a seed upon fertilization. Seed plants resembling modern tree ferns
became more numerous and diverse in the coal swamps of the Carboniferous period.
Figure26.3Seedfernleaf.ThisfossilizedleafisfromGlossopteris,aseedfernthatthrivedduringthePermianage
(290–240 million years ago). (credit: D.L. Schmidt, USGS)
Fossil records indicate the first gymnosperms (progymnosperms) most likely originated in the Paleozoic era,
duringthemiddleDevonianperiod:about390millionyearsago.ThepreviousMississippianandPennsylvanian
periods, were wet and dominated by giant fern trees. But the following Permian period was dry, which gave
a reproductive edge to seed plants, which are better adapted to survive dry spells. The Ginkgoales, a group
PAGE: 745
734 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
of gymnosperms with only one surviving species—the Ginkgo biloba—were the first gymnosperms to appear
during the lower Jurassic. Gymnosperms expanded in the Mesozoic era (about 240 million years ago),
supplanting ferns in the landscape, and reaching their greatest diversity during this time. The Jurassic period
wasasmuchtheageofthecycads(palm-tree-likegymnosperms)astheageofthedinosaurs.Ginkgoalesand
themorefamiliarconifersalsodottedthelandscape.Althoughangiosperms(floweringplants)arethemajorform
of plant life in most biomes, gymnosperms still dominate some ecosystems, such as the taiga (boreal forests)
and the alpine forests at higher mountain elevations (Figure 26.4) because of their adaptation to cold and dry
growth conditions.
Figure 26.4Conifers. This boreal forest (taiga) has low-lying plants and conifer trees. (credit: L.B. Brubaker, NOAA)
Seeds and Pollen as an Evolutionary Adaptation to Dry Land
Bryophyte and fern spores are haploid cells dependent on moisture for rapid development of multicellular
gametophytes. In the seed plants, the female gametophyte consists of just a few cells: the egg and some
supportive cells, including the endosperm-producing cell that will support the growth of the embryo. After
fertilizationoftheegg,thediploidzygoteproducesanembryothatwillgrowintothesporophytewhentheseed
germinates. Storage tissue to sustain growth of the embryo and a protective coat give seeds their superior
evolutionary advantage. Several layers of hardened tissue prevent desiccation, and free the embryo from the
needforaconstantsupplyofwater.Furthermore,seedsremaininastateofdormancy—inducedbydesiccation
and the hormone abscisic acid—until conditions for growth become favorable. Whether blown by the wind,
floating on water, or carried away by animals, seeds are scattered in an expanding geographic range, thus
avoiding competition with the parent plant.
Pollengrains(Figure26.5)aremalegametophytescontainingjustafewcellsandaredistributedbywind,water,
or an animal pollinator. The whole structure is protected from desiccation and can reach the female organs
withoutdependingonwater.Afterreachingafemalegametophyte,thepollengraingrowsatubethatwilldeliver
a male nucleus to the egg cell. The sperm of modern gymnosperms and all angiosperms lack flagella, but in
cycads, Ginkgo, and other primitive gymnosperms, the sperm are still motile, and use flagella to swim to the
female gamete; however, they are delivered to the female gametophyte enclosed in a pollen grain. The pollen
growsoristakenintoafertilizationchamber,wherethemotilespermarereleasedandswimashortdistanceto
an egg.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 746
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 735
Figure 26.5 Pollen fossils. This fossilized pollen is from a Buckbean fen core found in Yellowstone National Park,
Wyoming. The pollen is magnified 1,054 times. (credit: R.G. Baker, USGS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Evolution of Angiosperms
The roughly 200 million years between the appearance of the gymnosperms and the flowering plants gives us
someappreciationfortheevolutionaryexperimentationthatultimatelyproducedflowersandfruit.Angiosperms
(“seed in a vessel”) produce a flower containing male and/or female reproductive structures. Fossil evidence
(Figure26.6)indicatesthatfloweringplantsfirstappearedabout125millionyearsagointheLowerCretaceous
(lateintheMesozoicera),andwererapidlydiversifyingbyabout100millionyearsagointheMiddleCretaceous.
Earliertracesofangiospermsarescarce.FossilizedpollenrecoveredfromJurassicgeologicalmaterialhasbeen
attributed to angiosperms. A few early Cretaceous rocks show clear imprints of leaves resembling angiosperm
leaves. By the mid-Cretaceous, a staggering number of diverse flowering plants crowd the fossil record. The
same geological period is also marked by the appearance of many modern groups of insects, suggesting that
pollinating insects played a key role in the evolution of flowering plants.
New data in comparative genomics and paleobotany (the study of ancient plants) have shed some light on
the evolution of angiosperms. Although the angiosperms appeared after the gymnosperms, they are probably
not derived from gymnosperm ancestors. Instead, the angiosperms form a sister clade (a species and its
descendents) that developed in parallel with the gymnosperms. The two innovative structures of flowers and
fruit represent an improved reproductive strategy that served to protect the embryo, while increasing genetic
variability and range. There is no current consensus on the origin of the angiosperms. Paleobotanists debate
whether angiosperms evolved from small woody bushes, or were related to the ancestors of tropical grasses.
Both views draw support from cladistics, and the so-called woody magnoliid hypothesis—which proposes
that the early ancestors of angiosperms were shrubs like modern magnolia—also offers molecular biological
evidence.
The most primitive living angiosperm is considered to be Amborella trichopoda, a small plant native to the
rainforestofNewCaledonia,anislandintheSouthPacific.AnalysisofthegenomeofA.trichopodahasshown
that it is related to all existing flowering plants and belongs to the oldest confirmed branch of the angiosperm
family tree. The nuclear genome shows evidence of an ancient whole-genome duplication. The mitochondrial
genome is large and multichromosomal, containing elements from the mitochondrial genomes of several other
species,includingalgaeandamoss.Afewotherangiospermgroups,calledbasalangiosperms,areviewedas
having ancestral traits because they branched off early from the phylogenetic tree. Most modern angiosperms
PAGE: 747
736 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
are classified as either monocots or eudicots, based on the structure of their leaves and embryos. Basal
angiosperms, such as water lilies, are considered more ancestral in nature because they share morphological
traits with both monocots and eudicots.
Figure 26.6 Ficus imprint. This leaf imprint shows a Ficus speciosissima, an angiosperm that flourished during the
Cretaceous period. (credit: W. T. Lee, USGS)
Flowers and Fruits as an Evolutionary Adaptation
Angiospermsproducetheirgametesinseparateorgans,whichareusuallyhousedinaflower.Bothfertilization
and embryo development take place inside an anatomical structure that provides a stable system of sexual
reproductionlargelyshelteredfromenvironmentalfluctuations.Withabout300,000species,floweringplantsare
the most diverse phylum on Earth after insects, which number about 1,200,000 species. Flowers come in a
bewilderingarrayofsizes,shapes,colors,smells,andarrangements.Mostflowershaveamutualisticpollinator,
with the distinctive features of flowers reflecting the nature of the pollination agent. The relationship between
pollinator and flower characteristics is one of the great examples of coevolution.
Following fertilization of the egg, the ovule grows into a seed. The surrounding tissues of the ovary thicken,
developingintoafruitthatwillprotecttheseedandoftenensureitsdispersaloverawidegeographicrange.Not
all fruits develop completely from an ovary; such “false fruits" or pseudocarps, develop from tissues adjacent
to the ovary. Like flowers, fruit can vary tremendously in appearance, size, smell, and taste. Tomatoes, green
peppers, corn, and avocados are all examples of fruits. Along with pollen and seeds, fruits also act as agents
of dispersal. Some may be carried away by the wind. Many attract animals that will eat the fruit and pass the
seedsthroughtheirdigestivesystems,thendeposittheseedsinanotherlocation.Cocklebursarecoveredwith
stiff, hooked spines that can hook into fur (or clothing) and hitch a ride on an animal for long distances. The
cockleburs that clung to the velvet trousers of an enterprising Swiss hiker, George de Mestral, inspired his
invention of the loop and hook fastener he named Velcro.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 748
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 737
Building Phylogenetic Trees with Analysis of DNA Sequence
Alignments
Alllivingorganismsdisplaypatternsofrelationshipsderivedfromtheirevolutionaryhistory.Phylogenyisthe
science that describes the relative connections between organisms, in terms of ancestral and descendant
species. Phylogenetic trees, such as the plant evolutionary history shown in Figure 26.7, are tree-like
branching diagrams that depict these relationships. Species are found at the tips of the branches. Each
branching point, called a node, is the point at which a single taxonomic group (taxon), such as a species,
separates into two or more species.
Figure 26.7Plant phylogeny. This phylogenetic tree shows the evolutionary relationships of plants.
Phylogenetic trees have been built to describe the relationships between species since the first sketch of
atreethatappearedinDarwin'sOriginofSpecies.Traditionalmethodsinvolvecomparisonofhomologous
anatomical structures and embryonic development, assuming that closely related organisms share
anatomical features that emerge during embryo development. Some traits that disappear in the adult are
present in the embryo; for example, an early human embryo has a postanal tail, as do all members of
the Phylum Chordata. The study of fossil records shows the intermediate stages that link an ancestral
form to its descendants. However, many of the approaches to classification based on the fossil record
alone are imprecise and lend themselves to multiple interpretations. As the tools of molecular biology
and computational analysis have been developed and perfected in recent years, a new generation of
tree-building methods has taken shape. The key assumption is that genes for essential proteins or RNA
structures,suchastheribosomalRNAs,areinherentlyconservedbecausemutations(changesintheDNA
sequence) could possibly compromise the survival of the organism. DNA from minute samples of living
organisms or fossils can be amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequenced, targeting the
regionsofthegenomethataremostlikelytobeconservedbetweenspecies.Thegenesencodingthe18S
ribosomalRNAfromthesmallsubunitandplastidgenesarefrequentlychosenforDNAalignmentanalysis.
Once the sequences of interest are obtained, they are compared with existing sequences in databases
PAGE: 749
738 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
such as GenBank, which is maintained by The National Center for Biotechnology Information. A number
of computational tools are available to align and analyze sequences. Sophisticated computer analysis
programs determine the percentage of sequence identity or homology. Sequence homology can be used
to estimate the evolutionary distance between two DNA sequences and reflect the time elapsed since
the genes separated from a common ancestor. Molecular analysis has revolutionized phylogenetic trees.
In some cases, prior results from morphological studies have been confirmed: for example, confirming
Amborella trichopoda as the most primitive angiosperm known. However, some groups and relationships
have been rearranged as a result of DNA analysis.
26.2 | Gymnosperms
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the type of seeds produced by gymnosperms, as well as other characteristics of gymnosperms
• Identify the geological era dominated by the gymnosperms and describe the conditions to which they
were adapted
• List the four groups of modern-day gymnosperms and provide examples of each
• Describe the life cycle of a typical gymnosperm
Gymnosperms, meaning “naked seeds,” are a diverse group of seed plants. According to the "anthophyte"
hypothesis, the angiosperms are a sister group of one group of gymnosperms (the Gnetales), which makes
thegymnospermsaparaphyleticgroup.Paraphyleticgroupsarethoseinwhichnotalldescendantsofasingle
common ancestor are included in the group. However , the "netifer" hypothesis suggests that the gnetophytes
are sister to the conifers, making the gymnosperms monophyletic and sister to the angiosperms. Further
molecular and anatomical studies may clarify these relationships. Characteristics of the gymnosperms include
nakedseeds,separatefemaleandmalegametes,pollinationbywind,andtracheids(whichtransportwaterand
solutes in the vascular system).
Gymnosperm seeds are not enclosed in an ovary; rather, they are only partially sheltered by modified leaves
called sporophylls. You may recall the term strobilus (plural = strobili) describes a tight arrangement of
sporophylls around a central stalk, as seen in pine cones. Some seeds are enveloped by sporophyte tissues
uponmaturation.Thelayerofsporophytetissuethatsurroundsthemegasporangium,andlater,theembryo,is
called theintegument.
Gymnosperms were the dominant phylum in the Mesozoic era. They are adapted to live where fresh water
is scarce during part of the year, or in the nitrogen-poor soil of a bog. Therefore, they are still the prominent
phylum in the coniferous biome or taiga, where the evergreen conifers have a selective advantage in cold and
dryweather.Evergreenconiferscontinuelowlevelsofphotosynthesisduringthecoldmonths,andarereadyto
take advantage of the first sunny days of spring. One disadvantage is that conifers are more susceptible than
deciduous trees to leaf infestations because most conifers do not lose their leaves all at once. They cannot,
therefore, shed parasites and restart with a fresh supply of leaves in spring.
The life cycle of a gymnosperm involves alternation of generations, with a dominant sporophyte in which
reduced male and female gametophytes reside. All gymnosperms are heterosporous. The male and female
reproductiveorganscanforminconesorstrobili.Maleandfemalesporangiaareproducedeitheronthesame
plant, described as monoecious (“one home” or bisexual), or on separate plants, referred to as dioecious
(“two homes” or unisexual) plants. The life cycle of a conifer will serve as our example of reproduction in
gymnosperms.
Life Cycle of a Conifer
Pine trees are conifers (coniferous = cone bearing) and carry both male and female sporophylls on the same
mature sporophyte. Therefore, they are monoecious plants. Like all gymnosperms, pines are heterosporous
and generate two different types of spores (male microspores and female megaspores). Male and female
spores develop in different strobili, with small male cones and larger female cones. In the male cones, or
staminatecones,themicrosporocytesundergomeiosisandtheresultanthaploidmicrosporesgiverisetomale
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 750
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 739
gametophytes or “pollen grains” by mitosis. Each pollen grain consists of just a few haploid cells enclosed in a
toughwallreinforcedwithsporopollenin. Inthespring,largeamountsofyellowpollenarereleasedandcarried
bythewind.Somegametophyteswilllandonafemalecone.Pollinationisdefinedastheinitiationofpollentube
growth.Thepollentubedevelopsslowly,andthegenerativecellinthepollengrainproducestwohaploidsperm
orgenerativenucleibymitosis.Atfertilization,oneofthehaploidspermnucleiwillunitewiththehaploidnucleus
of an egg cell.
Female cones, or ovulate cones, contain two ovules per scale. Each ovule has a narrow passage that
opens near the base of the sporophyll. This passage is the micropyle, through which a pollen tube will later
grow. One megaspore mother cell, or megasporocyte, undergoes meiosis in each ovule. Three of the four
cells break down; only a single surviving cell will develop into a female multicellular gametophyte, which
encloses archegonia (an archegonium is a reproductive organ that contains a single large egg). As the female
gametophytebeginstodevelop,astickypollinationdroptrapswindblownpollengrainsneartheopeningofthe
micropyle. A pollen tube is formed and grows toward the developing gametophyte. One of the generative or
sperm nuclei from the pollen tube will enter the egg and fuse with the egg nucleus as the egg matures. Upon
fertilization,thediploideggwillgiverisetotheembryo,whichisenclosedinaseedcoatoftissuefromtheparent
plant. Although several eggs may be formed and even fertilized, there is usually a single surviving embryo in
eachovule.Fertilizationandseeddevelopmentisalongprocessinpinetrees:itmaytakeuptotwoyearsafter
pollination.Theseedthatisformedcontainsthreegenerationsoftissues:theseedcoatthatoriginatesfromthe
sporophyte tissue, the gametophyte tissue that will provide nutrients, and the embryo itself.
Figure 26.8 illustrates the life cycle of a conifer. The sporophyte (2n) phase is the longest phase in the life of
a gymnosperm. The gametophytes (1n)—produced by microspores and megaspores—are reduced in size. It
maytakemorethanayearbetweenpollinationandfertilizationwhilethepollentubegrowstowardsthegrowing
female gametophyte (1n), which develops from a single megaspore. The slow growth of the pollen tube allows
the female gametophyte time to produce eggs (1n).
PAGE: 751
740 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Figure26.8Coniferlifecycle.Thisimageshowsthelifecycleofaconifer.Pollenfrommaleconesblowsupinto
upper branches, where it fertilizes female cones. The megaspore shown in the image develops into the female
gametophyte as the pollen tube slowly grows toward it, eventually fusing with the egg and delivering a male
nucleus, which combines with the female nucleus of the mature egg.
At what stage does the diploid zygote form?
a. when the female cone begins to bud from the tree
b. at fertilization
c. when the seeds drop from the tree
d. when the pollen tube begins to grow
Watch this video to see the process of seed production in gymnosperms. (This multimedia resource will
open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66573/1.3/#eip-id1089843)
Diversity of Gymnosperms
Modern gymnosperms are classified into four phyla. Coniferophyta, Cycadophyta, and Ginkgophyta are similar
intheirpatternofseeddevelopmentandalsointheirproductionofsecondarycambium(cellsthatgeneratethe
vascular system of the trunk or stem and are partially specialized for water transportation). However, the three
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 752
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 741
phyla are not closely related phylogenetically to each other. Gnetophyta are considered the closest group to
angiospermsbecausetheyproducetruexylemtissue,withvesselsaswellasthetracheidsfoundintherestof
the gymnosperms. It is possible that vessel elements arose independently in the two groups
Conifers (Coniferophyta)
Conifersarethedominantphylumofgymnosperms,withthegreatestvarietyofspecies(Figure26.9).Typical
conifersaretalltreesthatbearscale-likeorneedle-likeleaves.Waterevaporationfromleavesisreducedbytheir
narrowshapeandathickcuticle.Snoweasilyslidesoffneedle-shapedleaves,keepingthesnowloadlight,thus
reducing broken branches. Such adaptations to cold and dry weather explain the predominance of conifers at
highaltitudesandincoldclimates.Conifersincludefamiliarevergreentreessuchaspines,spruces,firs,cedars,
sequoias,andyews.Afewspeciesaredeciduousandlosetheirleavesinfall.Thebaldcypress,dawnredwood,
European larch and the tamarack (Figure 26.9c) are examples of deciduous conifers. Many coniferous trees
areharvestedforpaperpulpandtimber.Thewoodofconifersismoreprimitivethanthewoodofangiosperms;
it containstracheids, but no vessel elements, and is therefore referred to as “soft wood.”
Figure26.9Conifers.Conifersarethedominantformofvegetationincoldoraridenvironmentsandathighaltitudes.
Shownherearethe(a)evergreensprucePiceasp.,(b)juniperJuniperussp.,(c)coastalredwoodorsequoiaSequoia
sempervirens, and (d) the tamarack Larix larcinia. Notice the deciduous yellow leaves of the tamarack. (credit a:
modification of work by Rosendahl; credit b: modification of work by Alan Levine; credit c: modification of work by
Wendy McCormic; credit d: modification of work by Micky Zlimen)
Cycads
Cycadsthriveinmildclimates,andareoftenmistakenforpalmsbecauseoftheshapeoftheirlarge,compound
leaves. Cycads bear large strobili or cones (Figure 26.10), and may be pollinated by beetles rather than wind,
whichisunusualforagymnosperm.Largecycadsdominatedthelandscapeduringtheageofdinosaursinthe
Mesozoic, but only a hundred or so smaller species persisted to modern times. They face possible extinction,
andseveralspeciesareprotectedthroughinternationalconventions.Becauseoftheirattractiveshape,theyare
often used as ornamental plants in gardens in the tropics and subtropics.
PAGE: 753
742 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Figure 26.10 Cycad. This cycad, Encephalartos ferox, has large cones and broad, fern-like leaves. (credit: Wendy
Cutler)
Ginkgophytes
The single surviving species of the ginkgophytes group is Ginkgo biloba (Figure 26.11). Its fan-shaped
leaves—unique among seed plants because they feature a dichotomous venation pattern—turn yellow in
autumnandfallfromthetree.Forcenturies,G.bilobawascultivatedbyChineseBuddhistmonksinmonasteries,
whichensureditspreservation.Itisplantedinpublicspacesbecauseitisunusuallyresistanttopollution.Male
and female organs are produced on separate plants. Typically, gardeners plant only male trees because the
seeds produced by the female plant have an off-putting smell of rancid butter.
Figure26.11Ginkgo.Thisplatefromthe1870bookFloraJaponica,SectioPrima(Tafelband)depictstheleavesand
fruit ofGinkgo biloba, as drawn by Philipp Franz von Siebold and Joseph Gerhard Zuccarini.
Gnetophytes
The phylogenetic position of the gnetophytes is not currently resolved. Their possession of vessel elements
suggeststheyaretheclosestrelativetomodernangiosperms.However,molecularanalysisplacesthemcloser
totheconifers.Thethreelivinggeneraarequitedissimilar:Ephedra,Gnetum,andWelwitschia(Figure26.12),
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 754
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 743
which may indicate that the group is not monophyletic. Like angiosperms, they have broad leaves. Ephedra
(Figure26.12a)occursindryareasoftheWestCoastoftheUnitedStatesandMexico.Ephedra’ssmall,scale-
like leaves are the source of the compound ephedrine, which is used in medicine as a potent decongestant.
Because ephedrine is similar to amphetamines, both in chemical structure and neurological effects, its use
is restricted to prescription drugs. Gnetum species (Figure 26.12b) are found in some parts of Africa, South
America, and Southeast Asia, and include trees, shrubs and vines. Welwitschia (Figure 26.12c) is found
in the Namib desert, and is possibly the oddest member of the group. It produces only two leaves, which
grow continuously throughout the life of the plant (some plants are hundreds of years old). Like the ginkgos,
Welwitschiaproduces male and female gametes on separate plants.
Figure 26.12 (a) Ephedra viridis, known by the common name Mormon tea, grows on the West Coast of the United
States and Mexico. (b) Gnetum gnemon grows in Malaysia. (c) The large Welwitschia mirabilis can be found in the
Namibiandesert.(credita:modificationofworkbyUSDA;creditb:modificationofworkbyMalcolmManners;creditc:
modification of work by Derek Keats)
Watch this BBC video describing the amazing strangeness of Welwitschia. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66573/1.3/#eip-id2212644)
26.3 | Angiosperms
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain why angiosperms are the dominant form of plant life in most terrestrial ecosystems
• Describe the main parts of a flower and their functions
• Detail the life cycle of a typical gymnosperm and angiosperm
• Discuss the similarities and differences between the two main groups of flowering plants
From their humble and still obscure beginning during the early Jurassic period, the angiosperms—or flowering
plants—haveevolvedtodominatemostterrestrialecosystems(Figure26.13).Withmorethan300,000species,
the angiosperm phylum (Anthophyta) is second only to insects in terms of diversification.
PAGE: 755
744 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Figure 26.13 Flowers. These flowers grow in a botanical garden border in Bellevue, WA. Flowering plants dominate
terrestrial landscapes. The vivid colors of flowers and enticing fragrance of flowers are adaptations to pollination by
animals like insects, birds, and bats. (credit: Myriam Feldman)
The success of angiosperms is due to two novel reproductive structures: flowers and fruits. The function of
the flower is to ensure pollination, often by arthropods, as well as to protect a developing embryo. The colors
and patterns on flowers offer specific signals to many pollinating insects or birds and bats that have coevolved
with them. For example, some patterns are visible only in the ultraviolet range of light, which can be seen by
arthropod pollinators. For somepollinators, flowers advertise themselves asareliable sourceof nectar.Flower
scentalsohelpstoselectitspollinators.Sweetscentstendtoattractbeesandbutterfliesandmoths,butsome
fliesandbeetlesmightpreferscentsthatsignalfermentationorputrefaction.Flowersalsoprovideprotectionfor
theovuleanddevelopingembryoinsideareceptacle.Thefunctionofthefruitisseedprotectionanddispersal.
Differentfruitstructuresortissuesonfruit—suchassweetflesh,wings,parachutes,orspinesthatgrab—reflect
the dispersal strategies that help spread seeds.
Flowers
Flowersaremodifiedleaves,orsporophylls,organizedaroundacentralreceptacle.Althoughtheyvarygreatlyin
appearance,virtuallyallflowerscontainthesamestructures:sepals,petals,carpels,andstamens.Thepeduncle
typically attaches the flower to the plant proper. A whorl of sepals (collectively called the calyx) is located at
the base of the peduncle and encloses the unopened floral bud. Sepals are usually photosynthetic organs,
although there are some exceptions. For example, the corolla in lilies and tulips consists of three sepals and
three petals that look virtually identical. Petals, collectively the corolla, are located inside the whorl of sepals
and may display vivid colors to attract pollinators. Sepals and petals together form the perianth. The sexual
organs,thefemalegynoeciumandmaleandroeciumarelocatedatthecenteroftheflower.Typically,thesepals,
petals, and stamens are attached to the receptacle at the base of the gynoecium, but the gynoecium mayalso
be located deeper in the receptacle, with the other floral structures attached above it.
AsillustratedinFigure26.14,theinnermostpartofaperfectfloweristhegynoecium,thelocationintheflower
where the eggs will form. The female reproductive unit consists of one or more carpels, each of which has a
stigma,style,andovary.Thestigmaisthelocationwherethepollenisdepositedeitherbywindorapollinating
arthropod. The sticky surface of the stigma traps pollen grains, and the style is a connecting structure through
which the pollen tube will grow to reach the ovary. The ovary houses one or more ovules, each of which will
ultimatelydevelopintoaseed.Flowerstructureisverydiverse,andcarpelsmaybesingular,multiple,orfused.
(Multiplefusedcarpelscompriseapistil.)Theandroecium,ormalereproductiveregioniscomposedofmultiple
stamenssurroundingthecentralcarpel.Stamensarecomposedofathinstalkcalledafilamentandasac-like
structure called the anther. The filament supports the anther, where the microspores are produced by meiosis
and develop into haploid pollen grains, or male gametophytes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 756
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 745
Figure26.14Flowerstructure.Thisimagedepictsthestructureofaperfectflower.Perfectflowersproducebothmale
andfemalefloralorgans.Theflowershownhasonlyonecarpel,butsomeflowershaveaclusterofcarpels.Together,
all the carpels make up the gynoecium. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The Life Cycle of an Angiosperm
The adult or sporophyte phase is the main phase of an angiosperm’s life cycle (Figure 26.15). Like
gymnosperms, angiosperms are heterosporous. Therefore, they produce microspores, which will generate
pollen grains as the male gametophytes, and megaspores, which will form an ovule that contains female
gametophytes. Inside the anther’s microsporangia, male sporocytes divide by meiosis to generate haploid
microspores,which,inturn,undergomitosisandgiverisetopollengrains.Eachpollengraincontainstwocells:
one generative cell that will divide into two sperm and a second cell that will become the pollen tube cell.
PAGE: 757
746 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Figure26.15Angiospermlifecycle.Thelifecycleofanangiospermisshown.Anthersandcarpelsarestructures
thatsheltertheactualgametophytes:thepollengrainandembryosac.Doublefertilizationisaprocessuniqueto
angiosperms. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Question:Ifaflowerlackedamegasporangium,whattypeofgametewouldnotform?Iftheflowerlackeda
microsporangium, what type of gamete would not form?
The ovule, sheltered within the ovary of the carpel, contains the megasporangium protected by two layers of
integuments and the ovary wall. Within each megasporangium, a diploid megasporocyte undergoes meiosis,
generating fourhaploidmegaspores—three smallandonelarge. Onlythelargemegasporesurvives; itdivides
mitotically three times to produce eight nuclei distributed among the seven cells of the female gametophyte or
embryosac.Threeofthesecellsarelocatedateachpoleoftheembryosac.Thethreecellsatonepolebecome
theeggandtwosynergids.Thethreecellsattheoppositepolebecomeantipodalcells.Thecentercellcontains
theremainingtwonuclei(polarnuclei).Thiscellwilleventuallyproducetheendospermoftheseed.Themature
embryo sac then contains one egg cell, two synergids or “helper” cells, three antipodal cells (which eventually
degenerate), and a central cell with two polar nuclei. When a pollen grain reaches the stigma, a pollen tube
extendsfromthegrain,growsdownthestyle,andentersthroughthemicropyle:anopeningintheinteguments
of the ovule. The two sperm are deposited in the embryo sac.
A double fertilization event then occurs. One sperm and the egg combine, forming a diploid zygote—the
future embryo. The other sperm fuses with the polar nuclei, forming a triploid cell that will develop into the
endosperm—thetissuethatservesasafoodreserveforthedevelopingembryo.Thezygotedevelopsintoan
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 758
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 747
embryo with a radicle, or small root, and one (monocot) or two (dicot) leaf-like organs called cotyledons. This
differenceinthenumberofembryonicleavesisthebasisforthetwomajorgroupsofangiosperms:themonocots
and the eudicots. Seed food reserves are stored outside the embryo, in the form of complex carbohydrates,
lipids, or proteins. The cotyledons serve as conduits to transmit the broken-down food reserves from their
storage site inside the seed to the developing embryo. The seed consists of a toughened layer of integuments
forming the coat, the endosperm with food reserves, and at the center, the well-protected embryo.
Most angiosperms have perfect flowers, which means that each flower carries both stamens and carpels
(Figure26.15).Inmonoeciousplants,male(staminate)andfemale(pistillate)flowersareseparate,butcarried
on the same plant. Sweetgums (Liquidambar spp.) and beeches (Betula spp. are monoecious (Figure 26.16).
In dioecious plants, male and female flowers are found on separate plants. Willows (Salix spp.) and poplars
(Populusspp.)aredioecious.Inspiteofthepredominanceofperfectflowers,onlyafewspeciesofangiosperms
self-pollinate. Both anatomical and environmental barriers promote cross-pollination mediated by a physical
agent(windorwater),orananimal,suchasaninsectorbird.Cross-pollinationincreasesgeneticdiversityina
species.
Figure 26.16 Beech inflorescences. The female inflorescence is at the upper left. The male inflorescence is at
the lower right. (credit: Stephen J. Baskauf, 2002. http://bioimages.vanderbilt.edu/baskauf/10593
(http://openstax.org/l/betula).Morphbank::BiologicalImaging(http://www.morphbank.net/(http://openstax.org/
l/morphbank) , 29 June 2017). Florida State University, Department of Scientific Computing, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4026 USA)
Fruit
Astheseeddevelops,thewallsoftheovarythickenandformthefruit.Theseedformsinanovary,whichalso
enlarges as the seeds grow. Many foods commonly called vegetables are actually fruits. Eggplants, zucchini,
string beans, tomatoes, and bell peppers are all technically fruits because they contain seeds and are derived
from the thick ovary tissue. Acorns are true nuts, and winged maple “helicopter seeds” or whirligigs (whose
botanicalnameissamara)arealsofruits.Botanistsclassifyfruitintomorethantwodozendifferentcategories,
only a few of which are actually fleshy and sweet.
Maturefruitcanbefleshyordry.Fleshyfruitincludethefamiliarberries,peaches,apples,grapes,andtomatoes.
Rice, wheat, and nuts are examples of dry fruit. Another subtle distinction is that not all fruits are derived from
PAGE: 759
748 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
just the ovary. For instance, strawberries are derived from the ovary as well as the receptacle, and apples are
formedfromtheovaryandthepericarp,orhypanthium.Somefruitsarederivedfromseparateovariesinasingle
flower, such as the raspberry. Other fruits, such as the pineapple, form from clusters of flowers. Additionally,
somefruits,likewatermelonandorange,haverinds.Regardlessofhowtheyareformed,fruitsareanagentof
seed dispersal. The variety of shapes and characteristics reflect the mode of dispersal. Wind carries the light
dry fruits of trees and dandelions. Water transports floating coconuts. Some fruits attract herbivores with their
color or scent, or as food. Once eaten, tough, undigested seeds are dispersed through the herbivore’s feces
(endozoochory). Other fruits have burrs and hooks to cling to fur and hitch rides on animals (epizoochory).
Diversity of Angiosperms
Angiosperms are classified in a single phylum: the Anthophyta. Modern angiosperms appear to be a
monophyletic group, which as you may recall means that they originated from a single ancestor. Within the
angiospermsarethreemajorgroups:basalangiosperms,monocots,anddicots.Basalangiospermsareagroup
of plants that are believed to have branched off before the separation of the monocots and eudicots, because
theyexhibittraitsfrombothgroups.Theyarecategorizedseparatelyinmostclassificationschemes.Thebasal
angiosperms include Amborella, water lilies, the Magnoliids (magnolia trees, laurels, and spice peppers), and
a group called the Austrobaileyales, which includes the star anise. The monocots and dicots are differentiated
on the basis of the structure of the cotyledons, pollen grains, and other structures. Monocots include grasses
and lilies, and the dicots form a multi-branched group that includes (among many others) roses, cabbages,
sunflowers, and mints.
Basal Angiosperms
TheMagnoliidaearerepresentedbythemagnolias,laurels,andpeppers.Magnoliasaretalltreesbearingdark,
shinyleaves,andlarge,fragrantflowerswithmanyparts,andareconsideredarchaic(Figure26.17).Intheouter
whorl of the magnolia flower the sepals and petals are undifferentiated and are collectively called tepals. The
reproductivepartsarearrangedinaspiralaroundacone-shapedreceptacle,withthecarpelslocatedabovethe
stamens(Figure26.17).Theaggregatefruit,withoneseedformedfromeachcarpel,isseeninFigure26.18d.
Laurel trees produce fragrant leaves and small, inconspicuous flowers. The Laurales grow mostly in warmer
climates and are small trees and shrubs. Familiar plants in this group include the bay laurel, cinnamon, spice
bush (Figure 26.18a), and avocado tree.
Figure 26.17 Magnolia grandiflora. A cluster of carpels can be seen above the stamens, which have shed their
pollen and begun to drop from the inflorescence. In the flower, the sepals and petals are undifferentiated and are
collectivelycalledtepals.(credit:IanaréSévi.http://bioimages.vanderbilt.edu/baskauf/10949(http://openstax.org/
l/grandiflora))
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 760
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 749
Figure26.18Basalangiosperms.The(a)commonspicebushbelongstotheLaurales,thesamefamilyascinnamon
and bay laurel. The fruit of (b) the Piper nigrum plant is black pepper, the main product that was traded along
spiceroutes.Noticethesmall,unobtrusive,clusteredflowers.Theleafvenationresemblesthatofboththemonocots
(parallel) and the dicots (branched). (c) Water lilies, Nymphaea lotus. Although the leaves of the plant float on the
surfaceofthewater,theirrootsareintheunderlyingsoilatthebottomofthelake.Theaggregatefruitofamagnolia
(d).Thefruitisinitsfinalstage,withitsredseedsjuststartingtoappear.(credita:modificationofworkbyCoryZanker;
credit b: modification of work by Franz Eugen Köhler; credit c: modification of work by Rl/Wikimedia Commons. d:
modification of work by "Coastside2"/Wikimedia Commons).
Monocots
Plantsinthemonocotgroupareprimarilyidentifiedbythepresenceofasinglecotyledonintheseedling.Other
anatomicalfeaturessharedbymonocotsincludeveinsthatrunparalleltoandalongthelengthoftheleaves,and
flower parts that are arranged in a three- or six-fold symmetry. True woody tissue is rarely found in monocots.
Inpalmtrees, vascularandparenchymatissues producedbythe primaryandsecondarythickening meristems
form the trunk. The pollen from the first angiosperms was likely monosulcate, containing a single furrow or
pore through the outer layer. This feature is still seen in the modern monocots. Vascular tissue of the stem is
scattered,notarrangedinanyparticularpattern,butisorganizedinaringintheroots.Therootsystemconsists
of multiple fibrous roots, with no major tap root. Adventitious roots often emerge from the stem or leaves. The
monocots include familiar plants such as the true lilies (Liliopsida), orchids, yucca, asparagus, grasses, and
palms.Manyimportantcropsaremonocots,suchasriceandothercereals,corn,sugarcane,andtropicalfruits
like bananas and pineapples (Figure 26.19a,b,c).
PAGE: 761
750 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Figure 26.19 Monocot and dicot crop plants. The world’s major crops are flowering plants. (a) Rice, (b) wheat, and
(c) bananas are monocots, while (d) cabbage, (e) beans, and (f) peaches are dicots. (credit a: modification of work
by David Nance, USDA ARS; credit b, c: modification of work by Rosendahl; credit d: modification of work by Bill
Tarpenning, USDA; credit e: modification of work by Scott Bauer, USDA ARS; credit f: modification of work by Keith
Weller, USDA)
Eudicots
Eudicots, or true dicots, are characterized by the presence of two cotyledons in the developing shoot. Veins
form a network in leaves, and flower parts come in four, five, or many whorls. Vascular tissue forms a ring in
the stem; in monocots, vascular tissue is scattered in the stem. Eudicots can be herbaceous (not woody), or
producewoodytissues.Mosteudicotsproducepollenthatistrisulcateortriporate,withthreefurrowsorpores.
Therootsystemisusuallyanchoredbyonemainrootdevelopedfromtheembryonicradicle.Eudicotscomprise
two-thirds of all flowering plants. The major differences between monocots and eudicots are summarized in
Table 26.1. However, some species may exhibit characteristics usually associated with the other group, so
identification of a plant as a monocot or a eudicot is not always straightforward.
Comparison of Structural Characteristics of Monocots and Eudicots
Characteristic Monocot Eudicot
Cotyledon One Two
Veins in Leaves Parallel Network (branched)
Stem Vascular Tissue Scattered Arranged in ring pattern
Roots Network of fibrous roots Tap root with many lateral roots
Pollen Monosulcate Trisulcate
Flower Parts Three or multiple of three Four, five, multiple of four or five and whorls
Table 26.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 762
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 751
26.4 | The Role of Seed Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how angiosperm diversity is due, in part, to multiple complex interactions with animals
• Describe ways in which pollination occurs
• Discuss the roles that plants play in ecosystems and how deforestation threatens plant biodiversity
Without seed plants, life as we know it would not be possible. Plants play a key role in the maintenance of
terrestrialecosystemsthroughthestabilizationofsoils,cyclingofcarbon,andclimatemoderation.Largetropical
forestsreleaseoxygenandactascarbondioxide“sinks.”Seedplantsprovidesheltertomanylifeforms,aswell
asfoodforherbivores,therebyindirectlyfeedingcarnivores.Plantsecondarymetabolitesareusedformedicinal
purposes and industrial production. Virtually all animal life is dependent on plants for survival.
Animals and Plants: Herbivory
Coevolution of flowering plants and insects is a hypothesis that has received much attention and support,
especially because both angiosperms and insects diversified at about the same time in the middle Mesozoic.
Many authors have attributed the diversity of plants and insects to both pollination and herbivory, or the
consumptionofplantsbyinsectsandotheranimals.Herbivoryisbelievedtohavebeenasmuchadrivingforce
aspollination.Coevolutionofherbivoresandplantdefensesiseasilyandcommonlyobservedinnature.Unlike
animals, most plants cannot outrun predators or use mimicry to hide from hungry animals (although mimicry
has been used to entice pollinators). A sort of arms race exists between plants and herbivores. To “combat”
herbivores, some plant seeds—such as acorn and unripened persimmon—are high in alkaloids and therefore
unsavory to some animals. Other plants are protected by bark, although some animals developed specialized
mouth pieces to tear and chew vegetal material. Spines and thorns (Figure 26.20) deter most animals, except
for mammals with thick fur, and some birds have specialized beaks to get past such defenses.
Figure26.20Plantdefenses.(a)Spinesand(b)thornsareexamplesofplantdefenses.(credita:modificationofwork
by Jon Sullivan; credit b: modification of work by I. Sáček, Sr.)
Herbivoryhasbeenexploitedbyseedplantsfortheirownbenefit.Thedispersaloffruitsbyherbivorousanimals
isastrikingexampleofmutualistic relationships. Theplantofferstotheherbivoreanutritious sourceoffoodin
return for spreading the plant’s genetic material to a wider area.
An extreme example of coevolution (discovered by Dan Jansen) between an animal and a plant is exemplified
byMexicanacaciatreesandtheirattendantacaciaantsPseudomyrmexspp.(thisistermedmyrmecophytism).
The trees support the ants with shelter and food: The ants nest in the hollows of large thorns produced by the
tree and feed on sugary secretions produced at the ends of the leaves. The sugar pellets also help to keep
the ants from interfering with insect pollinators. In return, ants discourage herbivores, both invertebrates and
vertebrates, by stinging and attacking leaf-eaters and insects ovipositing on the plants. The ants also help to
remove potential plant pathogens, such asfungal growths. Another case of insect-plant coevolution isfound in
bracken fern (Pteridium aquinilum), whose subspecies are found throughout the world. Bracken ferns produce
a number of “secondary plant compounds” in their adult fronds that serve as defensive compounds against
nonadaptedinsectattack(thesecompoundsincludecyanogenicglucosides,tannins,andphenolics).However,
PAGE: 763
752 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
duringthe“fiddlehead”orcrozierstage,brackensecretesnutritioussugaryandproteinaceouscompoundsfrom
special“nectaries”thatattractantsandevenspeciesofjumpingspiders,allofwhichdefendtheplant’scroziers
untiltheyarefullyunfolded.Theseopportunisticgroupsofprotectivearthropodsgreatlyreducethedamagethat
otherwise would occur during the early stages of growth.
Animals and Plants: Pollination
Flowers pollinated by wind are usually small, feathery, and visually inconspicuous. Grasses are a successful
group of flowering plants that are wind pollinated. They produce large amounts of powdery pollen carried over
large distances by the wind. Some large trees such as oaks, maples, and birches are also wind pollinated.
Explore thiswebsite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/pollinators2)for additional information on pollinators.
Morethan80percentofangiospermsdependonanimalsforpollination(technicallythetransferofpollenfrom
the anther to the stigma). Consequently, plants have developed many adaptations to attract pollinators. With
over200,000differentplantsdependentonanimalpollination,theplantneedstoadvertisetoitspollinatorswith
some specificity. The specificity of specialized plant structures that target animals can be very surprising. It is
possible, for example, to determine the general type of pollinators favored by a plant by observing the flower’s
physical characteristics. Many bird or insect-pollinated flowers secrete nectar, which is a sugary liquid. They
also produce both fertile pollen, for reproduction, and sterile pollen rich in nutrients for birds and insects. Many
butterfliesandbeescandetectultravioletlight,andflowersthatattractthesepollinatorsusuallydisplayapattern
of ultraviolet reflectance that helps them quickly locate the flower's center. In this manner, pollinating insects
collectnectarwhileatthesametimearedustedwithpollen(Figure26.21).Large,redflowerswithlittlesmelland
alongfunnelshapearepreferredbyhummingbirds,whohavegoodcolorperception,apoorsenseofsmell,and
needastrongperch.Whiteflowersthatopenatnightattractmoths.Otheranimals—suchasbats,lemurs,and
lizards—can also act as pollinating agents. Any disruption to these interactions, such as the disappearance of
bees,forexampleasaconsequenceofcolonycollapsedisorders,canleadtodisasterforagriculturalindustries
that depend heavily on pollinated crops.
Figure26.21Pollination.Asabeecollectsnectarfromaflower,itisdustedbypollen,whichitthendispersestoother
flowers. (credit: John Severns)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 764
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 753
Testing Attraction of Flies by Rotting Flesh Smell
Question: Willflowersthatoffercuestobeesattractcarrionfliesifsprayedwithcompoundsthatsmelllike
rotten flesh?
Background: Visitation of flowers by pollinating flies is a function mostly of smell. Flies are attracted by
rottingfleshandcarrions.Theputridodorseemstobethemajorattractant.Thepolyaminesputrescineand
cadaverine,whicharetheproductsofproteinbreakdownafteranimaldeath,arethesourceofthepungent
smell of decaying meat. Some plants strategically attract flies by synthesizing polyamines similar to those
generated by decaying flesh and thereby attract carrion flies.
Flies seek out dead animals because they normally lay their eggs on them and their maggots feed on the
decaying flesh. Interestingly, time of death can be determined by a forensic entomologist based on the
stages and type of maggots recovered from cadavers.
Hypothesis: Because flies are drawn to other organisms based on smell and not sight, a flower that is
normally attractive to bees because of its colors will attract flies if it is sprayed with polyamines similar to
those generated by decaying flesh.
Test the hypothesis:
1. Select flowers usually pollinated by bees. White petunia may be a good choice.
2. Dividetheflowersintotwogroups,andwhilewearingeyeprotectionandgloves,sprayonegroupwith
a solution of either putrescine or cadaverine. (Putrescine dihydrochloride is typically available in 98
percent concentration; this can be diluted to approximately 50 percent for this experiment.)
3. Place the flowers in a location where flies are present, keeping the sprayed and unsprayed flowers
separated.
4. Observethemovementofthefliesforonehour.Recordthenumberofvisitstotheflowersusingatable
similartoTable26.2.Giventherapidmovementofflies,itmaybebeneficialtouseavideocamerato
record the fly–flower interaction. Replay the video in slow motion to obtain an accurate record of the
number of fly visits to the flowers.
5. Repeattheexperimentfourmoretimeswiththesamespeciesofflower,butusingdifferentspecimens.
6. Repeat the entire experiment with a different type of flower that is normally pollinated by bees.
Results of Number of Visits by Flies to Sprayed and Control/Unsprayed
Flowers
Trial # Sprayed Flowers Unsprayed Flowers
1
2
3
4
5
Table 26.2
Analyze your data: Review the data you have recorded. Average the number of visits that flies made to
sprayedflowersoverthecourseofthefivetrials(onthefirstflowertype)andcompareandcontrastthemto
theaveragenumberofvisitsthatfliesmadetotheunsprayed/controlflowers.Canyoudrawanyconclusions
regarding the attraction of the flies to the sprayed flowers?
For the second flower type used, average the number of visits that flies made to sprayed flowers over the
PAGE: 765
754 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
courseofthefivetrialsandcompareandcontrastthemtotheaveragenumberofvisitsthatfliesmadetothe
unsprayed/controlflowers.Canyoudrawanyconclusionsregardingtheattractionofthefliestothesprayed
flowers?
Compare and contrast the average number of visits that flies made to the two flower types. Can you draw
anyconclusionsaboutwhethertheappearanceoftheflowerhadanyimpactontheattractionofflies?Did
smelloverrideanyappearancedifferences,orwerethefliesattractedtooneflowertypemorethananother?
Form a conclusion: Do the results support the hypothesis? If not, how can your observations be explained?
The Importance of Seed Plants in Human Life
Seed plants are the foundation of human diets across the world (Figure 26.22). Many societies eat almost
exclusively vegetarian fare and depend solely on seed plants for their nutritional needs. A few crops (rice,
wheat, and potatoes) dominate the agricultural landscape. Many crops were developed during the agricultural
revolution, when human societies made the transition from nomadic hunter–gatherers to horticulture and
agriculture. Cereals, rich in carbohydrates, provide the staple of many human diets. Beans and nuts supply
proteins. Fats are derived from crushed seeds, as is the case for peanut and rapeseed (canola) oils, or fruits
such as olives. Animal husbandry also consumes large quantities of crop plants.
Staple crops are not the only food derived from seed plants. Various fruits and vegetables provide nutrient
macromolecules, vitamins, minerals, and fiber. Sugar, to sweeten dishes, is produced from the monocot
sugarcane and the eudicot sugar beet. Drinks are made from infusions of tea leaves, chamomile flowers,
crushed coffee beans, or powdered cocoa beans. Spices come from many different plant parts: saffron and
cloves are stamens and buds, black pepper and vanilla are seeds, the bark of a bush in the Laurales family
suppliescinnamon,andtheherbsthatflavormanydishescomefromdriedleavesandfruit,suchasthepungent
red chili pepper. The volatile oils of a number of flowers and bark provide the scent of perfumes.
Additionally, no discussion of seed plant contribution to human diet would be complete without the mention
of alcohol. Fermentation of plant-derived sugars and starches is used to produce alcoholic beverages in all
societies. In some cases, the beverages are derived from the fermentation of sugars from fruit, as with wines
and, in other cases, from the fermentation of carbohydrates derived from seeds, as with beers. The sharing of
foods and beverages also contributes to human social ritual.
Seed plants have many other uses, including providing wood as a source of timber for construction, fuel, and
material to build furniture. Most paper is derived from the pulp of coniferous trees. Fibers of seed plants such
ascotton,flax,andhemparewovenintocloth.Textiledyes,suchasindigo,weremostlyofplantoriginuntilthe
advent of synthetic chemical dyes.
Lastly, it is more difficult to quantify the benefits of ornamental seed plants. These grace private and public
spaces, adding beauty and serenity to human lives and inspiring painters and poets alike.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 766
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 755
Figure26.22Humanusesofplants.Humansrelyonplantsforavarietyofreasons.(a)Cacaobeanswereintroduced
to Europe from the New World, where they were used byMesoamerican civilizations. Combined with sugar, another
plantproduct,chocolateisapopularfood.(b)Flowerslikethetuliparecultivatedfortheirbeauty.(c)Quinine,extracted
from cinchona trees, is used to treat malaria, to reduce fever, and to alleviate pain. (d) This violin is made of wood.
(credita:modificationofworkby"Everjean"/Flickr;creditb:modificationofworkbyRosendahl;creditc:modification
of work by Franz Eugen Köhler)
The medicinal properties of plants have been known to human societies since ancient times. There are
references to the use of plants’ curative properties in Egyptian, Babylonian, and Chinese writings from 5,000
yearsago.Manymodernsynthetictherapeuticdrugsarederivedorsynthesizeddenovofromplantsecondary
metabolites.Itisimportanttonotethatthesameplantextractcanbeatherapeuticremedyatlowconcentrations,
becomeanaddictivedrugathigherdoses,andcanpotentiallykillathighconcentrations.Table26.3presentsa
few drugs, their plants of origin, and their medicinal applications.
Plant Origin of Medicinal Compounds and Medical Applications
Plant Compound Application
Deadly nightshade
(Atropa belladonna Atropine Dilate eye pupils for eye exams
)
Table 26.3
PAGE: 767
756 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
Plant Origin of Medicinal Compounds and Medical Applications
Plant Compound Application
Foxglove (Digitalis
Digitalis Heart disease, stimulates heart beat
purpurea)
Yam (Dioscorea
Steroids Steroid hormones: contraceptive pill and cortisone
spp.)
Ephedra (Ephedra
Ephedrine Decongestant and bronchiole dilator
spp.)
Pacific yew (Taxus
Taxol Cancer chemotherapy; inhibits mitosis
brevifolia)
Opium poppy Analgesic (reduces pain without loss of consciousness) and narcotic
(Papaver Opioids (reduces pain with drowsiness and loss of consciousness) in higher
somniferum) doses
Quinine tree
Quinine Antipyretic (lowers body temperature) and antimalarial
(Cinchonaspp.)
Salicylic acid
Willow (Salixspp.) Analgesic and antipyretic
(aspirin)
Table 26.3
Ethnobotanist
The relatively new field of ethnobotany studies the interaction between a particular culture and the plants
native to the region. Seed plants have a large influence on day-to-day human life. Not only are plants
the major source of food and medicine, they also influence many other aspects of society, from clothing
to industry. The medicinal properties of plants were recognized early on in human cultures. From the
mid-1900s, synthetic chemicals began to supplant plant-based remedies.
Pharmacognosy is the branch of pharmacology that focuses on medicines derived from natural sources.
With massive globalization and industrialization, it is possible that much human knowledge of plants and
their medicinal purposes will disappear with the cultures that fostered them. This is where ethnobotanists
comein.Tolearnaboutandunderstandtheuseofplantsinaparticularculture,anethnobotanistmustbring
in knowledge of plant life and an understanding and appreciation of diverse cultures and traditions. The
Amazon forest is home to an incredible diversity of vegetation and is considered an untapped resource of
medicinal plants; yet, both the ecosystem and its indigenous cultures are threatened with extinction.
To become an ethnobotanist, a person must acquire a broad knowledge of plant biology, ecology, and
sociology. Not only are the plant specimens studied and collected, but also the stories, recipes, and
traditionsthatarelinkedtothem.Forethnobotanists,plantsarenotviewedsolelyasbiologicalorganismsto
bestudiedinalaboratory,butasanintegralpartofhumanculture.Theconvergenceofmolecularbiology,
anthropology, and ecology make the field of ethnobotany a truly multidisciplinary science.
Biodiversity of Plants
Biodiversity ensures a resource for new food crops and medicines. Plant life balances ecosystems, protects
watersheds,mitigateserosion,moderatesourclimate,andprovidesshelterformanyanimalspecies.Threatsto
plantdiversity,however,comefrommanysources.Theexplosionofthehumanpopulation,especiallyintropical
countries where birth rates are highest and economic development is in full swing, is leading to devastating
human encroachment into forested areas. To feed the growing population, humans need to obtain arable land,
so there has been and continues to be massive clearing of trees. The need for more energy to power larger
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 768
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 757
cities and economic growth therein leads to the construction of dams, the consequent flooding of ecosystems,
and increased emissions of pollutants. Other threats to tropical forests come from poachers, who log trees for
theirpreciouswood.EbonyandBrazilianrosewood,bothontheendangeredlist,areexamplesoftreespecies
drivenalmosttoextinctionbyindiscriminatelogging.Thisunfortunatepracticecontinuesunabatedtodaylargely
due to lack of population control and political willpower.
The number of plant species becoming extinct is increasing at an alarming rate. Because ecosystems are in
a delicate balance, and seed plants maintain close symbiotic relationships with animals—whether predators or
pollinators—the disappearance of a single plant can lead to the extinction of connected animal species. A real
andpressingissueisthatmanyplantspecieshavenotyetbeencatalogued,andsotheirplaceintheecosystem
is unknown. These unknown species are threatened by logging, habitat destruction, and loss of pollinators.
They may become extinct before we have the chance to begin to understand the possible impacts from their
disappearance. Efforts to preserve biodiversity take several lines of action, from preserving heirloom seeds to
barcoding species. Heirloom seeds come from plants that were traditionally grown in human populations, as
opposed to the seeds used for large-scale agricultural production. Barcoding is a technique in which one or
moreshortgenesequences,takenfromawell-characterizedportionofDNAfoundinmostgenomes,areused
to identify a species through DNA analysis.
PAGE: 769
758 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
KEY TERMS
anther sac-like structure at the tip of the stamen in which pollen grains are produced
Anthophyta phylum to which angiosperms belong
barcoding molecular biology technique in which one or more short gene sequences taken from a well-
characterized portion of the genome is used to identify a species
basal angiosperms a group of plants that probably branched off before the separation of monocots and
eudicots
calyx whorl of sepals
carpel single unit of the pistil
conifer dominant phylum of gymnosperms with the greatest variety of trees
corolla collection of petals
cotyledon primitive leaf that develops in the zygote; monocots have one cotyledon, and dicots have two
cotyledons
crop cultivated plant
cycad gymnosperm that grows in tropical climates and resembles a palm tree; member of the phylum
Cycadophyta
dicot (also, eudicot) related group of angiosperms whose embryos possess two cotyledons
dioecious describes a species in which the male and female reproductive organs are carried on separate
specimens
filament thin stalk that links the anther to the base of the flower
flower branches specialized for reproduction found in some seed-bearing plants, containing either specialized
male or female organs or both male and female organs
fruit thickened tissue derived from ovary wall that protects the embryo after fertilization and facilitates seed
dispersal
ginkgophyte gymnosperm with one extant species, theGinkgo biloba: a tree with fan-shaped leaves
gnetophyte gymnospermshrubwithvariedmorphologicalfeaturesthatproducesvesselelementsinitswoody
tissues; the phylum includes the generaEphedra, Gnetum,andWelwitschia
gymnosperm seed plant with naked seeds (seeds exposed on modified leaves or in cones)
gynoecium (also, carpel) structure that constitutes the female reproductive organ
heirloom seed seedfromaplantthatwasgrownhistorically,buthasnotbeenusedinmodernagricultureona
large scale
herbaceous grass-like plant noticeable by the absence of woody tissue
herbivory consumption of plants by insects and other animals
integument layer of sporophyte tissue that surrounds the megasporangium, and later, the embryo
megasporocyte megaspore mother cell; larger spore that germinates into a female gametophyte in a
heterosporous plant
microsporocyte smaller spore that produces a male gametophyte in a heterosporous plant
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 770
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 759
monocot relatedgroupofangiospermsthatproduceembryoswithonecotyledonandpollenwithasingleridge
monoecious describes a species in which the male and female reproductive organs are on the same plant
nectar liquid rich in sugars produced by flowers to attract animal pollinators
ovary chamber that contains and protects the ovule or female megasporangium
ovulate cone cone containing two ovules per scale
ovule female gametophyte
perianth part of the plant consisting of the calyx (sepals) and corolla (petals)
petal modified leaf interior to the sepals; colorful petals attract animal pollinators
pistil fused group of carpels
pollen grain structure containing the male gametophyte of the plant
pollen tube extension from the pollen grain that delivers sperm to the egg cell
pollination transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma
progymnosperm transitional group of plants that resembled conifers because they produced wood, yet still
reproduced like ferns
seed structure containing the embryo, storage tissue, and protective coat
sepal modified leaf that encloses the bud; outermost structure of a flower
spermatophyte seed plant; from the Greeksperm(seed) andphyte(plant)
stamen structure that contains the male reproductive organs
stigma uppermost structure of the carpel where pollen is deposited
strobilus plant structure with a tight arrangement of sporophylls around a central stalk, as seen in cones or
flowers; the male strobilus produces pollen, and the female strobilus produces eggs
style long, thin structure that links the stigma to the ovary
CHAPTER SUMMARY
26.1Evolution of Seed Plants
Seed plants appeared about one million years ago, during the Carboniferous period. Two major innovations
were seeds and pollen. Seeds protect the embryo from desiccation and provide it with a store of nutrients to
support the early growth of the sporophyte. Seeds are also equipped to delay germination until growth
conditions are optimal. Pollen allows seed plants to reproduce in the absence of water. The gametophytes of
seed plants shrank, while the sporophytes became prominent structures and the diploid stage became the
longest phase of the life cycle.
In the gymnosperms, which appeared during the drier Permian period and became the dominant group during
the Triassic, pollen was dispersed by wind, and their naked seeds developed in the sporophylls of a strobilus.
Angiosperms bear both flowers and fruit. Flowers expand the possibilities for pollination, especially by insects,
who have coevolved with the flowering plants. Fruits offer additional protection to the embryo during its
development, and also assist with seed dispersal. Angiosperms appeared during the Mesozoic era and have
become the dominant plant life in terrestrial habitats.
26.2Gymnosperms
Gymnosperms are heterosporous seed plants that produce naked seeds. They appeared in the Paleozoic
PAGE: 771
760 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
period and were the dominant plant life during the Mesozoic. Modern-day gymnosperms belong to four phyla.
The largest phylum, Coniferophyta, is represented by conifers, the predominant plants at high altitude and
latitude. Cycads (phylum Cycadophyta) resemble palm trees and grow in tropical climates. Ginkgophyta is
represented today by a single species,Ginkgo biloba. The last phylum, Gnetophyta, is a diverse group of
plants that produce vessel elements in their wood.
26.3Angiosperms
Angiosperms are the dominant form of plant life in most terrestrial ecosystems, comprising about 90 percent of
all plant species. Most crops and ornamental plants are angiosperms. Their success comes from two
innovative structures that protect reproduction from variability in the environment: the flower and the fruit.
Flowers were derived from modified leaves; their color and fragrance encourages species-specific pollination.
The main parts of a flower are the sepals and petals, which protect the reproductive parts: the stamens and the
carpels. The stamens produce the male gametes in pollen grains. The carpels contain the female gametes (the
eggs inside the ovules), which are within the ovary of a carpel. The walls of the ovary thicken after fertilization,
ripening into fruit that ensures dispersal by wind, water, or animals.
The angiosperm life cycle is dominated by the sporophyte stage. Double fertilization is an event unique to
angiosperms. One sperm in the pollen fertilizes the egg, forming a diploid zygote, while the other combines with
the two polar nuclei, forming a triploid cell that develops into a food storage tissue called the endosperm.
Flowering plants are divided into two main groups, the monocots and eudicots, according to the number of
cotyledons in the seedlings. Basal angiosperms belong to an older lineage than monocots and eudicots.
26.4The Role of Seed Plants
Angiosperm diversity is due in part to multiple interactions with animals. Herbivory has favored the
development of defense mechanisms in plants, and avoidance of those defense mechanisms in animals.
Conversely, seed dispersal can be aided by animals that eat plant fruits. Pollination (the transfer of pollen to a
carpel) is mainly carried out by wind and animals, and angiosperm fruits and seeds have evolved numerous
adaptations to capture the wind or attract specific classes of animals.
Plants play a key role in ecosystems. They are a source of food and medicinal compounds, and provide raw
materials for many industries. Rapid deforestation and industrialization, however, threaten plant biodiversity. In
turn, this threatens the ecosystem.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 26.8At what stage does the diploid zygote 2.Figure 26.15If a flower lacked a
form? megasporangium, what type of gamete would not
a. when the female cone begins to bud from form? If the flower lacked a microsporangium, what
the tree type of gamete would not form?
b. at fertilization
c. when the seeds drop from the tree
d. when the pollen tube begins to grow
REVIEW QUESTIONS
3.Seed plants are ________. a. flower
a. all homosporous b. fruit
b. mostly homosporous with some c. pollen
heterosporous d. spore
c. mostly heterosporous with some
5.In which of the following geological periods would
homosporous
gymnosperms dominate the landscape?
d. all heterosporous
a. Carboniferous
4.Besides the seed, what other major structure b. Permian
diminishes a plant’s reliance on water for c. Triassic
reproduction? d. Eocene (present)
6.Which of the following structures widens the
geographic range of a species and is an agent of
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 772
Chapter 26 | Seed Plants 761
dispersal? a. the anther
a. seed b. the stigma
b. flower c. the filament
c. leaf d. the carpel
d. root
13.In the course of double fertilization, one sperm
7.Which of the following traits characterizes cell fuses with the egg and the second one fuses with
gymnosperms? ________.
a. The plants carry exposed seeds on modified a. the synergids
leaves. b. the polar nuclei of the center cell
b. Reproductive structures are located in a c. the egg as well
flower. d. the antipodal cells
c. After fertilization, the ovary thickens and
14.Corn develops from a seedling with a single
forms a fruit.
cotyledon, displays parallel veins on its leaves, and
d. The gametophyte is the longest phase of
produces monosulcate pollen. It is most likely:
the life cycle.
8.Megasporocytes will eventually produce which of a. a gymnosperm
the following? b. a monocot
a. pollen grain c. a eudicot
b. sporophytes d. a basal angiosperm
c. male gametophytes
15.Which of the following plant structures is not a
d. female gametophytes
defense against herbivory?
9.What is the ploidy of the following structures: a. thorns
gametophyte, seed, spore, sporophyte? b. spines
a. 1n, 1n, 2n, 2n c. nectar
b. 1n, 2n, 1n, 2n d. alkaloids
c. 2n, 1n, 2n, 1n
16.White and sweet-smelling flowers with abundant
d. 2n, 2n, 1n, 1n
nectar are probably pollinated by
10.In the northern forests of Siberia, a tall tree is a. bees and butterflies
most likely a: b. flies
a. conifer c. birds
b. cycad d. wind
c. Ginkgo biloba
17.Abundant and powdery pollen produced by small,
d. gnetophyte
indistinct flowers is probably transported by:
11.Which of the following structures in a flower is not a. bees and butterflies
directly involved in reproduction? b. flies
a. the style c. birds
b. the stamen d. wind
c. the sepal
18.Plants are a source of ________.
d. the anther
a. food
12.Pollen grains develop in which structure? b. fuel
c. medicine
d. all of the above
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
19.The Triassic Period was marked by the increase weather is not cold, and the trees grow at sea level.
in number and variety of angiosperms. Insects also What evolutionary adaptation of conifers makes them
diversified enormously during the same period. Can suitable to the Mediterranean climate?
you propose the reason or reasons that could foster
22.What are the four modern-day phyla of
coevolution?
gymnosperms?
20.What role did the adaptations of seed and pollen
23.Some cycads are considered endangered
play in the development and expansion of seed
species and their trade is severely restricted.
plants?
Customs officials stop suspected smugglers who
21.The Mediterranean landscape along the sea claim that the plants in their possession are palm
shore is dotted with pines and cypresses. The trees, not cycads. How would a botanist distinguish
PAGE: 773
762 Chapter 26 | Seed Plants
between the two types of plants? funnel large amounts of energy into animal
pollination. What are the evolutionary advantages
24.What are the two structures that allow
that offset the cost of attracting animal pollinators?
angiosperms to be the dominant form of plant life in
most terrestrial ecosystems? 26.What is biodiversity and why is it important to an
ecosystem?
25.Biosynthesis of nectar and nutrient-rich pollen is
energetically very expensive for a plant. Yet, plants
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 774
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 763
27 | INTRODUCTION TO
ANIMAL DIVERSITY
Figure27.1Theleafchameleon(Brookesiamicra)wasdiscoveredinnorthernMadagascarin2012.Atjustoverone
inch long, it is the smallest known chameleon. (credit: modification of work by Frank Glaw, et al., PLOS)
Chapter Outline
27.1:Features of the Animal Kingdom
27.2:Features Used to Classify Animals
27.3:Animal Phylogeny
27.4:The Evolutionary History of the Animal Kingdom
Introduction
Animalevolutionbeganintheoceanover600millionyearsagowithtinycreaturesthatprobablydonotresemble
any living organism today. Since then, animals have evolved into a highly diverse kingdom. Although over one
million extant (currently living) species of animals have been identified, scientists are continually discovering
more species as they explore ecosystems around the world. The number of extant species is estimated to be
between 3 and 30 million.
But what is an animal? While we can easily identify dogs, birds, fish, spiders, and worms as animals, other
organisms, such as corals and sponges, are not as easy to classify. Animals vary in complexity—from sea
sponges to crickets to chimpanzees—and scientists are faced with the difficult task of classifying them within
a unified system. They must identify traits that are common to all animals as well as traits that can be used to
distinguishamongrelatedgroupsofanimals.Theanimalclassification systemcharacterizesanimalsbasedon
their anatomy, morphology, evolutionary history, features of embryological development, and genetic makeup.
Thisclassificationschemeisconstantlydevelopingasnewinformationaboutspeciesarises.Understandingand
classifying the great variety of living species help us better understand how to conserve the diversity of life on
earth.
PAGE: 775
764 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
27.1 | Features of the Animal Kingdom
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the features that distinguish the kingdom Animalia from other kingdoms
• Explain the processes of animal reproduction and embryonic development
• Describe the roles that Hox genes play in development
Two different groups within the Domain Eukaryota have produced complex multicellular organisms: The plants
arose within the Archaeplastida, whereas the animals (and their close relatives, the fungi) arose within the
Opisthokonta. However, plants and animals not only have different life styles, they also have different cellular
historiesaseukaryotes.Theopisthokontssharethepossessionofasingleposteriorflagelluminflagellatedcells,
e.g., sperm cells.
Most animals also share other features that distinguish them from organisms in other kingdoms. All animals
requireasourceoffoodandarethereforeheterotrophic,ingestingotherlivingordeadorganisms.Thisfeature
distinguishes them from autotrophic organisms, such as most plants, which synthesize their own nutrients
through photosynthesis. As heterotrophs, animals may be carnivores, herbivores, omnivores, or parasites
(Figure 27.2a,b). As with plants, almost all animals have a complex tissue structure with differentiated and
specialized tissues. The necessity to collect food has made most animals motile, at least during certain life
stages.Thetypicallifecycleinanimalsisdiplontic(likeyou,thediploidstateismulticellular,whereasthehaploid
state is gametic, such as sperm or egg). We should note that the alternation of generations characteristic of
thelandplantsistypicallynotfoundinanimals.Inanimalswhoselifehistoriesincludeseveraltomultiplebody
forms(e.g.,insectlarvaeorthemedusaeofsomeCnidarians),allbodyformsarediploid.Animalembryospass
throughaseriesofdevelopmentalstagesthatestablishadeterminedandfixedbodyplan.Thebodyplanrefers
to the morphology of an animal, determined by developmental cues.
Figure 27.2 Heterotrophy. All animals are heterotrophs and thus derive energy from a variety of food sources. The
(a)blackbearisanomnivore,eatingbothplantsandanimals.The(b)heartwormDirofilariaimmitisisaparasitethat
derives energy from its hosts. It spends its larval stage in mosquitoes and its adult stage infesting the heart of dogs
andothermammals,asshownhere.(credita:modificationofworkbyUSDAForestService;creditb:modificationof
work by Clyde Robinson)
Complex Tissue Structure
Many of the specialized tissues of animals are associated with the requirements and hazards of seeking
and processing food. This explains why animals typically have evolved special structures associated with
specific methods of food capture and complex digestive systems supported by accessory organs. Sensory
structures help animals navigate their environment, detect food sources (and avoid becoming a food source
for other animals!). Movement is driven by muscle tissue attached to supportive structures like bone or chitin,
and is coordinated by neural communication. Animal cells may also have unique structures for intercellular
communication (such as gap junctions). The evolution of nerve tissues and muscle tissues has resulted in
animals’ unique ability to rapidly sense and respond to changes in their environment. This allows animals to
survive in environments where they must compete with other species to meet their nutritional demands.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 776
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 765
The tissues of animals differ from those of the other major multicellular eukaryotes, plants and fungi, because
their cells don't have cell walls. However, cells of animal tissues may be embedded in an extracellular matrix
(e.g., mature bone cells reside within a mineralized organic matrix secreted by the cells). In vertebrates, bone
tissue is a type of connective tissue that supports the entire body structure. The complex bodies and activities
of vertebrates demand such supportive tissues. Epithelial tissues cover and protect both external and internal
bodysurfaces,andmayalsohavesecretoryfunctions.Epithelialtissuesincludetheepidermisoftheintegument,
the lining of the digestive tract and trachea, as well as the layers of cells that make up the ducts of the liver
andglandsofadvancedanimals,forexample.Thedifferenttypesoftissuesintrueanimalsareresponsiblefor
carrying out specific functions for the organism. This differentiation and specialization of tissues is part of what
allows for such incredible animal diversity.
Just as there are multiple ways to be a eukaryote, there are multiple ways to be a multicellular animal. The
animalkingdomiscurrentlydividedintofivemonophyleticclades:ParazoaorPorifera(sponges),Placozoa(tiny
parasiticcreaturesthatresemblemulticellularamoebae),Cnidaria(jellyfishandtheirrelatives),Ctenophora(the
combjellies),andBilateria(allotheranimals).ThePlacozoa("flatanimal")andParazoa(“besideanimal”)donot
havespecializedtissuesderivedfromgermlayersoftheembryo;althoughtheydopossessspecializedcellsthat
act functionally like tissues. The Placozoa have only four cell types, while the sponges have nearly two dozen.
Thethreeothercladesdoincludeanimalswithspecializedtissuesderivedfromthegermlayersoftheembryo.In
spiteoftheirsuperficialsimilaritytoCnidarianmedusae,recentmolecularstudiesindicatethattheCtenophores
are only distantly related to the Cnidarians, which together with the Bilateria constitute the Eumetazoa ("true
animals"). When we think of animals, we usually think of Eumetazoa, since most animals fall into this category.
Watchapresentation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/saving_life)bybiologistE.O.Wilsonontheimportance
of diversity.
Animal Reproduction and Development
Mostanimalsarediploidorganisms,meaningthattheirbody(somatic)cellsarediploidandhaploidreproductive
(gamete)cellsareproducedthroughmeiosis.Someexceptionsexist:forexample,inbees,wasps,andants,the
maleishaploidbecauseitdevelopsfromunfertilizedeggs.Mostanimalsundergosexualreproduction.However,
afewgroups,suchascnidarians,flatworms,androundworms,mayalsoundergoasexualreproduction,inwhich
offspring originate from part of the parental body.
Processes of Animal Reproduction and Embryonic Development
During sexual reproduction, the haploid gametes of the male and female individuals of a species combine in a
processcalledfertilization.Typically,bothmaleandfemalegametesarerequired:thesmall,motilemalesperm
fertilizes the typically much larger, sessile female egg. This process produces a diploid fertilized egg called a
zygote.
Someanimalspecies—includingseastarsandseaanemones—arecapableofasexualreproduction.Themost
commonformsofasexualreproductionforstationaryaquaticanimalsincludebuddingandfragmentation,where
part of a parent individual can separate and grow into a new individual. This type of asexual reproduction
produces genetically identical offspring, which would appear to be disadvantageous from the perspective of
evolutionary adaptability, simply because of the potential buildup of deleterious mutations.
In contrast, a form of uniparental reproduction found in some insects and a few vertebrates is called
parthenogenesis (or “virgin beginning”). In this case, progeny develop from a gamete, but without fertilization.
Because of the nutrients stored in eggs, only females produce parthenogenetic offspring. In some insects,
unfertilized eggs develop into new male offspring. This type of sex determination is called haplodiploidy, since
females are diploid (with both maternal and paternal chromosomes) and males are haploid (with only maternal
chromosomes). A few vertebrates, e.g., some fish, turkeys, rattlesnakes, and whiptail lizards, are also capable
of parthenogenesis. In the case of turkeys and rattlesnakes, parthenogenetically reproducing females also
produceonlymaleoffspring,butnotbecausethemalesarehaploid.Inbirdsandrattlesnakes,thefemaleisthe
heterogametic(ZW)sex,sotheonlysurvivingprogenyofpost-meioticparthenogenesiswouldbeZZmales.In
PAGE: 777
766 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
the whiptail lizards, on the other hand, only female progeny are produced by parthenogenesis. These animals
maynotbeidenticaltotheirparent,althoughtheyhaveonlymaternalchromosomes.However,foranimalsthat
are limited in their access to mates, uniparental reproduction can ensure genetic propagation.
In animals, the zygote progresses through a series of developmental stages, during which primary germ
layers (ectoderm, endoderm, and mesoderm) are established and reorganize to form an embryo. During this
process,animaltissuesbegintospecializeandorganizeintoorgansandorgansystems,determiningtheirfuture
morphology and physiology.
Animal development begins with cleavage, a series of mitotic cell divisions, of the zygote (Figure 27.3).
Cleavage differs from somatic cell division in that the egg is subdivided by successive cleavages into smaller
and smaller cells, with no actual cell growth. The cells resulting from subdivision of the material of the egg in
this way are called blastomeres. Three cell divisions transform the single-celled zygote into an eight-celled
structure. After further cell division and rearrangement of existing cells, a solid morula is formed, followed by
a hollow structure called a blastula. The blastula is hollow only in invertebrates whose eggs have relatively
smallamountsofyolk.Inveryyolkyeggsofvertebrates,theyolkremainsundivided,withmostcellsformingan
embryoniclayeronthesurfaceoftheyolk(imagineachickenembryogrowingovertheegg’syolk),whichserve
as food for the developing embryo.
Further cell division and cellular rearrangement leads to a process called gastrulation. Gastrulation results in
two important events: the formation of the primitive gut (archenteron) or digestive cavity, and the formation of
the embryonic germ layers, as we have discussed above. These germ layers are programmed to develop into
certaintissuetypes,organs,andorgansystemsduringaprocesscalledorganogenesis.Diploblasticorganisms
have two germ layers, endoderm and ectoderm. Endoderm forms the wall of the digestive tract, and ectoderm
coversthesurfaceoftheanimal.Intriploblasticanimals,athirdlayerforms:mesoderm,whichdifferentiatesinto
various structures between the ectoderm and endoderm, including the lining of the body cavity.
Figure 27.3 Development of a simple embryo. During embryonic development, the zygote undergoes a series of
mitotic cell divisions, or cleavages, that subdivide the egg into smaller and smaller blastomeres. Note that the 8-cell
stageandtheblastulaareaboutthesamesizeastheoriginalzygote.Inmanyinvertebrates,theblastulaconsistsof
a single layer of cells around a hollow space. During a process called gastrulation, the cells from the blastula move
inward on one side to form an inner cavity. This inner cavity becomes the primitive gut (archenteron) of the gastrula
("littlegut")stage.Theopeningintothiscavityiscalledtheblastopore,andinsomeinvertebratesitisdestinedtoform
the mouth.
Someanimalsproducelarvalformsthataredifferentfromtheadult.Ininsectswithincompletemetamorphosis,
such as grasshoppers, the young resemble wingless adults, but gradually produce larger and larger wing
buds during successive molts, until finally producing functional wings and sex organs during the last molt.
Otheranimals,suchassomeinsectsandechinoderms,undergocompletemetamorphosisinwhichtheembryo
develops into one or more feeding larval stages that may differ greatly in structure and function from the
adult (Figure 27.4). The adult body then develops from one or more regions of larval tissue. For animals
with complete metamorphosis, the larva and the adult may have different diets, limiting competition for food
betweenthem.Regardlessofwhetheraspeciesundergoescompleteorincompletemetamorphosis,theseries
of developmental stages of the embryo remains largely the same for most members of the animal kingdom.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 778
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 767
Figure 27.4 Insect metamorphosis. (a) The grasshopper undergoes incomplete metamorphosis. (b) The butterfly
undergoes complete metamorphosis. (credit: S.E. Snodgrass, USDA)
Watch the following video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/embryo_evol) to see how human embryonic
development (after the blastula and gastrula stages of development) reflects evolution.
The Role of Homeobox (Hox) Genes in Animal Development
Since the early nineteenth century, scientists have observed that many animals, from the very simple to the
complex, shared similar embryonic morphology and development. Surprisingly, a human embryo and a frog
embryo,atacertainstageofembryonicdevelopment,lookremarkablyalike!Foralongtime,scientistsdidnot
understand why so many animal species looked similar during embryonic development but were very different
as adults. They wondered what dictated the developmental direction that a fly, mouse, frog, or human embryo
wouldtake.Neartheendofthetwentiethcentury,aparticularclassofgeneswasdiscoveredthathadthisvery
job.Thesegenesthatdetermineanimalstructurearecalled“homeoticgenes,”andtheycontainDNAsequences
called homeoboxes. Genes with homeoboxes encode protein transcription factors. One group of animal genes
containing homeobox sequences is specifically referred to as Hox genes. This cluster of genes is responsible
for determining the general body plan, such as the number of body segments of an animal, the number and
placementofappendages,andanimalhead-taildirectionality.ThefirstHoxgenestobesequencedwerethose
from the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster). A single Hox mutation in the fruit fly can result in an extra pair
of wings or even legs growing from the head in place of antennae (this is because antennae and legs are
embryologic homologous structures and their appearance as antennae or legs is dictated by their origination
within specific body segments of the head and thorax during development). Now, Hox genes are known from
virtually all other animals as well.
PAGE: 779
768 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
While there are a great many genes that play roles in the morphological development of an animal, including
other homeobox-containing genes, what makes Hox genes so powerful is that they serve as “master control
genes”thatcanturnonorofflargenumbersofothergenes.Hoxgenesdothisbyencodingtranscriptionfactors
that control the expression of numerous other genes. Hox genes are homologous across the animal kingdom,
thatis,thegeneticsequencesofHoxgenesandtheirpositionsonchromosomesareremarkablysimilaracross
mostanimalsbecauseoftheirpresenceinacommonancestor,fromwormstoflies,mice,andhumans(Figure
27.5). In addition, the order of the genes reflects the anterior-posterior axis of the animal's body. One of the
contributionstoincreasedanimalbodycomplexityisthatHoxgeneshaveundergoneatleasttwoandperhaps
asmanyasfourduplicationeventsduringanimalevolution,withtheadditionalgenesallowingformorecomplex
body types to evolve. All vertebrates have four (or more) sets of Hox genes, while invertebrates have only one
set.
Figure27.5Hoxgenes.Hoxgenesarehighlyconservedgenesencodingtranscriptionfactorsthatdeterminethe
courseofembryonicdevelopmentinanimals.Invertebrates,thegeneshavebeenduplicatedintofourclusterson
differentchromosomes:Hox-A,Hox-B,Hox-C,andHox-D.Geneswithintheseclustersareexpressedincertain
bodysegmentsatcertainstagesofdevelopment.ShownhereisthehomologybetweenHoxgenesinmiceand
humans.NotehowHoxgeneexpression,asindicatedwithorange,pink,blue,andgreenshading,occursinthe
samebodysegmentsinboththemouseandthehuman.WhileatleastonecopyofeachHoxgeneispresentin
humans and other vertebrates, someHoxgenes are missing in some chromosomal sets.
If aHox 13gene in a mouse was replaced with aHox 1gene, how might this alter animal development?
TwoofthefivecladeswithintheanimalkingdomdonothaveHoxgenes:theCtenophoraandthePorifera.
InspiteofthesuperficialsimilaritiesbetweentheCnidariaandtheCtenophora,theCnidariahaveanumber
of Hox genes, but the Ctenophora have none. The absence of Hox genes from the ctenophores has led
to the suggestion that they might be “basal” animals, in spite of their tissue differentiation. Ironically, the
Placozoa,whichhaveonlyafewcelltypes,dohaveatleastoneHoxgene.ThepresenceofaHoxgenein
thePlacozoa,inadditiontosimilaritiesinthegenomicorganizationofthePlacozoa,CnidariaandBilateria,
hasledtotheinclusionofthethreegroupsina“Parahoxozoa”clade.However,weshouldnotethatatthis
time the reclassification of the Animal Kingdom is still tentative and requires much more study.
27.2 | Features Used to Classify Animals
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the differences in animal body plans that support basic animal classification
• Compare and contrast the embryonic development of protostomes and deuterostomes
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 780
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 769
Scientistshavedevelopedaclassificationschemethatcategorizesallmembersoftheanimalkingdom,although
there are exceptions to most “rules” governing animal classification (Figure 27.6). Animals have been
traditionallyclassifiedaccordingtotwocharacteristics:bodyplananddevelopmentalpathway.Themajorfeature
of the body plan is its symmetry: how the body parts are distributed along the major body axis. Symmetrical
animals can be divided into roughly equivalent halves along at least one axis. Developmental characteristics
include the number of germ tissue layers formed during development, the origin of the mouth and anus, the
presenceorabsenceofaninternalbodycavity,andotherfeaturesofembryologicaldevelopment,suchaslarval
types or whether or not periods of growth are interspersed with molting.
Figure 27.6 Animal phylogeny. The phylogenetic tree of animals is based on morphological, fossil, and genetic
evidence.TheCtenophoraandPoriferaarebothconsideredtobebasalbecauseoftheabsenceofHoxgenesin
thisgroup,buthowtheyarerelatedtothe“Parahoxozoa”(Placozoa+Eumetazoa)ortoeachother,continuesto
be a matter of debate.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Eumetazoans have specialized tissues and parazoans don’t.
b. Lophotrochozoa and Ecdysozoa are both Bilataria.
c. Acoela and Cnidaria both possess radial symmetry.
d. Arthropods are more closely related to nematodes than they are to annelids.
PAGE: 781
770 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
Animal Characterization Based on Body Symmetry
Ataverybasiclevelofclassification,trueanimalscanbelargelydividedintothreegroupsbasedonthetypeof
symmetryoftheirbodyplan:radiallysymmetrical,bilaterallysymmetrical,andasymmetrical.Asymmetryisseen
in two modern clades, the Parazoa (Figure 27.7a) and Placozoa. (Although we should note that the ancestral
fossils of the Parazoa apparently exhibited bilateral symmetry.) One clade, the Cnidaria (Figure 27.7b,c),
exhibits radial or biradial symmetry: Ctenophores have rotational symmetry (Figure 27.7e). Bilateral symmetry
is seen in the largest of the clades, the Bilateria (Figure 27.7d); however the Echinodermata are bilateral as
larvaeandmetamorphosesecondarilyintoradialadults.Alltypesofsymmetryarewellsuitedtomeettheunique
demands of a particular animal’s lifestyle.
Radial symmetry is the arrangement of body parts around a central axis, as is seen in a bicycle wheel or pie.
It results in animals having top and bottom surfaces but no left and right sides, nor front or back. If a radially
symmetricalanimalisdividedinanydirectionalongtheoral/aboralaxis(thesidewithamouthis“oralside,”and
thesidewithoutamouthisthe“aboralside”),thetwohalveswillbemirrorimages.Thisformofsymmetrymarks
thebodyplansofmanyanimalsinthephylaCnidaria,includingjellyfishandadultseaanemones(Figure27.7b,
c).Radialsymmetryequipstheseseacreatures(whichmaybesedentaryoronlycapableofslowmovementor
floating)toexperiencetheenvironmentequallyfromalldirections.Bilaterallysymmetricalanimals,likebutterflies
(Figure 27.7d) have only a single plane along which the body can be divided into equivalent halves. The
Ctenophora (Figure 27.7e), although they look similar to jellyfish, are considered to have rotational symmetry
rather than radial or biradial symmetry because division of the body into two halves along the oral/aboral axis
o
divides them into two copies of the same half, with one copy rotated 180 , rather than two mirror images.
Figure 27.7 Symmetry in animals. The (a) sponge is asymmetrical. The (b) jellyfish and (c) anemone are radially
symmetrical, the (d) butterfly is bilaterally symmetrical. Rotational symmetry (e) is seen in the ctenophore Beroe,
shown swimming open-mouthed. (credit a: modification of work by Andrew Turner; credit b: modification of work by
RobertFreiburger;creditc:modificationofworkbySamuelChow;creditd:modificationofworkbyCoryZanker;credit
e: modification of work by NOAA)
Bilateralsymmetryinvolvesthedivisionoftheanimalthroughamidsagittalplane,resultingintwosuperficially
mirror images, right and left halves, such as those of a butterfly (Figure 27.7d), crab, or human body. Animals
with bilateral symmetry have a “head” and “tail” (anterior vs. posterior), front and back (dorsal vs. ventral), and
right and left sides (Figure 27.8). All Eumetazoa except those with secondary radial symmetry are bilaterally
symmetrical. The evolution of bilateral symmetry that allowed for the formation of anterior and posterior (head
and tail) ends promoted a phenomenon called cephalization, which refers to the collection of an organized
nervoussystemattheanimal’santeriorend.Incontrasttoradialsymmetry,whichisbestsuitedforstationaryor
limited-motionlifestyles,bilateralsymmetryallowsforstreamlinedanddirectionalmotion.Inevolutionaryterms,
thissimpleformofsymmetrypromotedactiveandcontrolleddirectionalmobilityandincreasedsophisticationof
resource-seeking and predator-prey relationships.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 782
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 771
Figure 27.8Bilateral symmetry. The bilaterally symmetrical human body can be divided by several planes.
AnimalsinthephylumEchinodermata(suchasseastars,sanddollars,andseaurchins)displaymodifiedradial
symmetry as adults, but as we have noted, their larval stages (such as the bipinnaria) initially exhibit bilateral
symmetryuntiltheymetamorphoseinanimalswithradialsymmetry(thisistermedsecondaryradialsymmetry).
Echinoderms evolved from bilaterally symmetrical animals; thus, they are classified as bilaterally symmetrical.
Watch this video to see a quick sketch of the different types of body symmetry. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66578/1.3/#eip-id1165785284264)
Animal Characterization Based on Features of Embryological
Development
Most animal species undergo a separation of tissues into germ layers during embryonic development. Recall
that these germ layers are formed during gastrulation, and that each germ layer typically gives rise to specific
types of embryonic tissues and organs. Animals develop either two or three embryonic germ layers (Figure
27.9). The animals that display radial, biradial, or rotational symmetry develop two germ layers, an inner layer
(endodermormesendoderm)andanouterlayer(ectoderm).Theseanimalsarecalleddiploblasts,andhavea
nonlivingmiddlelayerbetweentheendodermandectoderm(althoughindividualcellsmaybedistributedthrough
this middle layer, there is no coherent third layer of tissue). The four clades considered to be diploblastic have
different levels of complexity and different developmental pathways, although there is little information about
development in Placozoa. More complex animals (usually those with bilateral symmetry) develop three tissue
layers:aninnerlayer(endoderm),anouterlayer(ectoderm),andamiddlelayer(mesoderm).Animalswiththree
tissue layers are calledtriploblasts.
PAGE: 783
772 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
Figure 27.9 Diploblastic and triploblastic embryos. During embryogenesis, diploblasts develop two embryonic
germ layers: an ectoderm and an endoderm or mesendoderm. Triploblasts develop a third layer—the
mesoderm—which arises from mesendoderm and resides between the endoderm and ectoderm.
Which of the following statements about diploblasts and triploblasts is false?
a. Animals that display only radial symmetry during their lifespans are diploblasts.
b. Animals that display bilateral symmetry are triploblasts.
c. The endoderm gives rise to the lining of the digestive tract and the respiratory tract.
d. The mesoderm gives rise to the central nervous system.
Each of the three germ layers is programmed to give rise to specific body tissues and organs, although there
arevariations onthese themes. Generally speaking, theendodermgivesrisetotheliningofthedigestive tract
(including the stomach, intestines, liver, and pancreas), as well as to the lining of the trachea, bronchi, and
lungsoftherespiratorytract,alongwithafewotherstructures.Theectodermdevelopsintotheouterepithelial
covering of the body surface, the central nervous system, and a few other structures. The mesoderm is the
third germ layer; it forms between the endoderm and ectoderm in triploblasts. This germ layer gives rise to all
specializedmuscletissues(includingthecardiactissuesandmusclesoftheintestines),connectivetissuessuch
astheskeletonandbloodcells,andmostothervisceralorganssuchasthekidneysandthespleen.Diploblastic
animals may have cell types that serve multiple functions, such as epitheliomuscular cells, which serve as a
covering as well as contractile cells.
Presence or Absence of a Coelom
Furthersubdivisionofanimalswiththreegermlayers(triploblasts)resultsintheseparationofanimalsthatmay
developaninternalbodycavityderivedfrommesoderm,calledacoelom,andthosethatdonot.Thisepithelial
cell-lined coelomiccavity,usuallyfilled with fluid, liesbetween the visceralorgansandthe bodywall. It houses
many organs such as the digestive, urinary, and reproductive systems, the heart and lungs, and also contains
the major arteries and veins of the circulatory system. In mammals, the body cavity is divided into the thoracic
cavity, which houses the heart and lungs, and the abdominal cavity, which houses the digestive organs. In the
thoracic cavity further subdivision produces the pleural cavity, which provides space for the lungs to expand
during breathing, and the pericardial cavity, which provides room for movements of the heart. The evolution of
the coelom is associated with many functional advantages. For example, the coelom provides cushioning and
shockabsorptionforthemajororgansystemsthatitencloses.Inaddition,organshousedwithinthecoelomcan
grow and move freely, which promotes optimal organ development and placement. The coelom also provides
space for the diffusion of gases and nutrients, as well as body flexibility, promoting improved animal motility.
Triploblasts that do not develop a coelom are called acoelomates, and their mesoderm region is completely
filled with tissue, although they do still have a gut cavity. Examples of acoelomates include animals in the
phylum Platyhelminthes, also known as flatworms. Animals with a true coelom are called eucoelomates (or
coelomates) (Figure 27.10). In such cases, a true coelom arises entirely within the mesoderm germ layer
and is lined by an epithelial membrane. This membrane also lines the organs within the coelom, connecting
and holding them in position while allowing them some freedom of movement. Annelids, mollusks, arthropods,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 784
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 773
echinoderms, and chordates are all eucoelomates. A third group of triploblasts has a slightly different coelom
lined partly by mesoderm and partly by endoderm. Although still functionally a coelom, these are considered
“false”coeloms,andsowecalltheseanimalspseudocoelomates.ThephylumNematoda(roundworms)isan
exampleofapseudocoelomate.Truecoelomatescanbefurthercharacterizedbasedonotherfeaturesoftheir
early embryological development.
Figure 27.10 Body cavities. Triploblasts may be (a) acoelomates, (b) eucoelomates, or (c) pseudocoelomates.
Acoelomateshavenobodycavity.Eucoelomateshaveabodycavitywithinthemesoderm,calledacoelom,inwhich
boththegutandthebodywallarelinedwithmesoderm.Pseudocoelomatesalsohaveabodycavity,butonlythebody
wallislinedwithmesoderm.(credita:modificationofworkbyJanDerk;creditb:modificationofworkbyNOAA;credit
c: modification of work by USDA, ARS)
Embryonic Development of the Mouth
Bilaterallysymmetrical,tribloblasticeucoelomatescanbefurtherdividedintotwogroupsbasedondifferencesin
theoriginofthemouth.Whentheprimitivegutforms,theopeningthatfirstconnectsthegutcavitytotheoutside
of the embryo is called the blastopore. Most animals have openings at both ends of the gut: mouth at one end
andanusattheother.Oneoftheseopeningswilldevelopatornearthesiteoftheblastopore.InProtostomes
("mouth first"), the mouth develops at the blastopore (Figure 27.11). In Deuterostomes ("mouth second"), the
mouthdevelopsattheotherendofthegut(Figure 27.11)andtheanusdevelopsatthesiteoftheblastopore.
Protostomesincludearthropods,mollusks,andannelids.Deuterostomesincludemorecomplexanimalssuchas
chordates but also some “simple” animals such as echinoderms. Recent evidence has challenged this simple
view of the relationship between the location of the blastopore and the formation of the mouth, however, and
the theory remains under debate. Nevertheless, these details of mouth and anus formation reflect general
differences in the organization of protostome and deuterostome embryos, which are also expressed in other
developmental features.
Oneofthesedifferencesbetweenprotostomesanddeuterostomesisthemethodofcoelomformation,beginning
from the gastrula stage. Since body cavity formation tends to accompany the formation of the mesoderm, the
mesoderm of protostomes and deuterostomes forms differently. The coelom of most protostomes is formed
through a process called schizocoely. The mesoderm in these organisms is usually the product of specific
blastomeres, which migrate into the interior of the embryo and form two clumps of mesodermal tissue. Within
eachclump,cavitiesdevelopandmergetoformthehollowopeningofthecoelom.Deuterostomesdifferinthat
their coelom forms through a process called enterocoely. Here, the mesoderm develops as pouches that are
pinchedofffromtheendodermtissue.Thesepoucheseventuallyfuseandexpandtofillthespacebetweenthe
gut and the body wall, giving rise to the coelom.
Another difference in organization of protostome and deuterostome embryos is expressed during cleavage.
Protostomes undergo spiral cleavage, meaning that the cells of one pole of the embryo are rotated, and thus
misaligned, with respect to the cells of the opposite pole. This is due to the oblique angle of cleavage relative
PAGE: 785
774 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
to the two poles of the embryo. Deuterostomes undergo radial cleavage, where the cleavage axes are either
parallelorperpendiculartothepolaraxis,resultingintheparallel(up-and-down)alignmentofthecellsbetween
the two poles.
Figure 27.11 Protostomes and deuterostomes. Eucoelomates can be divided into two groups based on their early
embryonic development. In protostomes, the mouth forms at or near the site of the blastopore and the body cavity
forms by splitting the mesodermal mass during the process of schizocoely. In deuterostomes, the mouth forms at a
siteoppositetheblastoporeendoftheembryoandthemesodermpinchesofftoformthecoelomduringtheprocess
of enterocoely.
Aseconddistinctionbetweenthetypesofcleavageinprotostomesanddeuterostomesrelatestothefateofthe
resultant blastomeres (cells produced by cleavage). In addition to spiral cleavage, protostomes also undergo
determinate cleavage. This means that even at this early stage, the developmental fate of each embryonic
cell is already determined. A given cell does not have the ability to develop into any cell type other than its
original destination. Removal of a blastomere from an embryo with determinate cleavage can result in missing
structures, and embryos that fail to develop. In contrast, deuterostomes undergo indeterminate cleavage, in
whichcellsarenotyetfullycommittedatthisearlystagetodevelopintospecificcelltypes.Removalofindividual
blastomeres from these embryos does not result in the loss of embryonic structures. In fact, twins (clones)
can be produced as a result from blastomeres that have been separated from the original mass of blastomere
cells. Unlike protostomes, however, if some blastomeres are damaged during embryogenesis, adjacent cells
are able to compensate for the missing cells, and the embryo is not damaged. These cells are referred to as
undeterminedcells.Thischaracteristicofdeuterostomesisreflectedintheexistenceoffamiliarembryonicstem
cells,whichhavetheabilitytodevelopintoanycelltypeuntiltheirfateisprogrammedatalaterdevelopmental
stage.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 786
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 775
The Evolution of the Coelom
One of the first steps in the classification of animals is to examine the animal’s body. One structure that
is used in classification of animals is the body cavity or coelom. The body cavity develops within the
mesoderm, so only triploblastic animals can have body cavities. Therefore body cavities are found only
within the Bilateria. In other animal clades, the gut is either close to the body wall or separated from it by
a jelly-like material. The body cavity is important for two reasons. Fluid within the body cavity protects the
organs from shock and compression. In addition, since in triploblastic embryos, most muscle, connective
tissue, and blood vessels develop from mesoderm, these tissues developing within the lining of the body
cavity can reinforce the gut and body wall, aid in motility, and efficiently circulate nutrients.
To recap what we have discussed above, animals that do not have a coelom are called acoelomates. The
majoracoelomategroupintheBilateriaistheflatworms,includingbothfree-livingandparasiticformssuch
astapeworms.Intheseanimals,mesenchymefillsthespacebetweenthegutandthebodywall.Although
two layers of muscle are found just under the epidermis, there is no muscle or other mesodermal tissue
around the gut. Flatworms rely on passive diffusion for nutrient transport across their body.
In pseudocoelomates, there is a body cavity between the gut and the body wall, but only the body wall
has mesodermal tissue. In these animals, the mesoderm forms, but does not develop cavities within
it. Major pseudocoelomate phyla are the rotifers and nematodes. Animals that have a true coelom are
called eucoelomates; all vertebrates, as well as molluscs, annelids, arthropods, and echinoderms, are
eucoelomates. The coelom develops within the mesoderm during embryogenesis. Of the major bilaterian
phyla, the molluscs, annelids, and arthropods are schizocoels, in which the mesoderm splits to form the
bodycavity,whiletheechinodermsandchordatesareenterocoels,inwhichthemesodermformsastwoor
more buds off of the gut. These buds separate from the gut and coalesce to form the body cavity. In the
vertebrates,mammalshaveasubdividedbodycavity,withthethoraciccavityseparatedfromtheabdominal
cavity.Thepseudocoelomatesmayhavehadeucoelomateancestorsandmayhavelosttheirabilitytoform
acompletecoelomthroughgeneticmutations.Thus,thisstepinearlyembryogenesis—theformationofthe
coelom—has had a large evolutionary impact on the various species of the animal kingdom.
27.3 | Animal Phylogeny
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Interpret the metazoan phylogenetic tree
• Describe the types of data that scientists use to construct and revise animal phylogeny
• Listsomeoftherelationshipswithinthemodernphylogenetictreethathavebeendiscoveredasaresult
of modern molecular data
Biologists strive to understand the evolutionary history and relationships of members of the animal kingdom,
and all of life, for that matter. The study of phylogeny (the branching sequence of evolution) aims to determine
theevolutionaryrelationshipsbetweenphyla.Currently,mostbiologistsdividetheanimalkingdominto35to40
phyla.Scientistsdevelopphylogenetictrees,whichserveashypothesesaboutwhichspecieshaveevolvedfrom
which ancestors.
Recall that until recently, only morphological characteristics and the fossil record were used to determine
phylogeneticrelationshipsamonganimals.Scientificunderstandingofthedistinctionsandhierarchiesbetween
anatomical characteristics provided much of this knowledge. Used alone, however, this information can be
misleading.Morphologicalcharacteristics(suchasskincolor,bodyshape,etc.)mayevolvemultipletimes,and
independently, through evolutionary history. Analogous characteristics may appear similar between animals,
but their underlying evolution may be very different. With the advancement of molecular technologies, modern
phylogenetics is now informed by genetic and molecular analyses, in addition to traditional morphological and
fossil data. With a growing understanding of genetics, the animal evolutionary tree has changed substantially
PAGE: 787
776 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
and continues to change as new DNA and RNA analyses are performed on additional animal species.
Constructing an Animal Phylogenetic Tree
The current understanding of evolutionary relationships among animal, or Metazoa, phyla begins with the
distinction between animals with true differentiated tissues, called Eumetazoa, and animal phyla that do not
have true differentiated tissues, such as the sponges ( Porifera) and the Placozoa. Similarities between the
feedingcellsofsponges(choanocytes)andchoanoflagellateprotists(Figure27.12)havebeenusedtosuggest
thatMetazoaevolvedfromacommonancestralorganismthatresembledthemoderncolonialchoanoflagellates.
Figure27.12Choanoflagellatesandchoanocytes.Cellsoftheprotistchoanoflagellatecladecloselyresemblesponge
choanocyte cells. Beating of choanocyte flagella draws water through the sponge so that nutrients can be extracted
and waste removed.
Eumetazoa are subdivided into radially symmetrical animals and bilaterally symmetrical animals, and are
thus classified into the clades Bilateria and Radiata, respectively. As mentioned earlier, the cnidarians and
ctenophoresareanimalphylawithtrueradial,biradial,orrotationalsymmetry.AllotherEumetazoaaremembers
of the Bilateria clade. The bilaterally symmetrical animals are further divided into deuterostomes (including
chordates and echinoderms) and two distinct clades of protostomes (including ecdysozoans and
lophotrochozoans) (Figure 27.13a,b). Ecdysozoa includes nematodes and arthropods; they are so named for
acommonlyfoundcharacteristicamongthegroup:thephysiologicalprocessofexoskeletalmoltingfollowedby
the“stripping”oftheoutercuticularlayer,calledecdysis.Lophotrochozoaisnamedfortwostructuralfeatures,
eachcommontocertainphylawithintheclade.Somelophotrochozoanphylaarecharacterizedbyalarvalstage
called trochophore larvae, and other phyla are characterized by the presence of a feeding structure called a
lophophore(thus, the shorter term, “lopho-trocho-zoa”).
Figure 27.13 Ecdysozoa. Animals that molt their exoskeletons, such as these (a) Madagascar hissing cockroaches,
are in the clade Ecdysozoa. (b) Phoronids are in the clade Lophotrochozoa. The tentacles are part of a feeding
structure called a lophophore. (credit a: modification of work by Whitney Cranshaw, Colorado State University,
Bugwood.org; credit b: modification of work by NOAA)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 788
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 777
Explore an interactive tree (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/tree_of_life2) of life here. Zoom and click to learn
more about the organisms and their evolutionary relationships.
Modern Advances in Phylogenetic Understanding Come from
Molecular Analyses
Thephylogeneticgroupingsarecontinuallybeingdebatedandrefinedbyevolutionarybiologists.Eachyear,new
evidence emerges that further alters the relationships described by a phylogenetic tree diagram.
Watch the following video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/build_phylogeny) to learn how biologists use
genetic data to determine relationships among organisms.
Nucleicacidandproteinanalyseshavegreatlymodifiedandrefinedthemodernphylogeneticanimaltree.These
data come from a variety of molecular sources, such as mitochondrial DNA, nuclear DNA, ribosomal RNA
(rRNA), and certain cellular proteins. Many evolutionary relationships in the modern tree have only recently
been determined from the molecular evidence. For example, a previously classified group of animals called
lophophorates, which included brachiopods and bryozoans, were long-thought to be primitive deuterostomes.
Extensive molecular analysis using rRNA data found these animals are actually protostomes, more closely
related to annelids and mollusks. This discovery allowed for the distinction of the protostome clade
Lophotrochozoa. Molecular data have also shed light on some differences within the lophotrochozoan group,
and the placement of the Platyhelminthes is particularly problematic. Some scientists believe that the phyla
Platyhelminthes and Rotifera should actually belong to their own clade of protostomes termed Platyzoa.
Molecular research similar to the discoveries that brought about the distinction of the lophotrochozoan clade
has also revealed a dramatic rearrangement of the relationships between mollusks, annelids, arthropods, and
nematodes, and as a result, a new ecdysozoan clade was formed. Due to morphological similarities in their
segmented body types, annelids and arthropods were once thought to be closely related. However, molecular
evidence has revealed that arthropods are actually more closely related to nematodes, now comprising the
ecdysozoan clade, and annelids are more closely related to mollusks, brachiopods, and other phyla in the
lophotrochozoan clade. These two clades now make up the protostomes.
Another change to former phylogenetic groupings because of modern molecular analyses includes the
emergenceofanentirelynewphylumofwormcalledAcoelomorpha.Theseacoelflatwormswerelongthought
to belong to the phylum Platyhelminthes because of their similar “flatworm” morphology. However, molecular
analysesrevealedthistobeafalserelationshipandoriginallysuggestedthatacoelsrepresentedlivingspecies
of some of the earliest divergent bilaterians. More recent research into the acoelomorphs has called this
hypothesis into question and suggested that the acoels are more closely related to deuterostomes. The
placementofthisnewphylumremainsdisputed,butscientistsagreethatwithsufficientmoleculardata,theirtrue
phylogeny will be determined.
AnotherexampleofphylogeneticreorganizationinvolvestheidentificationoftheCtenophoraasthebasalclade
oftheanimalkingdom.Ctenophora,orcombjellies,wereonceconsideredtobeasistergroupoftheCnidaria,
and the sponges (Porifera) were placed as the basal animal group, sister to other animals. The presence of
nerveandmusclecellsinboththeCtenophoresandtheCnidariaandtheirabsenceinthePoriferastrengthened
this view of the relationships among simple animal forms. However, recent molecular analysis has shown that
PAGE: 789
778 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
manyofthegenesthatsupportneuraldevelopmentinotheranimalsareabsentfromtheCtenophoregenome.
The muscle cells are restricted to the mouth and tentacles and are derived from cells in the mesoglea. The
mitochondrial genome of the Ctenophores is small and lacks many genes found in other animal mitochondrial
genomes. These features plus the absence of Hox genes from the Ctenophores have been used to argue that
the Ctenophores should be considered basal or as a sister group of the Porifera, and that the evolution of
specialized nerve and muscle tissue may have occurred more than once in the history of animal life. Although
Ctenophores have been shown as basal to other animals in the phylogeny presented in Chapter 27.2, debate
on this issue is likely to continue as Ctenophores are more closely studied.
Changes to the phylogenetic tree can be difficult to track and understand, and are evidence of the process
of science. Data and analytical methods play a significant role in the development of phylogenies. For this
reason – because molecular analysis and reanalysis are not complete -- we cannot necessarily dismiss a
former phylogenetic tree as inaccurate. A recent reanalysis of molecular evidence by an international group of
evolutionarybiologistsrefutedthepropositionthatcombjelliesarethephylogeneticallyoldestextantmetazoan
group. The study, which relied on more sophisticated methods of analyzing the original genetic data, reaffirms
the traditional view that the sponges were indeed the first phylum to diverge from the common ancestor of
metazoans. The ongoing discussion concerning the location of sponges and comb jellies on the animal “family
tree” is an example of what drives science forward.
27.4 | The Evolutionary History of the Animal Kingdom
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describethefeaturesthatcharacterizedtheearliestanimalsandapproximatelywhentheyappearedon
earth
• ExplainthesignificanceoftheCambrianperiodforanimalevolutionandthechangesinanimaldiversity
that took place during that time
• Describe some of the unresolved questions surrounding the Cambrian explosion
• Discuss the implications of mass animal extinctions that have occurred in evolutionary history
Manyquestionsregardingtheoriginsandevolutionaryhistoryoftheanimalkingdomcontinuetoberesearched
anddebated,asnewfossilandmolecularevidencechangeprevailingtheories.Someofthesequestionsinclude
thefollowing:HowlonghaveanimalsexistedonEarth?Whatweretheearliestmembersoftheanimalkingdom,
andwhatorganismwastheircommonancestor?WhileanimaldiversityincreasedduringtheCambrianperiodof
thePaleozoicera,530millionyearsago,modernfossilevidencesuggeststhatprimitiveanimalspeciesexisted
much earlier.
Pre-Cambrian Animal Life
The time before the Cambrian period is known as the Ediacaran Period (from about 635 million years ago to
543 million years ago), the final period of the late Proterozoic Neoproterozoic Era (Figure 27.14). Ediacaran
fossilswerefirstfoundintheEdiacaranhillsofSouthernAustralia.Therearenolivingrepresentativesofthese
species, which have left impressions that look like those of feathers or coins (Figure 27.15). It is believed that
early animal life, termedEdiacaran biota, evolved from protists at this time.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 790
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 779
Figure 27.14 An evolutionary timeline. (a) Earth’s history is divided into eons, eras, and periods. Note that the
EdiacaranperiodstartsintheProterozoiceonandendsintheCambrianperiodofthePhanerozoiceon.(b)Stageson
the geological time scale are represented as a spiral. (credit: modification of work by USGS)
MostEdiacaranbiotawerejustafewmmorcmlong,butsomeofthefeather-likeformscouldreachlengthsof
overameter.Recentlytherehasbeenincreasingscientificevidencesuggestingthatmorevariedandcomplex
animal species lived during this time, and likely even before the Ediacaran period.
Fossils believed to represent the oldest animals with hard body parts were recently discovered in South
Australia.Thesesponge-likefossils,namedCoronacollinaacula,datebackasfaras560millionyears,andare
believedtoshowtheexistenceofhardbodypartsandspiculesthatextended20–40cmfromthethimble-shaped
body (estimated about 5 cm long). Other fossils from the Ediacaran period are shown inFigure 27.15a, b, c.
Figure 27.15 Ediacaran fauna. Fossils of (a) Cyclomedusa (up to 20 cm), (b) Dickinsonia (up to 1.4 m), (and
(c) Spriggina (up to 5 cm) date to the Ediacaran period (543-635 MYA). (credit: modification of work by
“Smith609”/Wikimedia Commons)
Another recent fossil discovery may represent the earliest animal species ever found. While the validity of this
claim is still under investigation, these primitive fossils appear to be small, one-centimeter long, sponge-like
creatures,irregularlyshapedandwithinternaltubesorcanals.TheseancientfossilsfromSouthAustraliadate
back650millionyears,actuallyplacingtheputativeanimalbeforethegreaticeageextinctioneventthatmarked
the transition between the Cryogenian period and the Ediacaran period. Until this discovery, most scientists
believed that there was no animal life prior to the Ediacaran period. Many scientists now believe that animals
may in fact have evolved during the Cryogenian period.
The Cambrian Explosion of Animal Life
If the fossils of the Ediacaran and Cryogenian periods are enigmatic, those of the following Cambrian period
are far less so, and include body forms similar to those living today. The Cambrian period, occurring between
approximately 542–488 million years ago, marks the most rapid evolution of new animal phyla and animal
diversity in Earth’s history. The rapid diversification of animals that appeared during this period, including most
oftheanimalphylainexistencetoday,isoftenreferredtoastheCambrianexplosion(Figure27.16).Animals
resemblingechinoderms,mollusks,worms,arthropods,andchordatesaroseduringthisperiod.Whatmayhave
been a top predator of this period was an arthropod-like creature named Anomalocaris, over a meter long,
PAGE: 791
780 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
with compound eyes and spiky tentacles. Obviously, all these Cambrian animals already exhibited complex
structures, so their ancestors must have existed much earlier.
Figure 27.16 Fauna of the Burgess Shale. An artist’s rendition depicts some organisms from the Cambrian period.
Anomalocarisis seen in the upper left quadrant of the picture.
One of the most dominant species during the Cambrian period was the trilobite, an arthropod that was among
thefirstanimalstoexhibitasenseofvision(Figure27.17a,b,c,d).Trilobitesweresomewhatsimilartomodern
horseshoecrabs.ThousandsofdifferentspecieshavebeenidentifiedinfossilsedimentsoftheCambrianperiod;
not a single species survives today.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 792
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 781
Figure27.17Trilobites.Thesefossils(a–d)belongtotrilobites,extinctarthropodsthatappearedintheearlyCambrian
period, 525 million years ago, and disappeared from the fossil record during a mass extinction at the end of the
Permian period, about 250 million years ago.
ThecauseoftheCambrianexplosionisstilldebated,andinfact,itmaybethatanumberofinteractingcauses
ushered in this incredible explosion of animal diversity. For this reason, there are a number of hypotheses
that attempt to answer this question. Environmental changes may have created a more suitable environment
for animal life. Examples of these changes include rising atmospheric oxygen levels (Figure 27.18) and large
increases in oceanic calcium concentrations that preceded the Cambrian period. Some scientists believe that
an expansive, continental shelf with numerous shallow lagoons or pools provided the necessary living space
forlargernumbersofdifferenttypesofanimalstocoexist. Thereisalsosupportforhypothesesthatarguethat
ecological relationships between species, such as changes in the food web, competition for food and space,
and predator-prey relationships, were primed to promote a sudden massive coevolution of species. Yet other
hypothesesclaimgeneticanddevelopmentalreasonsfortheCambrianexplosion.Themorphologicalflexibility
and complexity of animal development afforded by the evolution of Hox control genes may have provided the
necessary opportunities for increases in possible animal morphologies at the time of the Cambrian period.
HypothesesthatattempttoexplainwhytheCambrianexplosionhappenedmustbeabletoprovidevalidreasons
forthemassiveanimaldiversification,aswellasexplainwhyithappenedwhenitdid.Thereisevidencethatboth
supportsandrefuteseachofthehypothesesdescribedabove,andtheanswermayverywellbeacombination
of these and other theories.
PAGE: 793
782 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
Figure 27.18 Atmospheric oxygen over time. The oxygen concentration in Earth’s atmosphere rose sharply around
300 million years ago.
However, unresolved questions about the animal diversification that took place during the Cambrian period
remain. For example, we do not understand how the evolution of so many species occurred in such a short
period of time. Was there really an “explosion” of life at this particular time? Some scientists question the
validity of this idea, because there is increasing evidence to suggest that more animal life existed prior to the
Cambrian period and that other similar species’ so-called explosions (or radiations) occurred later in history as
well. Furthermore, the vast diversification of animal species that appears to have begun during the Cambrian
period continued well into the following Ordovician period. Despite some of these arguments, most scientists
agreethattheCambrianperiodmarkedatimeofimpressivelyrapidanimalevolutionanddiversificationofbody
forms that is unmatched for any other time period.
View an animation of what ocean life may have been like during the Cambrian explosion. (This multimedia
resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66586/1.3/#eip-id1169840612792)
Post-Cambrian Evolution and Mass Extinctions
The periods that followed the Cambrian during the Paleozoic Era are marked by further animal evolution and
theemergenceofmanyneworders,families,andspecies.Asanimalphylacontinuedtodiversify,newspecies
adapted to new ecological niches. During the Ordovician period, which followed the Cambrian period, plant life
firstappearedonland.Thischangeallowedformerlyaquaticanimalspeciestoinvadeland,feedingdirectlyon
plantsordecayingvegetation.Continualchangesintemperatureandmoisturethroughouttheremainderofthe
PaleozoicEraduetocontinentalplatemovementsencouragedthedevelopmentofnewadaptationstoterrestrial
existence in animals, such as limbed appendages in amphibians and epidermal scales in reptiles.
Changes in the environment often create new niches (diversified living spaces) that invite rapid speciation
and increased diversity. On the other hand, cataclysmic events, such as volcanic eruptions and meteor strikes
that obliterate life, can result in devastating losses of diversity to some clades, yet provide new opportunities
for others to “fill in the gaps” and speciate. Such periods of mass extinction (Figure 27.19) have occurred
repeatedlyintheevolutionaryrecordoflife,erasingsomegeneticlineswhilecreatingroomforotherstoevolve
into the empty niches left behind. The end of the Permian period (and the Paleozoic Era) was marked by the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 794
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 783
largest mass extinction event in Earth’s history, a loss of an estimated 95 percent of the extant species at that
time.Someofthedominantphylaintheworld’soceans,suchasthetrilobites,disappearedcompletely.Onland,
the disappearance of some dominant species of Permian reptiles made it possible for a new line of reptiles
to emerge, the dinosaurs. The warm and stable climatic conditions of the ensuing Mesozoic Era promoted an
explosive diversification of dinosaurs into every conceivable niche in land, air, and water. Plants, too, radiated
into new landscapes and empty niches, creating complex communities of producers and consumers, some of
which became very large on the abundant food available.
Another mass extinction event occurred at the end of the Cretaceous period, bringing the Mesozoic Era to an
end. Skies darkened and temperatures fell after a large meteor impact and tons of volcanic ash ejected into
the atmosphere blocked incoming sunlight. Plants died, herbivores and carnivores starved, and the dinosaurs
ceded their dominance of the landscape to the more warm-blooded mammals. In the following Cenozoic Era,
mammalsradiatedintoterrestrialandaquaticnichesonceoccupiedbydinosaurs,andbirds—thewarm-blooded
directdescendantsofonelineoftherulingreptiles—becameaerialspecialists.Theappearanceanddominance
of flowering plants in the Cenozoic Era created new niches for pollinating insects, as well as for birds and
mammals. Changes in animal species diversity during the late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic were also
promoted by a dramatic shift in Earth’s geography, as continental plates slid over the crust into their current
positions, leaving some animal groups isolated on islands and continents, or separated by mountain ranges
or inland seas from other competitors. Early in the Cenozoic, new ecosystems appeared, with the evolution of
grassesandcoralreefs.LateintheCenozoic,furtherextinctionsfollowedbyspeciationoccurredduringiceages
that covered high latitudes with ice and then retreated, leaving new open spaces for colonization.
Watch the following video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/mass_extinction) to learn more about the mass
extinctions.
Figure 27.19Extinctions. Mass extinctions have occurred repeatedly over geological time.
PAGE: 795
784 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
Paleontologist
Natural history museums contain the fossils of extinct animals as well as information about how these
animals evolved, lived, and died. Paleontologists are scientists who study prehistoric life. They use fossils
to observe and explain how life evolved on Earth and how species interacted with each other and with
theenvironment.Apaleontologistneedstobeknowledgeableinmathematics,biology,ecology,chemistry,
geology, and many other scientific disciplines. A paleontologist’s work may involve field studies: searching
for and studying fossils. In addition to digging for and finding fossils, paleontologists also prepare fossils
for further study and analysis. Although dinosaurs are probably the first animals that come to mind when
thinkingaboutancientlife,paleontologistsstudyavarietyoflifeforms,fromplants,fungiandinvertebrates
to the vertebrate fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals.
An undergraduate degree in earth science or biology is a good place to start toward the career path of
becoming a paleontologist. Most often, a graduate degree is necessary. Additionally, work experience in a
museum or in a paleontology lab is useful.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 796
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 785
KEY TERMS
acoelomate animal without a body cavity
bilateral symmetry typeofsymmetryinwhichthereisonlyoneplaneofsymmetry,sotheleftandrighthalves
of an animal are mirror images
blastopore opening into the archenteron that forms during gastrulation
blastula 16–32 cell stage of development of an animal embryo
body plan morphology or defining shape of an organism
Cambrian explosion time during the Cambrian period (542–488 million years ago) when most of the animal
phyla in existence today evolved
cleavage cell divisions subdividing a fertilized egg (zygote) to form a multicellular embryo
coelom lined body cavity
Cryogenian period geologic period (850–630 million years ago) characterized by a very cold global climate
determinate cleavage cleavage pattern in which developmental fate of each blastomere is tightly defined
deuterostome blastopore develops into the anus, with the second opening developing into the mouth
diploblast animal that develops from two germ layers
Ecdysozoa clade of protostomes that exhibit exoskeletal molting (ecdysis)
Ediacaran period geological period (630–542 million years ago) when the oldest definite multicellular
organisms with tissues evolved
enterocoely mesoderm of deuterostomes develops as pouches that are pinched off from endodermal tissue,
cavity contained within the pouches becomes coelom
eucoelomate animal with a body cavity completely lined with mesodermal tissue
Eumetazoa group of animals with true differentiated tissues
gastrula stage of animal development characterized by the formation of the digestive cavity
germ layer collection of cells formed during embryogenesis that will give rise to future body tissues, more
pronounced in vertebrate embryogenesis
Hox gene (also, homeobox gene) master control gene that can turn on or off large numbers of other genes
during embryogenesis
indeterminate cleavage cleavage pattern in which individual blastomeres have the character of "stem cells,"
and are not yet predetermined to develop into specific cell types
Lophotrochozoa clade of protostomes that exhibit a trochophore larvae stage or a lophophore feeding
structure
mass extinction eventorenvironmentalconditionthatwipesoutthemajorityofspecieswithinarelativelyshort
geological time period
Metazoa group containing all animals
organogenesis formation of organs in animal embryogenesis
Parazoa group of animals without true differentiated tissues
PAGE: 797
786 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
protostome blastopore develops into the mouth of protostomes, with the second opening developing into the
anus
pseudocoelomate animal with a body cavity located between the mesoderm and endoderm
radial cleavage cleavageaxesareparallelorperpendiculartothepolaraxis,resultinginthealignmentofcells
between the two poles
radial symmetry typeofsymmetrywithmultipleplanesofsymmetry,withbodyparts(rays)arrangedarounda
central disk
schizocoely during development of protostomes, a solid mass of mesoderm splits apart and forms the hollow
opening of the coelom
spiral cleavage cells of one pole of the embryo are rotated or misaligned with respect to the cells of the
opposite pole
triploblast animal that develops from three germ layers
CHAPTER SUMMARY
27.1Features of the Animal Kingdom
Animals constitute an incredibly diverse kingdom of organisms. Although animals range in complexity from
simple sea sponges to human beings, most members of the animal kingdom share certain features. Animals
are eukaryotic, multicellular, heterotrophic organisms that ingest their food and usually develop into motile
creatures with a fixed body plan. A major characteristic unique to the animal kingdom is the presence of
differentiated tissues, such as nerve, muscle, and connective tissues, which are specialized to perform specific
functions. Most animals undergo sexual reproduction, leading to a series of developmental embryonic stages
that are relatively similar across the animal kingdom. A class of transcriptional control genes calledHoxgenes
directs the organization of the major animal body plans, and these genes are strongly homologous across the
animal kingdom.
27.2Features Used to Classify Animals
Organisms in the animal kingdom are classified based on their body morphology, their developmental
pathways, and their genetic affinities. The relationships between the Eumetazoa and more basal clades
(Ctenophora, Porifera, and Placozoa) are still being debated. The Eumetazoa ("true animals") are divided into
those with radial versus bilateral symmetry. Generally, the simpler and often nonmotile animals display radial
symmetry, which allows them to explore their environment in all directions. Animals with radial symmetry are
also generally characterized by the development of two embryological germ layers, the endoderm and
ectoderm, whereas animals with bilateral symmetry are generally characterized by the development of a third
embryologic germ layer, the mesoderm. Animals with three germ layers, called triploblasts, are further
characterized by the presence or absence of an internal body cavity called a coelom. The presence of a
coelom affords many advantages, and animals with a coelom may be termed true coelomates or
pseudocoelomates, depending the extent to which mesoderm lines the body cavity. Coelomates are further
divided into one of two groups called protostomes and deuterostomes, based on a number of developmental
characteristics, including differences in zygote cleavage, the method of coelom formation, and the rigidity of the
developmental fate of blastomeres.
27.3Animal Phylogeny
Scientists are interested in the evolutionary history of animals and the evolutionary relationships among them.
There are three main sources of data that scientists use to create phylogenetic evolutionary tree diagrams that
illustrate such relationships: morphological information (which includes developmental morphologies), fossil
record data, and, most recently, molecular data. The details of the modern phylogenetic tree change frequently
as new data are gathered, and molecular data has recently contributed to many substantial modifications of the
understanding of relationships between animal phyla.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 798
Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity 787
27.4The Evolutionary History of the Animal Kingdom
The most rapid documented diversification and evolution of animal species in all of history occurred during the
Cambrian period of the Paleozoic Era, a phenomenon known as the Cambrian explosion. Until recently,
scientists believed that there were only very few tiny and simplistic animal species in existence before this
period. However, recent fossil discoveries have revealed that additional, larger, and more complex animals
existed during the Ediacaran period, and even possibly earlier, during the Cryogenian period. Still, the
Cambrian period undoubtedly witnessed the emergence of the majority of animal phyla that we know today,
although many questions remain unresolved about this historical phenomenon.
The remainder of the Paleozoic Era is marked by the growing appearance of new classes, families, and
species, and the early colonization of land by certain marine animals and semiaquatic arthropods, both
freshwater and marine. The evolutionary history of animals is also marked by numerous major extinction
events, each of which wiped out a majority of extant species. Some species of most animal phyla survived
these extinctions, allowing the phyla to persist and continue to evolve into species that we see today.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 27.5If aHox 13gene in a mouse was 3.Figure 27.9Which of the following statements
replaced with aHox 1gene, how might this alter about diploblasts and triploblasts is false?
animal development? a. Animals that display radial symmetry are
diploblasts.
2.Figure 27.6Which of the following statements is
b. Animals that display bilateral symmetry are
false?
triploblasts.
a. Eumetazoans have specialized tissues and
c. The endoderm gives rise to the lining of the
parazoans don’t.
digestive tract and the respiratory tract.
b. Lophotrochozoa and Ecdysozoa are both
d. The mesoderm gives rise to the central
Bilataria.
nervous system.
c. Acoela and Cnidaria both possess radial
symmetry.
d. Arthropods are more closely related to
nematodes than they are to annelids.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following is not a feature common to a. sea star
mostanimals? b. shrimp
a. development into a fixed body plan c. jellyfish
b. asexual reproduction d. insect
c. specialized tissues
8.Which of the following is not possible?
d. heterotrophic nutrient sourcing
a. radially symmetrical diploblast
5.During embryonic development, unique cell layers b. diploblastic eucoelomate
develop into specific groups of tissues or organs c. protostomic coelomate
during a stage called ________. d. bilaterally symmetrical deuterostome
a. the blastula stage
9.An animal whose development is marked by radial
b. the germ layer stage
cleavage and enterocoely is ________.
c. the gastrula stage
a. a deuterostome
d. the organogenesis stage
b. an annelid or mollusk
6.Which of the following phenotypes would most c. either an acoelomate or eucoelomate
likely be the result of aHoxgene mutation? d. none of the above
a. abnormal body length or height
10.Consulting the modern phylogenetic tree of
b. two different eye colors
animals, which of the following would not constitute a
c. the contraction of a genetic illness
clade?
d. two fewer appendages than normal
a. deuterostomes
7.Which of the following organisms is most likely to b. lophotrochozoans
be a diploblast? c. Parazoa
d. Bilateria
11.Which of the following is thought to be the most
PAGE: 799
788 Chapter 27 | Introduction to Animal Diversity
closely related to the common animal ancestor? 15.The time between 542–488 million years ago
marks which period?
a. fungal cells a. Cambrian period
b. protist cells b. Silurian period
c. plant cells c. Ediacaran period
d. bacterial cells d. Devonian period
12.As with the emergence of the Acoelomorpha 16.Until recent discoveries suggested otherwise,
phylum, it is common for ____ data to misplace animals existing before the Cambrian period were
animals in close relation to other species, whereas believed to be:
____ data often reveals a different and more a. small and ocean-dwelling
accurate evolutionary relationship. b. small and nonmotile
a. molecular : morphological c. small and soft-bodied
b. molecular : fossil record d. small and radially symmetrical or
c. fossil record : morphological asymmetrical
d. morphological : molecular
17.Plant life first appeared on land during which of
13.Which of the following periods is the earliest the following periods?
during which animals may have appeared? a. Cambrian period
a. Ordovician period b. Ordovician period
b. Cambrian period c. Silurian period
c. Ediacaran period d. Devonian period
d. Cryogenian period
18.Approximately how many mass extinction events
14.What type of data is primarily used to determine occurred throughout the evolutionary history of
the existence and appearance of early animal animals?
species? a. 3
a. molecular data b. 4
b. fossil data c. 5
c. morphological data d. more than 5
d. embryological development data
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
19.Why might the evolution of specialized tissues be coelom formation.
important for animal function and complexity?
24.Describe at least two major changes to the
20.Describe and give examples of how humans animal phylogenetic tree that have come about due
display all of the features common to the animal to molecular or genetic findings.
kingdom.
25.How is it that morphological data alone might
21.How haveHoxgenes contributed to the diversity lead scientists to group animals into erroneous
of animal body plans? evolutionary relationships?
22.Using the following terms, explain what 26.Briefly describe at least two theories that attempt
classifications and groups humans fall into, from the to explain the cause of the Cambrian explosion.
most general to the most specific: symmetry, germ
27.How is it that most, if not all, of the extant animal
layers, coelom, cleavage, embryological
phyla today evolved during the Cambrian period if so
development.
many massive extinction events have taken place
23.Explain some of the advantages brought about since then?
through the evolution of bilateral symmetry and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 800
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 789
28 | INVERTEBRATES
Figure 28.1 Nearly 97 percent of animal species are invertebrates, including this sea star (Astropecten articulatus)
common to the eastern and southern coasts of the United States (credit: modification of work by Mark Walz)
Chapter Outline
28.1:Phylum Porifera
28.2:Phylum Cnidaria
28.3:Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Flatworms, Rotifers, and Nemerteans
28.4:Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Molluscs and Annelids
28.5:Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Nematodes and Tardigrades
28.6:Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Arthropods
28.7:Superphylum Deuterostomia
Introduction
A brief look at any magazine pertaining to our natural world, such as National Geographic, would show a rich
variety of vertebrates, especially mammals and birds. To most people, these are the animals that attract our
attention. Concentrating on vertebrates, however, gives us a rather biased and limited view of animal diversity,
becauseitignoresnearly97percentoftheanimalkingdom—theinvertebrates—animalsthatlackacraniumand
a defined vertebral column or spine.
Theinvertebrateanimalphylaexhibitanenormousvarietyofcellsandtissuesadaptedforspecificpurposes,and
frequentlythesetissuesareuniquetotheirphyla.Thesespecializationsshowtherangeofcellulardifferentiation
possible within the clade Opisthokonta, which has both unicellular and multicellular members. Cellular and
structuralspecializationsincludecuticlesforprotection,spinesandtinyharpoonsfordefense,toothystructures
forfeeding,andwingsforflight.Anexoskeletonmaybeadaptedformovementorfortheattachmentofmuscles
asintheclamsandinsects.Secretorycellscanproducevenom,mucus,ordigestiveenzymes.Thebodyplans
ofsomephyla,suchasthoseofthemolluscs,annelids,arthropods,andechinoderms,havebeenmodifiedand
adapted throughout evolution to produce thousands of different forms. Perhaps you will find it amazing that an
enormousnumberofbothaquaticandterrestrialinvertebrates—perhapsmillionsofspecies—havenotyetbeen
scientificallyclassified.Asaresult,thephylogeneticrelationshipsamongtheinvertebratesareconstantlybeing
PAGE: 801
790 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
updated as new information is collected about the organisms of each phylum.
28.1 | Phylum Porifera
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the organizational features of the simplest multicellular organisms
• Explain the various body forms and bodily functions of sponges
As we have seen, the vast majority of invertebrate animals do not possess a defined bony vertebral
endoskeleton,orabonycranium.However,oneofthemostancestralgroupsofdeuterostomeinvertebrates,the
Echinodermata,doproducetinyskeletal“bones”calledossiclesthatmakeupatrueendoskeleton,orinternal
skeleton, covered by an epidermis.
We will start our investigation with the simplest of all the invertebrates—animals sometimes classified within
thecladeParazoa(“besidetheanimals”).ThiscladecurrentlyincludesonlythephylumPlacozoa(containinga
single species, Trichoplax adhaerens), and the phylum Porifera, containing the more familiar sponges (Figure
28.2). The split between the Parazoa and the Eumetazoa (all animal clades above Parazoa) likely took place
over a billion years ago.
We should reiterate here that the Porifera do not possess “true” tissues that are embryologically homologous
to those of all other derived animal groups such as the insects and mammals. This is because they do not
create a true gastrula during embryogenesis, and as a result do not produce a true endoderm or ectoderm.
But even though they are not considered to have true tissues, they do have specialized cells that perform
specificfunctionsliketissues(forexample,theexternal“pinacoderm”ofaspongeactslikeourepidermis).Thus,
functionally, the poriferans can be said to have tissues; however, these tissues are likely not embryologically
homologous to our own.
Sponge larvae (e.g, parenchymula and amphiblastula) are flagellated and able to swim; however, adults are
non-motile and spend their life attached to a substratum. Since water is vital to sponges for feeding, excretion,
and gas exchange, their body structure facilitates the movement of water through the sponge. Various canals,
chambers, and cavities enable water to move through the sponge to allow the exchange of food and waste as
well as the exchange of gases to nearly all body cells.
Figure28.2Sponges.SpongesaremembersofthephylumPorifera,whichcontainsthesimplestinvertebrates.(credit:
Andrew Turner)
Morphology of Sponges
There are at least 5,000 named species of sponges, likely with thousands more yet to be classified. The
morphology of the simplest sponges takes the shape of an irregular cylinder with a large central cavity, the
spongocoel, occupying the inside of the cylinder (Figure 28.3). Water enters into the spongocoel through
numerouspores,orostia,thatcreateopeningsinthebodywall.Waterenteringthespongocoelisexpelledviaa
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 802
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 791
largecommonopeningcalledtheosculum.However,weshouldnotethatspongesexhibitarangeofdiversityin
bodyforms,includingvariationsinthesizeandshapeofthespongocoel,aswellasthenumberandarrangement
of feeding chambers within the body wall. In some sponges, multiple feeding chambers open off of a central
spongocoelandinothers,severalfeedingchambersconnectingtooneanothermayliebetweentheentrypores
and the spongocoel.
While sponges do not exhibit true tissue-layer organization, they do have a number of functional “tissues”
composed of different cell types specialized for distinct functions. For example, epithelial-like cells called
pinacocytes form the outermost body, called a pinacoderm, that serves a protective function similar that of
our epidermis. Scattered among the pinacoderm are the ostia that allow entry of water into the body of the
sponge. These pores have given the sponges their phylum name Porifera—pore-bearers. In some sponges,
ostia are formed by porocytes, single tube-shaped cells that act as valves to regulate the flow of water into
the spongocoel. In other sponges, ostia are formed by folds in the body wall of the sponge. Between the outer
layer and the feeding chambers of the sponge is a jelly-like substance called the mesohyl, which contains
collagenous fibers. Various cell types reside within the mesohyl, including amoebocytes, the “stem cells” of
sponges, and sclerocytes, which produce skeletal materials. The gel-like consistency of mesohyl acts like an
endoskeleton and maintains the tubular morphology of sponges.
Thefeedingchambersinsidethespongearelinedbychoanocytes("collarcells").Thestructureofachoanocyte
is critical to its function, which is to generate a directed water current through the sponge and to trap and
ingest microscopic food particles by phagocytosis. These feeding cells are similar in appearance to unicellular
choanoflagellates (Protista). This similarity suggests that sponges and choanoflagellates are closely related
and likely share common ancestry. The body of the choanocyte is embedded in mesohyl and contains all the
organelles required for normal cell function. Protruding into the “open space” inside the feeding chamber is
a mesh-like collar composed of microvilli with a single flagellum in the center of the column. The beating of
the flagella from all choanocytes draws water into the sponge through the numerous ostia, into the spaces
lined by choanocytes, and eventually out through the osculum (or osculi, if the sponge consists of a colony of
attached sponges). Food particles, including waterborne bacteria and unicellular organisms such as algae and
variousanimal-likeprotists,aretrappedbythesieve-likecollarofthechoanocytes,slidedowntowardthebody
of the cell, and are ingested by phagocytosis. Choanocytes also serve another surprising function: They can
differentiate into sperm for sexual reproduction, at which time they become dislodged from the mesohyl and
leave the sponge with expelled water through the osculum.
Watch this video to see the movement of water through the sponge body. (This multimedia resource will
open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66394/1.3/#eip-id7448133)
The amoebocytes (derived from stem-cell-like archaeocytes), are so named because they move throughout
themesohylinanamoeba-likefashion.Theyhaveavarietyoffunctions:Inadditiontodeliveringnutrientsfrom
choanocytes to other cells within the sponge, they also give rise to eggs for sexual reproduction. (The eggs
remaininthemesohyl,whereasthespermcellsarereleasedintothewater.)Theamoebocytescandifferentiate
intoothercelltypesofthesponge,suchascollenocytesandlophocytes,whichproducethecollagen-likeprotein
that support the mesohyl. Amoebocytes can also give rise to sclerocytes, which produce spicules (skeletal
spikesofsilicaorcalciumcarbonate)insomesponges,andspongocytes,whichproducetheproteinsponginin
the majority of sponges. These different cell types in sponges are shown inFigure 28.3.
PAGE: 803
792 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.3 Simple sponge body plan and cell types. The sponge’s (a) basic body plan and (b) some of the
specialized cell types found in sponges are shown.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Choanocytes have flagella that propel water through the body.
b. Pinacocytes can transform into any cell type.
c. Lophocytes secrete collagen.
d. Porocytes control the flow of water through pores in the sponge body.
Take an up-closetour (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sponge_ride)through the sponge and its cells.
As we’ve seen, most sponges are supported by small bone-like spicules (usually tiny pointed structures made
of calcium carbonate or silica) in the mesohyl. Spicules provide support for the body of the sponge, and may
also deter predation. The presence and composition of spicules form the basis for differentiating three of the
four classes of sponges (Figure 28.4). Sponges in class Calcarea produce calcium carbonate spicules and no
spongin;thoseinclassHexactinellidaproducesix-rayedsiliceous(glassy)spiculesandnospongin;andthosein
classDemospongiacontainsponginandmayormaynothavespicules;ifpresent,thosespiculesaresiliceous.
Sponges in this last class have been used as bath sponges. Spicules are most conspicuously present in the
glasssponges,classHexactinellida.Someofthespiculesmayattaingiganticproportions.Forexample,relative
to typical glass sponge spicules, whose size generally ranges from 3 to 10 mm, some of the basal spicules of
the hexactinellid Monorhaphis chuni are enormous and grow up to 3 meters long! The glass sponges are also
unusual in that most of their body cells are fused together to form a multinucleate syncytium. Because their
cellsareinterconnectedinthisway,thehexactinellidspongeshavenomesohyl.Afourthclassofsponges,the
Sclerospongiae, wasdescribedfromspeciesdiscoveredinunderwatertunnels.Thesearealsocalledcoralline
sponges after their multilayered calcium carbonate skeletons. Dating based on the rate of deposition of the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 804
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 793
skeletal layers suggests that some of these sponges are hundreds of years old.
Figure 28.4 Several classes of sponges. (a) Clathrina clathrus belongs to class Calcarea, (b) Staurocalyptus spp.
(commonname:yellowPicassosponge)belongstoclassHexactinellida,and(c)Acarnuserithacusbelongstoclass
Demospongia.(credita:modificationofworkbyParentGéry;creditb:modificationofworkbyMontereyBayAquarium
Research Institute, NOAA; credit c: modification of work by Sanctuary Integrated Monitoring Network, Monterey Bay
National Marine Sanctuary, NOAA)
Use the Interactive Sponge Guide (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/id_sponges) to identify species of
sponges based on their external form, mineral skeleton, fiber, and skeletal architecture.
Physiological Processes in Sponges
Sponges, despite being simple organisms, regulate their different physiological processes through a variety of
mechanisms. These processes regulate their metabolism, reproduction, and locomotion.
Digestion
Sponges lack complex digestive, respiratory, circulatory, and nervous systems. Their food is trapped as water
passes through the ostia and out through the osculum. Bacteria smaller than 0.5 microns in size are trapped
bychoanocytes, which are the principal cells engaged in feeding, and are ingested byphagocytosis. However,
particles that are larger than the ostia may be phagocytized at the sponge's surface by pinacocytes. In some
sponges, amoebocytes transport food from cells that have ingested food particles to those that do not. In
sponges, in spite of what looks like a large digestive cavity, all digestion is intracellular. The limit of this type of
digestion is that food particles must be smaller than individual sponge cells.
All other major body functions in the sponge (gas exchange, circulation, excretion) are performed by diffusion
betweenthecellsthatlinetheopeningswithinthespongeandthewaterthatispassingthroughthoseopenings.
Allcelltypeswithinthespongeobtainoxygenfromwaterthroughdiffusion.Likewise,carbondioxideisreleased
into seawater by diffusion. In addition, nitrogenous waste produced as a byproduct of protein metabolism is
excreted via diffusion by individual cells into the water as it passes through the sponge.
Somespongeshostgreenalgaeorcyanobacteriaasendosymbiontswithinarcheocytesandothercells.Itmay
be a surprise to learn that there are nearly 150 species of carnivorous sponges, which feed primarily on tiny
crustaceans, snaring them through sticky threads or hooked spicules!
Although there is no specialized nervous system in sponges, there is intercellular communication that can
regulate events like contraction of the sponge's body or the activity of the choanocytes.
Reproduction
Spongesreproducebysexualaswellasasexualmethods.Thetypicalmeansofasexualreproductioniseither
fragmentation (during this process, a piece of the sponge breaks off, settles on a new substrate, and develops
into a new individual), or budding (a genetically identical outgrowth grows from the parent and eventually
detaches or remains attached to form a colony). An atypical type of asexual reproduction is found only in
freshwater sponges and occurs through the formation of gemmules. Gemmules are environmentally resistant
PAGE: 805
794 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
structures produced by adult sponges (e.g., in the freshwater sponge Spongilla). In gemmules, an inner layer
ofarcheocytes(amoebocytes)issurroundedbyapneumaticcellularlayerthatmaybereinforcedwithspicules.
In freshwater sponges, gemmules may survive hostile environmental conditions like changes in temperature,
and then serve to recolonize the habitat once environmental conditions improve and stabilize. Gemmules are
capable of attaching to a substratum and generating a new sponge. Since gemmules can withstand harsh
environments,areresistanttodesiccation,andremaindormantforlongperiods,theyareanexcellentmeansof
colonization for a sessile organism.
Sexual reproduction in sponges occurs when gametes are generated. Oocytes arise by the differentiation of
amoebocytes and are retained within the spongocoel, whereas spermatozoa result from the differentiation of
choanocytes and are ejected via the osculum. Sponges are monoecious (hermaphroditic), which means that
one individual can produce both gametes (eggs and sperm) simultaneously. In some sponges, production of
gametesmayoccurthroughouttheyear,whereasotherspongesmayshowsexualcyclesdependinguponwater
temperature.Spongesmayalsobecomesequentiallyhermaphroditic,producingoocytesfirstandspermatozoa
later.Thistemporalseparationofgametesproducedbythesamespongehelpstoencouragecross-fertilization
andgeneticdiversity.Spermatozoacarriedalongbywatercurrentscanfertilizetheoocytesborneinthemesohyl
of other sponges. Early larval development occurs within the sponge, and free-swimming larvae (such as
flagellatedparenchymula) are then released via the osculum.
Locomotion
Sponges are generally sessile as adults and spend their lives attached to a fixed substratum. They do not
showmovementoverlargedistanceslikeotherfree-swimmingmarineinvertebrates.However,spongecellsare
capableofcreepingalongsubstrataviaorganizationalplasticity,i.e.,rearrangingtheircells.Underexperimental
conditions,researchershaveshownthatspongecellsspreadonaphysicalsupportdemonstratealeadingedge
fordirectedmovement.Ithasbeenspeculatedthatthislocalizedcreepingmovementmayhelpspongesadjust
tomicroenvironmentsnearthepointofattachment.Itmustbenoted,however,thatthispatternofmovementhas
been documented in laboratories, it remains to be observed in natural sponge habitats.
Watch this BBC video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sea_sponges) showing the array of sponges seen
along the Cayman Wall during a submersible dive.
28.2 | Phylum Cnidaria
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare structural and organization characteristics of Porifera and Cnidaria
• Describe the progressive development of tissues and their relevance to animal complexity
• Identify the two general body forms found in the Cnidaria
• Describe the identifying features of the major cnidarian classes
Phylum Cnidaria includes animals that exhibit radial or biradial symmetry and are diploblastic, meaning that
theydevelopfromtwoembryoniclayers,ectodermandendoderm.Nearlyall(about99percent)cnidariansare
marine species.
Whereasthedefiningcelltypeforthespongesisthechoanocyte,thedefiningcelltypeforthecnidariansisthe
cnidocyte,orstingingcell.Thesecellsarelocatedaroundthemouthandonthetentacles,andservetocapture
prey or repel predators. Cnidocytes have large stinging organelles called nematocysts, which usually contain
barbs at the base of a long coiled thread. The outer wall of the cell has a hairlike projection called a cnidocil,
which is sensitive to tactile stimulation. If the cnidocils are touched, the hollow threads evert with enormous
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 806
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 795
acceleration, approaching 40,000 times that of gravity. The microscopic threads then either entangle the prey
orinstantlypenetratethefleshofthepreyorpredator,releasingtoxins(includingneurotoxinsandpore-forming
toxins that can lead to cell lysis) into the target, thereby immobilizing it or paralyzing it (seeFigure 28.5).
Figure28.5Cnidocytes.AnimalsfromthephylumCnidariahavestingingcellscalledcnidocytes.Cnidocytescontain
largeorganellescalled(a)nematocyststhatstoreacoiledthreadandbarb,thenematocyst.Whenthehairlikecnidocil
on the cell surface is touched, even lightly, (b) the thread, barb, and a toxin are fired from the organelle.
View this video (https://www.openstaxcollege.org/l/nematocyst) animation showing two anemones
engaged in a battle.
Two distinct body plans are found in Cnidarians: the polyp or tuliplike "stalk" form and the medusa or "bell"
form. (Figure 28.6). An example of the polyp form is found in the genus Hydra, whereas the most typical form
of medusa is found in the group called the “sea jellies” (jellyfish). Polyp forms are sessile as adults, with a
single opening (the mouth/anus) to the digestive cavity facing up with tentacles surrounding it. Medusa forms
are motile, with the mouth and tentacles hanging down from an umbrella-shaped bell.
Figure 28.6 Cnidarian body forms. Cnidarians have two distinct body plans, the medusa (a) and the polyp (b). All
cnidarians have two membrane layers, with a jelly-like mesoglea between them.
Some cnidarians are dimorphic, that is, they exhibit both body plans during their life cycle. In these species,
PAGE: 807
796 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
the polyp serves as the asexual phase, while the medusa serves as the sexual stage and produces gametes.
However, both body forms are diploid.
An example of cnidarian dimorphism can be seen in the colonial hydroid Obelia. The sessile asexual colony
hastwotypesofpolyps,showninFigure28.7.Thefirstisthegastrozooid,whichisadaptedforcapturingprey
and feeding. In Obelia, all polyps are connected through a common digestive cavity called a coenosarc. The
other type of polyp is the gonozooid, adapted for the asexual budding and the production of sexual medusae.
Thereproductivebudsfromthegonozooidbreakoffandmatureintofree-swimmingmedusae,whichareeither
male or female (dioecious). Each medusa has either several testes or several ovaries in which meiosis occurs
to produce sperm or egg cells. Interestingly, the gamete-producing cells do not arise within the gonad itself,
but migrate into it from the tissues in the gonozooid. This separate origin of gonad and gametes is common
throughout the eumetazoa. The gametes are released into the surrounding water, and after fertilization, the
zygote develops into a blastula, which soon develops into a ciliated, bilaterally symmetrical planula larva. The
planulaswimsfreelyforawhile,buteventuallyattachestoasubstrateandbecomesasinglepolyp,fromwhich
a new colony of polyps is formed by budding.
Figure 28.7 Obelia. The colonial sessile form of Obelia geniculata has two types of polyps: gastrozooids, which are
adapted for capturing prey, and gonozooids, which asexually bud to produce medusae.
Click here to follow anObelialife cycle (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/obelia)animation and quiz.
All cnidarians are diploblastic and thus have two “epithelial” layers in the body that are derived from the
endoderm and ectoderm of the embryo. The outer layer (from ectoderm) is called the epidermis and lines the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 808
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 797
outsideoftheanimal,whereastheinnerlayer(fromendoderm)iscalledthegastrodermisandlinesthedigestive
cavity.Intheplanulalarva,alayerofectodermsurroundsasolidmassofendoderm,butasthepolypdevelops,
thedigestiveorgastrovascularcavityopenswithintheendoderm.Anon-living,jelly-likemesoglealiesbetween
these two epithelial layers. In terms of cellular complexity, cnidarians show the presence of differentiated cell
typesineachtissuelayer,suchasnervecells,contractileepithelialcells,enzyme-secretingcells,andnutrient-
absorbing cells, as well as the presence of intercellular connections. However, with a few notable exceptions
such as statocysts and rhopalia (see below), the development of organs or organ systems is not advanced in
this phylum.
The nervous system is rudimentary, with nerve cells organized in a network scattered across the body. This
nerve net may show the presence of groups of cells that form nerve plexi (singular: plexus) or nerve cords.
Organization of the nervous system in the motile medusa is more complex than that of the sessile polyp, with
a nerve ring around the edge of the medusa bell that controls the action of the tentacles. Cnidarian nerve
cells show mixed characteristics of motor and sensory neurons. The predominant signaling molecules in these
primitive nervous systems are peptides, which perform both excitatory and inhibitory functions. Despite the
simplicityofthenervoussystem,itisremarkablethatitcoordinatesthecomplicatedmovementofthetentacles,
the drawing of captured prey to the mouth, the digestion of food, and the expulsion of waste.
The gastrovascular cavity has only one opening that serves as both a mouth and an anus; this arrangement
is called an incomplete digestive system. In the gastrovascular cavity, extracellular digestion occurs as food is
takenintothegastrovascularcavity,enzymesaresecretedintothecavity,andthecellsliningthecavityabsorb
nutrients. However, some intracellular digestion also occurs. The gastrovascular cavity distributes nutrients
throughout the body of the animal, with nutrients passing from the digestive cavity across the mesoglea to the
epidermal cells. Thus, this cavity serves both digestive and circulatory functions.
Cnidarian cells exchange oxygen and carbon dioxide by diffusion between cells in the epidermis and water in
the environment, and between cells in the gastrodermis and water in the gastrovascular cavity. The lack of a
circulatory system to move dissolved gases limits the thickness of the body wall and necessitates a non-living
mesoglea between the layers. In the cnidarians with a thicker mesoglea, a number of canals help to distribute
both nutrients and gases. There is neither an excretory system nor organs, and nitrogenous wastes simply
diffuse from the cells into the water outside the animal or into the gastrovascular cavity.
The phylum Cnidaria contains about 10,000 described species divided into two monophyletic clades: the
Anthozoa and the Medusozoa. The Anthozoa include the corals, sea fans, sea whips, and the sea anemones.
The Medusozoa include several classes of Cnidaria in two clades: The Hydrozoa include sessile forms, some
medusoidforms,andswimmingcolonialformslikethePortugueseman-of-war.Theothercladecontainsvarious
types of jellies including both Scyphozoa and Cubozoa. The Anthozoa contain only sessile polyp forms, while
the Medusozoa include species with both polyp and medusa forms in their life cycle.
Class Anthozoa
The class Anthozoa ("flower animals") includes sea anemones (Figure 28.8), sea pens, and corals, with an
estimatednumberof6,100describedspecies.Seaanemonesareusuallybrightlycoloredandcanattainasize
of 1.8 to 10 cm in diameter. Individual animals are cylindrical in shape and are attached directly to a substrate.
PAGE: 809
798 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.8 Sea anemone. The sea anemone is shown (a) photographed and (b) in a diagram illustrating its
morphology. (credit a: modification of work by "Dancing With Ghosts"/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by NOAA)
The mouth of a sea anemone is surrounded by tentacles that bear cnidocytes. The slit-like mouth opening
and flattened pharynx are lined with ectoderm. This structure of the pharynx makes anemones bilaterally
symmetrical. Aciliated groovecalledasiphonoglyph isfound ontwoopposite sidesofthepharynxanddirects
waterintoit.Thepharynxisthemuscularpartofthedigestivesystemthatservestoingestaswellasegestfood,
and may extend for up to two-thirds the length of the body before opening into the gastrovascular cavity. This
cavityisdividedintoseveralchambersbylongitudinalseptacalledmesenteries.Eachmesenteryconsistsofa
fold of gastrodermal tissue with a layer of mesoglea between the sheets of gastrodermis. Mesenteries do not
divide the gastrovascular cavity completely, and the smaller cavities coalesce at the pharyngeal opening. The
adaptivebenefitofthemesenteriesappearstobeanincreaseinsurfaceareaforabsorptionofnutrientsandgas
exchange, as well as additional mechanical support for the body of the anemone.
Sea anemones feed on small fish and shrimp, usually by immobilizing their prey with nematocysts. Some sea
anemonesestablishamutualisticrelationshipwithhermitcrabswhenthecrabseizesandattachesthemtotheir
shell.Inthisrelationship,theanemonegetsfoodparticlesfrompreycaughtbythecrab,andthecrabisprotected
from the predators by the stinging cells of the anemone. Some species of anemone fish, or clownfish, are also
able to live with sea anemones because they build up an acquired immunity to the toxins contained within the
nematocysts and also secrete a protective mucus that prevents them from being stung.
The structure of coral polyps is similar to that of anemones, although the individual polyps are usually smaller
and part of a colony, some of which are massive and the size of small buildings. Coral polyps feed on smaller
planktonic organisms, including algae, bacteria, and invertebrate larvae. Some anthozoans have symbiotic
associations with dinoflagellate algae called zooxanthellae. The mutually beneficial relationship between
zooxanthellae and modern corals—which provides the algae with shelter—gives coral reefs their colors and
suppliesbothorganismswithnutrients.Thiscomplexmutualisticassociationbeganmorethan210millionyears
ago,accordingtoanewstudybyaninternationalteamofscientists.Thatthissymbioticrelationshiparoseduring
atimeofmassiveworldwidecoral-reefexpansionsuggeststhattheinterconnectionofalgaeandcoraliscrucial
forthehealthofcoralreefs,whichprovidehabitatforroughlyone-fourthofallmarinelife.Reefsarethreatened
byatrendinoceanwarmingthathascausedcoralstoexpeltheirzooxanthellaealgaeandturnwhite,aprocess
called coral bleaching.
Anthozoans remain polypoid (note that this term is easily confused with "polyploid") throughout their lives
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 810
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 799
and can reproduce asexually by budding or fragmentation, or sexually by producing gametes. Male or female
gametesproducedbyapolypfusetogiverisetoafree-swimmingplanulalarva.Thelarvasettlesonasuitable
substratum and develops into a sessile polyp.
Class Scyphozoa
Class Scyphozoa ("cup animals") includes all (and only) the marine jellies, with about 200 known species. The
medusaistheprominentstageinthelifecycle,althoughthereisapolypstageinthelifecycleofmostspecies.
Mostjelliesrangefrom2to40cminlengthbutthelargestscyphozoanspecies,Cyaneacapillata,canreacha
size of two meters in diameter. Scyphozoans display a characteristic bell-like morphology (Figure 28.9).
Figure 28.9 A sea jelly. A jelly is shown (a) photographed and (b) in a diagram illustrating its morphology. (credit a:
modification of work by "Jimg944"/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
In the sea jelly, a mouth opening is present on the underside of the animal, surrounded by hollow tentacles
bearingnematocysts.Scyphozoanslivemostoftheirlifecycleasfree-swimming,solitarycarnivores.Themouth
leads to the gastrovascular cavity, which may be sectioned into four interconnected sacs, called diverticuli. In
some species, the digestive system may branch further into radial canals. Like the septa in anthozoans, the
branched gastrovascular cells serve two functions: to increase the surface area for nutrient absorption and
diffusion, and to support the body of the animal.
In scyphozoans, nerve cells are organized in a nerve net that extends over the entire body, with a nerve ring
aroundtheedgeofthebell.Clustersofsensoryorganscalledrhopaliamaybepresentinpocketsintheedgeof
thebell.Jellieshavearingofmusclesliningthedomeofthebody,whichprovidesthecontractileforcerequired
to swim through water, as well as to draw in food from the water as they swim. Scyphozoans have separate
sexes. The gonads are formed from the gastrodermis and gametes are expelled through the mouth. Planula
larvae are formed by external fertilization; they settle on a substratum in a polypoid form. These polyps may
budtoformadditionalpolypsorbeginimmediatelytoproducemedusabuds.Inafewspecies,theplanulalarva
maydevelopdirectlyintothemedusa.Thelifecycle(Figure 28.10)ofmostscyphozoansincludesbothsexual
medusoid and asexual polypoid body forms.
PAGE: 811
800 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.10 Scyphozoan life cycle. The lifecycle of most jellyfish includes two stages: the medusa stage and the
polyp stage. The polyp reproduces asexually by budding, and the medusa reproduces sexually. (credit "medusa":
modification of work by Francesco Crippa)
Class Cubozoa
This class includes jellies that have a box-shaped medusa, or a bell that is square in cross-section, and are
colloquiallyknownas“boxjellyfish.”Thesespeciesmayachievesizesof15to25cm,buttypicallymembersof
theCubozoaarenotaslargeasthoseoftheScyphozoa.However,cubozoansdisplayoverallmorphologicaland
anatomicalcharacteristicsthataresimilartothoseofthescyphozoans.Aprominentdifferencebetweenthetwo
classes is the arrangement of tentacles. The cubozoans contain muscular pads called pedalia at the corners
of the square bell canopy, with one or more tentacles attached to each pedalium. In some cases, the digestive
systemmayextendintothepedalia.Nematocystsmaybearrangedinaspiralconfigurationalongthetentacles;
thisarrangementhelpstoeffectivelysubdueandcaptureprey.Cubozoansincludethemostvenomousofallthe
cnidarians (Figure 28.11).
These animals are unusual in having image-forming eyes, including a cornea, lens, and retina. Because these
structures are made from a number of interactive tissues, they can be called true organs. Eyes are located in
fourclustersbetweeneachpairofpedalia.Eachclusterconsistsoffoursimpleeyespotsplustwoimage-forming
eyes oriented in different directions. How images formed by these very complex eyes are processed remains
a mystery, since cubozoans have extensive nerve nets but no distinct brain. Nontheless, the presence of eyes
helpsthecubozoanstobeactiveandeffectivehuntersofsmallmarineanimalslikeworms,arthropods,andfish.
Cubozoans have separate sexes and fertilization occurs inside the female. Planula larvae may develop inside
thefemaleorbereleased,dependingonspecies.Eachplanuladevelopsintoapolyp.Thesepolypsmaybudto
form more polyps to create a colony; each polyp then transforms into a single medusa.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 812
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 801
Figure28.11Acubozoan.The(a)tinycubozoanjellyMalokingiisthimble-shapedand,likeallcubozoanjellies,(b)has
fourmuscularpedaliatowhichthetentaclesattach.M.kingiisoneoftwospeciesofjelliesknowntocauseIrukandji
syndrome, a condition characterized by excruciating muscle pain, vomiting, increased heart rate, and psychological
symptoms.TwopeopleinAustralia,whereIrukandjijelliesaremostcommonlyfound,arebelievedtohavediedfrom
Irukandji stings. (c) A sign on a beach in northern Australia warns swimmers of the danger. (credit c: modification of
work by Peter Shanks)
Class Hydrozoa
Hydrozoa is a diverse group that includes nearly 3,200 species; most are marine, although some freshwater
species are known (Figure 28.12). Most species exhibit both polypoid and medusoid forms in their lifecycles,
although the familiar Hydra has only the polyp form. The medusoid form has a muscular veil or velum below
themarginofthebellandforthisreasoniscalledahydromedusa.Incontrast,themedusoidformofScyphozoa
lacks a velum and is termed ascyphomedusa.
Thepolypformintheseanimalsoftenshowsacylindricalmorphologywithacentralgastrovascularcavitylined
by the gastrodermis. The gastrodermis and epidermis have a simple layer of mesoglea sandwiched between
them. A mouth opening, surrounded by tentacles, is present at the oral end of the animal. Many hydrozoans
form sessile, branched colonies of specialized polyps that share a common, branching gastrovascular cavity
(coenosarc), such as is found in the colonial hydroidObelia.
Free-floating colonial species called siphonophores contain both medusoid and polypoid individuals that are
specialized for feeding, defense, or reproduction. The distinctive rainbow-hued float of the Portuguese man o’
war(Physaliaphysalis)createsapneumatophorewithwhichitregulatesbuoyancybyfillingandexpellingcarbon
monoxidegas.Atfirstglance,thesecomplexsuperorganismsappeartobeasingleorganism;buttherealityis
thateventhetentaclesareactuallycomposedofzooidsladenwithnematocysts.Thus,althoughitsuperficially
resemblesatypicalmedusozoanjellyfish,P.physalisisafree-floatinghydrozoancolony;eachspecimenismade
up of many hundreds of organisms, each specialized for a certain function, including motility and buoyancy,
feeding,reproductionanddefense.Althoughtheyarecarnivorousandfeedonmanysoftbodiedmarineanimals,
P.physalislackstomachsandinsteadhavespecializedpolypscalledgastrozooidsthattheyusetodigesttheir
prey in the open water.
Physalia has male and female colonies, which release their gametes into the water. The zygote develops into
a single individual, which then buds asexually to form a new colony. Siphonophores include the largest known
floating cnidarian colonies such as Praya dubia, whose chain of zoids can get up to 50 meters (165 feet) long.
Other hydrozoan species are solitary polyps (Hydra) or solitary hydromedusae (Gonionemus). One defining
characteristic shared by the hydrozoans is that their gonads are derived from epidermal tissue, whereas in all
other cnidarians they are derived from gastrodermal tissue.
PAGE: 813
802 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.12 Hydrozoans. The polyp colony Obelia (a), siphonophore colonies Physalia (b) physalis, known as the
Portuguesemano‘warandVelellabae(c),andthesolitarypolypHydra(d)havedifferentbodyshapesbutallbelong
to the family Hydrozoa. (credit b: modification of work by NOAA; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
28.3 | Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Flatworms,
Rotifers, and Nemerteans
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the unique anatomical and morphological features of flatworms, rotifers, and Nemertea
• Identify an important extracoelomic cavity found in Nemertea
• Explain the key features of Platyhelminthes and their importance as parasites
Animals belonging to superphylum Lophotrochozoa are triploblastic (have three germ layers) and unlike the
cnidarians, they possess an embryonic mesoderm sandwiched between the ectoderm and endoderm. These
phylaarealsobilaterallysymmetrical,meaningthatalongitudinalsectionwilldividethemintorightandleftsides
that are superficially symmetrical. In these phyla, we also see the beginning of cephalization, the evolution of
a concentration of nervous tissues and sensory organs in the head of the organism—exactly where a mobile
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 814
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 803
bilaterally symmetrical organism first encounters its environment.
Lophotrochozoa are also protostomes, in which the blastopore, or the point of invagination of the ectoderm
(outergermlayer),becomesthemouthopeningintothealimentarycanal.Thisdevelopmentalpatterniscalled
protostomy or “first mouth.” Protostomes include acoelomate, pseudocoelomate, and eucoelomate phyla. The
coelomisacavitythatseparatestheectodermfromtheendoderm.Inacoelomates,asolidmassofmesoderm
issandwichedbetweentheectodermandendodermanddoesnotformacavityor“coelom,”leavinglittleroom
for organ development; in pseudocoelomates, there is a cavity or pseudocoelom that replaces the blastocoel
(thecavitywithintheblastula),butitisonlylinedbymesodermontheoutsideofthecavity,leavingtheguttube
and organs unlined; in eucoelomates, the cavity that obliterates the blastocoel as the coelom develops is lined
bothontheoutsideofthecavity(parietallayer)andalsoontheinsideofthecavity,aroundtheguttubeandthe
internal organs (visceral layer).
Eucoelmate protostomes are schizocoels, in which mesoderm-producing cells typically migrate into the
blastocoel during gastrulation and multiply to form a solid mass of cells. Cavities then develop within the cell
masstoformthecoelom.Sincetheformingbodycavitysplitsthemesoderm,thisprotostomiccoelomistermeda
schizocoelom.Aswewillseelaterinthischapter,chordates,thephylumtowhichwebelong,generallydevelop
acoelombyenterocoely:pouchesofmesodermpinchofftheinvaginatingprimitivegut,orarchenteron,andthen
fuse to form a complete coelom. We should note here that a eucoelomate can form its “true coelom” by either
schizocoelyorenterocoely.Theprocessthatproducesthecoelomisdifferentandoftaxonomicimportance,but
the result is the same: a complete, mesodermally lined coelom.
Most organisms placed in the superphylum Lophotrochozoa possess either a lophophore feeding apparatus
or a trochophore larvae (thus the contracted name, “lopho-trocho-zoa”). The lophophore is a feeding structure
composed of a set of ciliated tentacles surrounding the mouth. A trochophore is a free-swimming larva
characterizedbytwobandsofciliasurroundingatop-likebody.SomeofthephylaclassifiedasLophotrochozoa
maybemissingoneorbothofthesedefiningstructures.NeverthelesstheirplacementwiththeLophotrochozoa
isupheldwhenribosomalRNAandothergenesequencesarecompared.Thesystematicsofthiscomplexgroup
is still unclear and much more work remains to resolve the cladistic relationships among them.
Phylum Platyhelminthes
The flatworms are acoelomate organisms that include many free-living and parasitic forms. The flatworms
possess neither a lophophore nor trochophore larvae, although the larvae of one group of flatworms, the
Polycladida (named after its many-branched digestive tract), are considered to be homologous to trochophore
larvae. Spiral cleavage is also seen in the polycladids and other basal flatworm groups. The developmental
pattern of some of the free-living forms is obscured by a phenomenon called "blastomere anarchy," in which
a sort of temporary feeding larva forms, followed by a regrouping of cells within the embryo that gives
rise to a second-stage embryo. However, both the monophyly of the flatworms and their placement in the
Lophotrochozoa has been supported by molecular analyses.
The Platyhelminthes consist of two monophyletic lineages: the Catenulida and the Rhabditophora. The
Catenulida, or "chain worms," is a small clade of just over 100 species. These worms typically reproduce
asexuallybybudding.However,theoffspringdonotfullydetachfromtheparentsandtheformationresembles
a chain in appearance. All of the flatworms discussed here are part of the Rhabditophora ("rhabdite bearers").
Rhabditesarerodlikestructuresdischargedinthemucusproducedbysomefree-livingflatworms;Eucoelmate
protostomes are schizocoels, in which mesoderm-producing cells typically migrate into the blastocoel during
gastrulation likely serve in both defense and to provide traction for ciliary gliding along the substrate. Unlike
free-living flatworms, many species of trematodes and cestodes are parasitic, including important parasites of
humans.
PAGE: 815
804 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.13Flatwormsexhibitsignificantdiversity.(a)AbluePseudocerosflatworm(Pseudocerosbifurcus);(b)gold
speckled flatworm (Thysanozoon nigropapillosum). (credit a: modification of work by Stephen Childs; b: modification
of work by Pril Fish.)
Flatworms have three embryonic tissue layers that give rise to epidermal tissues (from ectoderm), the lining of
the digestive system (from endoderm), and other internal tissues (from mesoderm). The epidermal tissue is a
single layer of cells or a layer of fused cells ( syncytium) that covers two layers of muscle, one circular and
the other longitudinal. The mesodermal tissues include mesenchymal cells that contain collagen and support
secretory cells that produce mucus and other materials at the surface. Because flatworms are acoelomates,
the mesodermal layer forms a solid mass between the outer epidermal surface and the cavity of the digestive
system.
Physiological Processes of Flatworms
The free-living species of flatworms are predators or scavengers. Parasitic forms feed by absorbing nutrients
provided by their hosts. Most flatworms, such as the planarian shown in Figure 28.14, have a branching
gastrovascularcavityratherthanacompletedigestivesystem.Insuchanimals,the“mouth”isalsousedtoexpel
wastematerialsfromthedigestivesystem,andthusalsoservesasananus.(Afewspeciesmayhaveasecond
analporeoropening.)Thegutmaybeasimplesacorhighlybranched.Digestionisprimarilyextracellular,with
digested materials taken into the cells of the gut lining by phagocytosis. One parasitic group, the tapeworms
(cestodes), lacks a digestive system altogether, and absorb digested food from the host.
Flatwormshaveanexcretorysystemwithanetworkoftubulesattachedtoflamecells,whoseciliabeattodirect
waste fluids concentrated in the tubules out of the body through excretory pores. The system is responsible
for the regulation of dissolved salts and the excretion of nitrogenous wastes. The nervous system consists of
a pair of lateral nerve cords running the length of the body with transverse connections between them. Two
largecerebralganglia—concentrationsofnervecellbodiesattheanteriorendoftheworm—areassociatedwith
photosensory and chemosensory cells. There is neither a circulatory nor a respiratory system, with gas and
nutrient exchange dependent on diffusion and cell-to-cell junctions. This necessarily limits the thickness of the
body in these organisms, constraining them to be “flat” worms. Most flatworm species are monoecious (both
male and female reproductive organs are found in the same individual), and fertilization is typically internal.
Asexual reproduction by fission is common in some groups.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 816
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 805
Figure 28.14 Planaria, a free-living flatworm. The planarian is a flatworm that has a gastrovascular cavity with one
openingthatservesasbothmouthandanus.Theexcretorysystemismadeupofflamecellsandtubulesconnected
to excretory pores on both sides of the body. The nervous system is composed of two interconnected nerve cords
running the length of the body, with cerebral ganglia and eyespots at the anterior end.
Diversity of Flatworms
The flatworms have been traditionally divided into four classes: Turbellaria, Monogenea, Trematoda, and
Cestoda (Figure 28.15). However, the relationships among members of these classes has recently been
reassessed, with the turbellarians in particular now viewed as paraphyletic, since its descendants may also
include members of the other three classes. Members of the clade or class Rhabditophora are now dispersed
among multiple orders of Platyhelminthes, the most familiar of these being the Polycladida, which contains
the large marine flatworms; the Tricladida (which includes Dugesia [“planaria”] and Planaria and its relatives);
andthemajorparasiticorders:Monogenea(fishectoparasites),Trematoda(flukes),andCestoda(tapeworms),
which together form a monophyletic clade.
PAGE: 817
806 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.15Traditionalflatwormclasses.PhylumPlatyhelmintheswaspreviouslydividedintofourclasses.(a)Class
Turbellariaincludesthefree-livingpolycladidBedford’sflatworm(Pseudobicerosbedfordi),whichisabout8to10cm
inlength.(b)TheparasiticclassMonogeneaincludesDactylogyrusspp,commonlycalledgillflukes,whichareabout
0.2mminlengthandhavetwoanchors,indicatedbyarrowsusedtoattachtheparasiteontothegillsofhostfish.(c)
The class Trematoda includes Fascioloides magna (right) and Fasciola hepatica (two specimens on left, also known
as the common liver fluke). (d) Class Cestoda includes tapeworms such as this Taenia saginata, infects both cattle
and humans, and can reach 4 to 10 meters in length; the specimen shown here is about four meters long. (credit a:
modification of work by Jan Derk; credit d: modification of work by CDC)
Mostfree-livingflatwormsaremarinepolycladids,althoughtricladidspeciesliveinfreshwaterormoistterrestrial
environments, and there are a number of members from other orders in both environments. The ventral
epidermis of free-living flatworms is ciliated, which facilitates their locomotion. Some free-living flatworms are
capable of remarkable feats of regeneration in which an individual may regrow its head or tail after being
severed, or even several heads if the planaria is cut lengthwise.
Themonogeneansareectoparasites,mostlyoffish,withsimplelifecyclesthatconsistofafree-swimminglarva
thatattachestoafish,priortoitstransformationtotheectoparasiticadultform.Theparasitehasonlyonehost
and that host is usually very specific. The worms may produce enzymes that digest the host tissues, or they
may simply graze on surface mucus and skin particles. Most monogeneans are hermaphroditic, but the male
gametes develop first and so cross-fertilization is quite common.
The trematodes, or flukes, are internal parasites of mollusks and many other groups, including humans.
Trematodes have complex life cycles that involve a primary host in which sexual reproduction occurs, and one
or more secondary hosts in which asexual reproduction occurs. The primary host is usually a vertebrate and
the secondary host is almost always a mollusk, in which multiple larvae are produced asexually. Trematodes,
whichattachedinternallytothehostviaanoralandmedialsucker,areresponsibleforserioushumandiseases
including schistosomiasis, caused by several species of the blood fluke, Schistosoma spp. Various forms of
schistosomiasis infect an estimated 200 million people in the tropics, leading to organ damage, secondary
infectionbybacteria,andchronicsymptomslikefatigue.Infectionoccurswhenthehumanentersthewaterand
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 818
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 807
metacercaria larvae, released from the snail host, locate and penetrate the skin. The parasite infects various
organs in the body and feeds on red blood cells before reproducing.
Many of the eggs are released in feces and find their way into a waterway, where they are able to reinfect
the snail host. The eggs, which have a barb on them, can damage the vascular system of the human host,
causing ulceration, abscesses, and bloody diarrhea, wherever they reside, thereby allowing other pathogens
to cause secondary infections. In fact, it is the parasite’s eggs that produce most of the main ill effects of
schistosomiasis.Manyeggsdonotmakethetransitthroughtheveinsofthehostforelimination,andareswept
by blood flow back to the liver and other locations, where they can cause severe inflammation. In the liver, the
erranteggsmayimpedecirculationandcausecirrhosis.Controlisdifficultinimpoverishedareasinunsanitary,
crowded conditions, and prognosis is poor in people with heavy infections of Schistosoma japonicum, without
early treatment.
Thecestodes,ortapeworms,arealsointernalparasites,mainlyofvertebrates(Figure28.16).Tapeworms,such
as those of Taenia spp, live in the intestinal tract of the primary host and remain fixed using a sucker or hooks
on the anterior end, or scolex, of the tapeworm body, which is essentially a colony of similar subunits called
proglottids.Eachproglottidmaycontainanexcretorysystemwithflamecells,alongwithreproductivestructures,
both male and female. Because they are solong and flat, tapeworms do not need adigestive system; instead,
they absorb nutrients from the food matter surrounding them in the host’s intestine by diffusion.
Proglottids are produced at the scolex and gradually migrate to the end of the tapeworm; at this point, they
are “mature” and all structures except fertilized eggs have degenerated. Most reproduction occurs by cross-
fertilization between different worms in the same host, but may also occur between proglottids. The mature
proglottids detach from the body of the worm and are released into the feces of the organism. The eggs are
eatenbyanintermediatehost,typicallyanothervertebrate.Thejuvenileworminfectstheintermediatehostand
takes up residence, usually in muscle tissue. When the muscle tissue is consumed by the primary host, the
cycleiscompleted.Thereareseveraltapewormparasitesofhumansthataretransmittedbyeatinguncookedor
poorly cooked pork, beef, or fish.
Figure 28.16 Tapeworm life cycle. Tapeworm (Taenia spp.) infections occur when humans consume raw or
undercooked infected meat. (credit: modification of work by CDC)
PAGE: 819
808 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Phylum Rotifera
Therotifers ("wheel-bearer") belongtoagroupofmicroscopic(about 100µmto2mm)mostlyaquatic animals
that get their name from the corona—a pair of ciliated feeding structures that appear to rotate when viewed
under the light microscope (Figure 28.17). Although their taxonomic status is currently in flux, one treatment
places the rotifers in three classes: Bdelloidea, Monogononta, and Seisonidea. In addition, the parasitic “spiny
headedworms”currentlyinphylumAcanthocephala,appeartobemodifiedrotifersandwillprobablybeplaced
into the group in the near future. Undoubtedly the rotifers will continue to be revised as more phylogenetic
evidence becomes available.
The pseudocoelomate body of a rotifer is remarkably complex for such a small animal (roughly the size of a
Paramecium) and is divided into three sections: a head (which contains the corona), a trunk (which contains
mostoftheinternalorgans),andthefoot.Acuticle,rigidinsomespeciesandflexibleinothers,coversthebody
surface. They have both skeletal muscle associated with locomotion and visceral muscles associated with the
gut,bothcomposedofsinglecells.Rotifersaretypicallyfree-swimmingorplanktonic(drifting)organisms,butthe
toesorextensionsofthefootcansecreteastickymaterialtohelpthemadheretosurfaces.Theheadcontains
a number of eyespots and a bilobed “brain,” with nerves extending into the body.
Figure 28.17 Rotifers. Shown are examples from two of the three classes of rotifer. (a) Species from the class
Bdelloideaarecharacterizedbyalargecorona.Thewholeanimalsinthecenterofthisscanningelectronmicrograph
areshownsurroundedbyseveralsetsofjawsfromthemastaxofrotifers.(b)Polyarthra,fromthelargestrotiferclass
Monogononta,hasasmallercoronathanbdelloidrotifers,andasinglegonad,whichgivetheclassitsname.(credita:
modificationofworkbyDiegoFontaneto;creditb:modificationofworkbyU.S.EPA;scale-bardatafromCoryZanker)
Rotifers are commonly found in freshwater and some saltwater environments throughout the world. As filter
feeders, they will eat dead material, algae, and other microscopic living organisms, and are therefore very
importantcomponentsofaquaticfoodwebs.Arotifer'sfoodisdirectedtowardthemouthbythecurrentcreated
from the movement of the coronal cilia. The food particles enter the mouth and travel first to the mastax—a
muscular pharynx with toothy jaw-like structures. Examples of the jaws of various rotifers are seen in Figure
28.17a.Masticatedfoodpassesneardigestiveandsalivaryglands,intothestomach,andthentotheintestines.
Digestive and excretory wastes are collected in a cloacal bladder before being released out the anus.
Watch thisvideo (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/rotifers)to see rotifers feeding.
About 2,200 species of rotifers have been identified. Figure 28.18 shows the anatomy of a rotifer belonging
to class Bdelloidea. Some rotifers are dioecious organisms and exhibit sexual dimorphism (males and females
have different forms). In many dioecious species, males are short-lived and smaller with no digestive system
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 820
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 809
andasingletestis.Manyrotiferspeciesexhibithaplodiploidy,amethodofsexdeterminationinwhichafertilized
eggdevelopsintoafemaleandanunfertilizedeggdevelopsintoamale.However,reproductioninthebdelloid
rotifers is exclusively parthenogenetic and appears to have been so for millions of years: Thus, all bdelloid
rotifers and their progeny are female! The bdelloids may compensate for this genetic insularity by borrowing
genes from the DNA of other species. Up to 10% of a bdelloid genome comprises genes imported from
relatedspecies.Somerotifereggsarecapableofextendeddormancyforprotectionduringharshenvironmental
conditions.
Figure 28.18A bdelloid rotifer. This illustration shows the anatomy of a bdelloid rotifer.
Phylum Nemertea
The Nemertea are colloquially known as ribbon worms or proboscis worms. Most species of phylum Nemertea
are marine and predominantly benthic (bottom dwellers), with an estimated 900 known species. However,
nemerteans have been recorded in freshwater and very damp terrestrial habitats as well. Most nemerteans
are carnivores, feeding on worms, clams, and crustaceans. Some species are scavengers, and some, like
Malacobdella grossa, have also evolved commensal relationships with mollusks. Economically important
specieshaveattimesdevastatedcommercialfishingofclamsandcrabs.Nemerteanshavealmostnopredators
and two species are sold as fish bait.
Morphology
Nemerteansvaryinsizefrom1cmtoseveralmeters.Theyshowbilateralsymmetryandremarkablecontractile
properties. Because of their contractility, they can change their morphological presentation in response to
environmentalcues.AnimalsinphylumNemerteaaresoftandunsegmentedanimals,withamorphologylikea
flattened tube. (Figure 28.19).
PAGE: 821
810 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.19Aproboscisworm.Theproboscisworm(Parborlasiacorrugatus)isascavengerthatcombstheseafloor
forfood.ThespeciesisamemberofthephylumNemertea.ThespecimenshownherewasphotographedintheRoss
Sea, Antarctica. (credit: Henry Kaiser, National Science Foundation)
A unique characteristic of this phylum is the presence of an eversible proboscis enclosed in a pocket called a
rhynchocoel (not part of the animal's actual coelom). The proboscis is located dorsal to the gut and serves
as a harpoon or tentacle for food capture. In some species it is ornamented with barbs. The rhynchocoel is
a fluid-filled cavity that extends from the head to nearly two-thirds of the length of the gut in these animals
(Figure28.20).Theproboscismaybeextendedbyhydrostaticpressuregeneratedbycontractionofmuscleof
the rhynchocoel and retracted by a retractor muscle attached to the rear wall of the rhynchocoel.
Figure 28.20The anatomy of a Nemertean is shown.
Watch this video (https://www.openstaxcollege.org/l/nemertean) to see a nemertean attack a polychaete
with its proboscis.
Digestive System
The nemerteans, which are primarily predators of annelids and crustaceans, have a well-developed digestive
system.Amouthopeningthatisventraltotherhynchocoelleadsintotheforegut,followedbytheintestine.The
intestineispresentintheformofdiverticularpouchesandendsinarectumthatopensviaananus.Gonadsare
interspersed with the intestinal diverticular pouches and open outward via genital pores.
Nemerteansaresometimesclassifiedasacoels,butbecausetheirclosedcirculatorysystemisderivedfromthe
coelomiccavityoftheembryo,theymayberegardedascoelomic.Theircirculatorysystemconsistsofaclosed
loopformedbyaconnectedpairoflateralbloodvessels.Somespeciesmayalsohaveadorsalvesselorcross-
connecting vessels in addition to lateral ones. Although the circulatory fluid contains cells, it is often colorless.
However,thebloodcellsofsomespeciesbearhemoglobinaswellasotheryelloworgreenpigments.Theblood
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 822
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 811
vesselsarecontractile,althoughthereisusuallynoregularcirculatorypathway,andmovementofbloodisalso
facilitatedbythecontractionofmusclesinthebodywall.Thecirculationoffluidsintherhychocoelismoreorless
independent of the blood circulation, although blind branches from the blood vessels into the rhyncocoel wall
canmediateexchangeofmaterialsbetweenthem.Apairofprotonephridia,orexcretorytubules,ispresentin
these animals to facilitate osmoregulation. Gaseous exchange occurs through the skin.
Nervous System
Nemerteans have a "brain" composed of four ganglia situated at the anterior end, around the rhynchocoel.
Pairedlongitudinalnervecordsemergefromthebraingangliaandextendtotheposteriorend.Additionalnerve
cords are found in some species. Interestingly, the brain can contain hemoglobin, which acts as an oxygen
reserve. Ocelli or eyespots are present in pairs, in multiples of two in the anterior portion of the body. It is
speculated that the eyespots originate from neural tissue and not from the epidermis.
Reproduction
Nemerteans,likeflatworms,haveexcellentpowersofregeneration,andasexualreproductionbyfragmentation
is seen in some species. Most animals in phylum Nemertea are dioecious, although freshwater species may
be hermaphroditic. Stem cells that become gametes aggregate within gonads placed along the digestive tract.
Eggs and sperm are released into the water, and fertilization occurs externally. Like most lophotrochozoan
protostomes,cleavageisspiral,anddevelopmentisusuallydirect,althoughsomespecieshaveatrochophore-
likelarva,inwhichayoungwormisconstructedfromaseriesofimaginaldiscsthatbeginasinvaginationsfrom
the body surface of the larva.
28.4 | Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Molluscs and
Annelids
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the unique anatomical and morphological features of molluscs and annelids
• Describe the formation of the coelom
• Identify an important extracoelomic cavity in molluscs
• Describe the major body regions of Mollusca and how they vary in different molluscan classes
• Discuss the advantages of true body segmentation
• Describe the features of animals classified in phylum Annelida
The annelids and the mollusks are the most familiar of the lophotrochozoan protostomes. They are also more
“typical”lophotrochozoans,sincebothgroupsincludeaquaticspecieswithtrochophorelarvae,whichuniteboth
taxa in common ancestry. These phyla show how a flexible body plan can lead to biological success in terms
of abundance and species diversity. The phylum Mollusca has the second greatest number of species of all
animalphylawithnearly100,000describedextantspecies,andabout80,000describedextinctspecies.Infact,
it is estimated that about 25 percent of all known marine species are mollusks! The annelids and mollusca are
both bilaterally symmetrical, cephalized, triploblastic, schizocoelous eucoeolomates They include animals you
are likely to see in your backyard or on your dinner plate!
Phylum Mollusca
The name “Mollusca” means “soft” body, since the earliest descriptions of molluscs came from observations of
“squishy,” unshelled cuttlefish. Molluscs are predominantly a marine group of animals; however, they are also
known to inhabit freshwater as well as terrestrial habitats. This enormous phylum includes chitons, tusk shells,
snails,slugs,nudibranchs,seabutterflies,clams,mussels,oysters,squids,octopuses,andnautiluses.Molluscs
display a wide range of morphologies in each class and subclass, but share a few key characteristics (Figure
28.21).Thechieflocomotorstructureisusuallyamuscularfoot.Mostinternalorgansarecontainedinaregion
called the visceral mass. Overlying the visceral mass is a fold of tissue called the mantle; within the cavity
formedbythemantlearerespiratorystructurescalledgills,thattypicallyfoldoverthevisceralmass.Themouths
ofmostmollusks,exceptbivalves(e.g.,clams)containaspecializedfeedingorgancalledaradula,anabrasive
tonguelikestructure.Finally,themantlesecretesacalcium-carbonate-hardenedshellinmostmolluscs,although
PAGE: 823
812 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
this is greatly reduced in the class Cephalopoda, which contains the octopuses and squids.
Figure 28.21 Molluscan body regions. There are many species and variations of molluscs; this illustration
showstheanatomy ofanaquatic gastropod. Inaterrestrial gastropod, themantle cavityitself wouldserveasa
respiratory organ.
Which of the following statements about the anatomy of a mollusc is false?
1. Most molluscs have a radula for grinding food.
2. A digestive gland is connected to the stomach.
3. The tissue beneath the shell is called the mantle.
4. The digestive system includes a gizzard, a stomach, a digestive gland, and the intestine.
Themuscularfootistheventral-mostorgan,whereasthemantleisthelimitingdorsalorganthatfoldsoverthe
visceralmass.Thefoot,whichisusedforlocomotionandanchorage,variesinshapeandfunction,depending
onthetypeofmolluskunderstudy.Inshelledmollusks,thefootisusuallythesamesizeastheopeningofthe
shell.Thefootisbothretractableandextendable.IntheclassCephalopoda(“head-foot”),thefoottakestheform
of a funnel for expelling water at high velocity from the mantle cavity; and the anterior margin of the foot has
been modified into a circle ofarmsandtentacles.
The visceral mass is present above the foot, in the visceral hump. This mass contains digestive, nervous,
excretory, reproductive, and respiratory systems. Molluscan species that are exclusively aquatic have gills that
extendintothemantlecavity,whereassometerrestrialspecieshave"lungs"formedfromtheliningofthemantle
cavity. Mollusks are schizocoelous eucoelomates, but the coelomic cavity in adult animals has been largely
reducedtoacavityaroundtheheart.However,areducedcoelomsometimessurroundsthegonads,partofthe
kidneys,andintestine aswell.Thisoverallcoelomicreductionmakesthemantlecavitythemajorinternalbody
chamber.
Most mollusks have a special rasp-like organ, the radula, which bears chitinous filelike teeth. The radula is
present in all groups except the bivalves, and serves to shred or scrape food before it enters the digestive
tract. The mantle (also known as the pallium) is the dorsal epidermis in mollusks; all mollusks except some
cephalopods are specialized to secrete a calcareous shell that protects the animal's soft body.
Mostmollusksaredioeciousanimalsandfertilizationoccursexternally,althoughthisisnotthecaseinterrestrial
mollusks, such as snails and slugs, or in cephalopods. In most aquatic mollusks, the zygote hatches and
produces a trochophore larva, with several bands of cilia around a toplike body, and an additional apical tuft
ofcilia.Insomespecies,thetrochophoremaybefollowedbyadditionallarvalstages,suchasaveligerlarvae,
beforethefinalmetamorphosistotheadultform.Mostcephalopodsdevelopdirectlyintosmallversionsoftheir
adult form.
Classification of Phylum Mollusca
PhylumMolluscacomprisesaverydiversegroupoforganismsthatexhibitsadramaticvarietyofforms,ranging
fromchitonstosnailstosquids,thelatterofwhichtypicallyshowahighdegreeofintelligence.Thisvariabilityisa
consequenceofmodificationofthebasicbodyregions,especiallythefootandmantle.Thephylumisorganized
intoeightclasses:Caudofoveata,Solenogastres,Monoplacophora,Polyplacophora,Gastropoda,Cephalopoda,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 824
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 813
Bivalvia,andScaphopoda.Althougheachmolluscanclassappearstobemonophyletic,theirrelationshiptoone
another is unclear and still being reviewed.
Both the Caudofoveata and the Solenogastres include shell-less, worm-like animals primarily found in benthic
marine habitats. Although these animals lack a calcareous shell, they get some protection from calcareous
spiculesembeddedinacuticlethatcoverstheirepidermis.Themantlecavityisreduced,andbothgroupslack
eyes, tentacles, and nephridia (excretory organs). The Caudofoveata possess a radula, but the Solenogastres
do not have a radula or gills. The foot is also reduced in the Solenogastres and absent from the Caudofoveata.
Longthoughttobeextinct,thefirstlivingspecimensofMonoplacophora,Neopilinagalatheae,werediscovered
in 1952 on the ocean bottom near the west coast of Costa Rica. Today there are over 25 described species.
MembersofclassMonoplacophora(“bearingoneplate”)possessasingle,cap-likeshellthatcoversthedorsal
body.Themorphologyoftheshellandtheunderlyinganimalcanvaryfromcirculartoovate.Theyhaveasimple
radula, a looped digestive system, multiple pairs of excretory organs, and a pair of gonads. Multiple gills are
located between the foot and the edge of the mantle.
AnimalsinclassPolyplacophora(“bearingmanyplates”)arecommonlyknownas“chitons”andbeareightlimy
plates that make up the dorsal shell (Figure 28.22). These animals have a broad, ventral foot that is adapted
forsuctionontorocksandothersubstrates,andamantlethatextendsbeyondtheedgeoftheshell.Calcareous
spinesontheexposedmantleedgeprovideprotectionfrompredators.Respirationisfacilitatedbymultiplepairs
of gills in the mantle cavity. Blood from the gills is collected in a posterior heart, and then sent to the rest of
the body in a hemocoel—an open circulation system in which the blood is contained in connected chambers
surroundingvariousorgansratherthanwithinindividualbloodvessels.Theradula,whichhasteethcomposedof
anultra-hardmagnetite,isusedtoscrapefoodorganismsoffrockysurfaces.Chitonteethhavebeenshownto
exhibitthegreatesthardnessandstiffnessofanybiomineralmaterialreportedtodate,beingasmuchasthree-
times harder than human enamel and the calcium carbonate-based shells of mollusks.
Thenervoussystemisrudimentarywithonlybuccalor“cheek”gangliapresentattheanteriorend.Multipletiny
sensorystructures,includingphotosensors,extendfromthemantleintochannelsintheupperlayeroftheshell.
Thesestructuresarecalledesthetesandareuniquetothechitons.Anothersensorystructureundertheradula
is used to sample the feeding environment. A single pair of nephridia is used for the excretion of nitrogenous
wastes.
Figure 28.22 A chiton. This chiton from the class Polyplacaphora has the eight-plated shell for which its class is
named. (credit: Jerry Kirkhart)
Class Bivalvia (“two-valves”) includes clams, oysters, mussels, scallops, geoducks, and shipworms. Some
bivalves are almost microscopic, while others, in the genus Tridacna, may be one meter in length and weigh
225kilograms.Membersofthisclassarefoundinmarineaswellasfreshwaterhabitats.Asthenamesuggests,
bivalves are enclosed in two-part valves or shells (Figure 28.23a) fused on the dorsal side by hinge ligaments
as well as shell teeth on the ventral side that keep the two halves aligned. The two shells, which consist of an
outer organic layer, a middle prismatic layer, and a very smooth nacreous layer, are joined at the oldest part
of the shell called the umbo. Anterior and posterior adductor and abductor muscles close and open the shell
respectively.
The overall body of the bivalve is laterally flattened; the foot is wedge-shaped; and the head region is poorly
developed(withnoobviousmouth).Bivalvesarefilter-feeders,andaradulaisabsentinthisclassofmollusks.
Themantlecavityisfusedalongtheedgesexceptforopeningsforthefootandfortheintakeandexpulsionof
PAGE: 825
814 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
water,whichiscirculatedthroughthemantlecavitybytheactionsoftheincurrentandexcurrentsiphons.During
waterintakebytheincurrentsiphon,foodparticlesarecapturedbythepairedposteriorgills(ctenidia)andthen
carried by the movement of cilia forward to the mouth. Excretion and osmoregulation are performed by a pair
ofnephridia.Eyespotsandothersensorystructuresarelocatedalongtheedgeofthemantleinsomespecies.
The "eyes" are especially conspicuous in scallops (Figure 28.23b). Three pairs of connected ganglia regulate
activity of different body structures.
Figure 28.23 Bivalves. These mussels (a), found in the intertidal zone in Cornwall, England, show the bivalve shell.
The scallop Argopecten irradians (b) has a fluted shell and conspicuous eyespots. (credit (a): Mark A. Wilson.
credit (b) Rachael Norris and Marina Freudzon. https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=17251065
(http://openstax.org/l/scallop_eyes))
Oneofthefunctionsofthemantleistosecretetheshell.Somebivalves,likeoystersandmussels,possessthe
unique ability to secrete and deposit a calcareous nacre or “mother of pearl” around foreign particles that may
enter the mantle cavity. This property has been commercially exploited to produce pearls.
Watch the animations of bivalves feeding: View the process in clams (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/clams)
andmussels (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/mussels)at these sites.
More than half of molluscan species are in the class Gastropoda (“stomach foot”), which includes well-known
mollusks like snails, slugs, conchs, cowries, limpets, and whelks. Aquatic gastropods include both marine and
freshwater species, and all terrestrial mollusks are gastropods. Gastropoda includes shell-bearing species as
well as species without shells. Gastropod bodies are asymmetrical and usually present a coiled shell (Figure
28.24a). Shells may be planospiral (like a garden hose wound up), commonly seen in garden snails, or
conispiral, (like a spiral staircase), commonly seen in marine conches. Cowrie shells have a polished surface
because the mantle extends up over the top of the shell as it is secreted.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 826
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 815
Figure28.24Gastropods.Snails(a)andslugs(b)arebothgastropods,butslugslackashell.(credita:modificationof
work by Murray Stevenson; credit b: modification of work by Rosendahl)
A key characteristic of some gastropods is the embryonic development of torsion. During this process, the
mantleandvisceralmassarerotatedaroundtheperpendicularaxisoverthecenterofthefoottobringtheanal
openingforwardjustbehindthehead(Figure28.25),creatingaverypeculiarsituation.Theleftgill,kidney,and
heart atrium are now on the right side, whereas the original right gill, kidney, and heart atrium are on the left
side.Evenstranger,thenervecordshavebeentwistedandcontortedintoafigure-eightpattern.Becauseofthe
spacemadeavailablebytorsioninthemantlecavity,theanimal’ssensitiveheadendcannowbewithdrawninto
theprotectionoftheshell,andthetougherfoot(andsometimestheprotectivecoveringoroperculum)formsa
barriertotheoutside.Thestrangearrangementthatresultsfromtorsionposesaserioussanitationproblemby
creating the possibility of wastes being washed back over the gills, causing fouling. There is actually no really
perfect explanation for the embryonic development of torsion, and some groups that formerly exhibited torsion
in their ancestral groups are now known to have reversed the process.
Gastropods also have a foot that is modified for crawling. Most gastropods have a well-defined head with
tentacles and eyes. A complex radula is used to scrape up food particles. In aquatic gastropods, the mantle
cavity encloses the gills (ctenidia), but in land gastropods, the mantle itself is the major respiratory structure,
acting as a kind of lung.Nephridia(“kidneys”) are also found in the mantle cavity.
Figure28.25Torsioningastropods.Duringembryonicdevelopmentofsomegastropods,thevisceralmassundergoes
torsion, or counterclockwise rotation of the visceral anatomical features. As a result, the anus of the adult animal is
locatedoverthehead.Althoughtorsionisalwayscounterclockwise,theshellmaycoilineitherdirection;thuscoiling
of a shell isnotthe same as torsion of the visceral mass.
PAGE: 827
816 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Can Snail Venom Be Used as a Pharmacological Painkiller?
Marine snails of the genus Conus (Figure 28.26) attack prey with a venomous stinger, modified from the
radula.Thetoxinreleased,knownasconotoxin,isapeptidewithinternaldisulfidelinkages.Conotoxinscan
bring about paralysis in humans, indicating that this toxin attacks neurological targets. Some conotoxins
havebeenshowntoblockneuronalionchannels.Thesefindingshaveledresearcherstostudyconotoxins
for possible medical applications.
Conotoxins are an exciting area of potential pharmacological development, since these peptides may be
possibly modified and used in specific medical conditions to inhibit the activity of specific neurons. For
example,conotoxinsormodificationsofthemmaybeusedtoinduceparalysisinmusclesinspecifichealth
applications,similartotheuseofbotulinumtoxin.Sincetheentirespectrumofconotoxins,aswellastheir
mechanismsofaction,isnotcompletelyknown,thestudyoftheirpotentialapplicationsisstillinitsinfancy.
Most research to date has focused on their use to treat neurological diseases. They have also shown
some efficacy in relieving chronic pain, and the pain associated with conditions like sciatica and shingles.
The study and use of biotoxins—toxins derived from living organisms—are an excellent example of the
application of biological science to modern medicine.
Figure 28.26 Conus. Members of the genus Conus produce neurotoxins that may one day have medical uses.
The tube above the eyes is a siphon used both to circulate water over the gills and to sample the water for
chemicalevidenceofpreynearby.Notetheeyesbelowthesiphon.Theproboscis,throughwhichthevenomous
harpoon is projected, is located between the eyes. (credit: David Burdick, NOAA)
Class Cephalopoda (“head foot” animals), includes octopuses, squids, cuttlefish, and nautiluses. Cephalopods
includebothanimalswithshellsaswellasanimalsinwhichtheshellisreducedorabsent.Intheshell-bearing
Nautilus,thespiralshellismulti-chambered.Thesechambersarefilledwithgasorwatertoregulatebuoyancy.
A siphuncle runs through the chambers, and it is this tube that regulates the amount of water and gases
(nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and oxygen mixture) present in the chambers. Ammonites and other nautiloid shells
are commonly seen in the fossil record. The shell structure in squids and cuttlefish is reduced and is present
internally in the form of a squid pen and cuttlefish bone, respectively. Cuttle bone is sold in pet stores to help
smooththebeaksofbirdsandalsotoprovidebirdssuchasegg-layingchickensandquailwithaninexpensive
natural source of calcium carbonate. Examples of cephalopods are shown inFigure 28.27.
Cephalopodscandisplayvividandrapidlychangingcoloration,almostlikeflashingneonsigns.Typicallythese
flashing displays are seen in squids and octopuses, where they may be used for camouflage and possibly
as signals for mating displays. We should note, however, that researchers are not entirely sure if squid can
actually see color, or see color in the same way as we do. We know that pigments in the skin are contained
in special pigment cells ( chromatophores), which can expand or contract to produce different color patterns.
Butchromatophorescanonlymakeyellow,red,brown,andblackpigmentation;however,underneaththemisa
wholedifferentsetofelementscallediridophoresandleucophoresthatreflectlightandcanmakeblue,green,
and white. It is possible that squid skin might actually be able to detect some light on its own, without even
needing its eyes!
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 828
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 817
Allanimalsinthisclassarecarnivorouspredatorsandhavebeak-likejawsinadditiontotheradula.Cephalopods
includethemostintelligentofthemollusks,andhaveawell-developednervoussystemalongwithimage-forming
eyes. Unlike other mollusks, they have a closed circulatory system, in which the blood is entirely contained in
vessels rather than in a hemocoel.
Thefootislobedandsubdividedintoarmsandtentacles.Suckerswithchitinizedringsarepresentonthearms
and tentacles of octopuses and squid. Siphons are well developed and the expulsion of water is used as their
primary mode of locomotion, which resembles jet propulsion. Gills (ctenidia) are attached to the wall of the
mantle cavity and are serviced by large blood vessels, each with its own heart. A pair of nephridia is present
within the mantle cavity for water balance and excretion of nitrogenous wastes. Cephalopods such as squids
andoctopusesalsoproducesepiaoradarkink,whichcontainsmelanin.Theinkglandislocatedbetweenthe
gillsandcanbereleasedintotheexcurrentwaterstream.Inkcloudscanbeusedeitherasa“smokescreen”to
hidetheanimalfrompredatorsduringaquickattemptatescape,ortocreateafakeimagetodistractpredators.
Cephalopodsaredioecious.Membersofaspeciesmate,andthefemalethenlaystheeggsinasecludedand
protected niche. Females of some species care for the eggs for an extended period of time and may end up
dyingduringthattimeperiod.Whilemostotheraquaticmollusksproducetrochophorelarvae,cephalopodeggs
develop directly into a juvenile without an intervening larval stage.
Figure 28.27 Cephalopods. The (a) nautilus, (b) giant cuttlefish, (c) reef squid, and (d) blue-ring octopus are all
members of the class Cephalopoda. (credit a: modification of work by J. Baecker; credit b: modification of work by
Adrian Mohedano; credit c: modification of work by Silke Baron; credit d: modification of work by Angell Williams)
Members of class Scaphopoda (“boat feet”) are known colloquially as “tusk shells” or “tooth shells,” as evident
when examining Dentalium, one of the few remaining scaphopod genera (Figure 28.28). Scaphopods are
usually buried in sand with the anterior opening exposed to water. These animals have a single conical shell,
whichisopenonbothends.Theheadisnotwelldeveloped,butthemouth,containingaradula,opensamong
agroupoftentaclesthatterminateinciliatedbulbsusedtocatchandmanipulateprey.Scaphopodsalsohavea
footsimilartothatseeninbivalves.Ctenidiaareabsentintheseanimals;themantlecavityformsatubeopenat
both ends and serves as the respiratory structure in these animals.
PAGE: 829
818 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.28Toothshells.AntalisvulgarisshowstheclassicDentaliidaeshapethatgivestheseanimalstheircommon
name of "tusk shell." (credit: Georges Jansoone)
Phylum Annelida
Phylum Annelida comprises the true, segmented worms. These animals are found in marine, terrestrial, and
freshwater habitats, but the presence of water or humidity is a critical factor for their survival in terrestrial
habitats. The annelids are often called “segmented worms” due to their key characteristic of metamerism, or
true segmentation. Approximately 16,500 species have been described in phylum Annelida, which includes
polychaete worms (marine annelids with multiple appendages), and oligochaetes (earthworms and leeches).
Some animals in this phylum show parasitic and commensal symbioses with other species in their habitat.
Morphology
Annelidsdisplaybilateralsymmetryandareworm-likeinoverallmorphology.Thenameofthephylumisderived
from the Latin word annullus, which means a small ring, an apt description of the ring-like segmentation of
the body. Annelids have a body plan with metameric segmentation, in which several internal and external
morphological features are repeated in each body segment. Metamerism allows animals to become bigger by
adding“compartments,”whilemakingtheirmovementmoreefficient.Theoverallbodycanbedividedintohead,
body,andpygidium(ortail).Duringdevelopment,thesegmentsbehindtheheadarisesequentiallyfromagrowth
region anterior to the pygidium, a pattern called teloblastic growth. In the Oligochaetes, the clitellum is a
reproductive structure that generates mucus to aid sperm transfer and also produces a “cocoon,” within which
fertilization occurs; it appears as a permanent, fused band located on the anterior third of the animal (Figure
28.29).
Figure28.29Theclitellumofanearthworm.Theclitellum,seenhereasaprotrudingsegmentwithdifferentcoloration
than the rest of the body, is a structure that aids in oligochaete reproduction. (credit: Rob Hille)
Anatomy
The epidermis is protected by a collagenous, external cuticle, which is much thinner than the cuticle found in
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 830
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 819
theecdysozoansanddoesnotrequireperiodicsheddingforgrowth.Circularaswellaslongitudinalmusclesare
locatedinteriortotheepidermis.Chitinousbristlescalledsetae(orchaetae)areanchoredintheepidermis,each
with its own muscle. In the polychaetes, the setae are borne on paired appendages calledparapodia.
Mostannelidshaveawell-developedandcompletedigestivesystem.Feedingmechanismsvarywidelyacross
the phylum. Some polychaetes are filter-feeders that use feather-like appendages to collect small organisms.
Othershavetentacles,jaws,oraneversiblepharynxtocaptureprey.Earthwormscollectsmallorganismsfrom
soil as they burrow through it, and most leeches are blood-feeders armed with teeth or a muscular proboscis.
Inearthworms,thedigestivetractincludesamouth,muscularpharynx,esophagus,crop,andmusculargizzard.
The gizzard leads to the intestine, which ends in an anal opening in the terminal segment. A cross-sectional
viewofabodysegmentofanearthwormisshowninFigure28.30;eachsegmentislimitedbyamembranous
septum that divides the coelomic cavity into a series of compartments.
Most annelids possess a closed circulatory system of dorsal and ventral blood vessels that run parallel to the
alimentarycanalaswellascapillariesthatserviceindividualtissues.Inaddition,thedorsalandventralvessels
are connected by transverse loops in every segment. Some polychaetes and leeches have an open system
in which the major blood vessels open into a hemocoel. In many species, the blood contains hemoglobin, but
notcontainedincells.Annelidslackawell-developedrespiratorysystem,andgasexchangeoccursacrossthe
moist body surface. In the polychaetes, the parapodia are highly vascular and serve as respiratory structures.
Excretionisfacilitatedbyapairofmetanephridia(atypeofprimitive“kidney”thatconsistsofaconvolutedtubule
and an open, ciliated funnel) that is present in every segment toward the ventral side. Annelids show well-
developed nervoussystemswith aringoffused gangliapresent aroundthepharynx. Thenervecordisventral
in position and bears enlarged nodes or ganglia in each segment.
Figure28.30Segmentalanatomyofanearthworm.Thisschematicdrawingshowsthebasicanatomyofannelidsina
cross-sectional view.
Annelids may be either monoecious with permanent gonads (as in earthworms and leeches) or dioecious
with temporary or seasonal gonads (as in polychaetes). However, cross-fertilization is preferred even in
hermaphroditic animals. Earthworms may show simultaneous mutual fertilization when they are aligned for
copulation. Some leeches change their sex over their reproductive lifetimes. In most polychaetes, fertilization
is external and development includes a trochophore larva, which then metamorphoizes to the adult form. In
oligochaetes, fertilization is typically internal and the fertilized eggs develop in a cocoon produced by the
clitellum;developmentisdirect.Polychaetesareexcellentregeneratorsandsomeevenreproduceasexuallyby
budding or fragmentation.
PAGE: 831
820 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
This combination video and animation (http://shapeoflife.org/video/animation/annelid-animation-body-
plan)provides a close-up look at annelid anatomy.
Classification of Phylum Annelida
Phylum Annelida contains the class Polychaeta (the polychaetes) and the class Oligochaeta (the earthworms,
leeches,andtheirrelatives).Theearthwormsandtheleechesformamonophyleticcladewithinthepolychaetes,
which are therefore paraphyletic as a group.
There are more than 22,000 different species of annelids, and more than half of these are marine polychaetes
("many bristles"). In the polychaetes, bristles are arranged in clusters on their parapodia—fleshy, flat, paired
appendages that protrude from each segment. Many polychaetes use their parapodia to crawl along the sea
floor,butothersareadaptedforswimmingorfloating.Somearesessile,livingintubes.Somepolychaeteslive
nearhydrothermalvents.Thesedeepwatertubewormshavenodigestivetract,buthaveasymbioticrelationship
with bacteria living in their bodies.
Earthworms are the most abundant members of the class Oligochaeta ("few bristles"), distinguished by the
presence of a permanent clitellum as well as the small number of reduced chaetae on each segment. (Recall
that oligochaetes do not have parapodia.) The oligochaete subclass Hirudinea, includes leeches such as
the medicinal leech, Hirudo medicinalis, which is effective at increasing blood circulation and breaking up
blood clots, and thus can be used to treat some circulatory disorders and cardiovascular diseases. Their use
goes back thousands of years. These animals produce a seasonal clitellum, unlike the permanent clitellum
of other oligochaetes. A significant difference between leeches and other annelids is the lack of setae and
the development of suckers at the anterior and posterior ends, which are used to attach to the host animal.
Additionally, in leeches, the segmentation of the body wall may not correspond to the internal segmentation of
thecoelomiccavity.Thisadaptationpossiblyhelpstheleechestoelongatewhentheyingestcopiousquantities
ofbloodfromhostvertebrates,aconditioninwhichtheyaresaidtobe“engorged.”ThesubclassBrachiobdella
includes tiny leechlike worms that attach themselves to the gills or body surface of crayfish.
Figure28.31Annelidgroups.The(a)earthworm,(b)leech,and(c)featherdusterareallannelids.Theearthwormand
leechareoligochaetes,whilethefeatherdusterwormisatube-dwellingfilter-feedingpolychaete.(credita:modification
of work by S. Shepherd; credit b: modification of work by “Sarah G...”/Flickr; credit c: modification of work by Chris
Gotschalk, NOAA)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 832
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 821
28.5 | Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Nematodes and
Tardigrades
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the structural organization of nematodes
• Describe the importance of Caenorhabditis elegans in research
• Describe the features of Tardigrades
Superphylum Ecdysozoa
ThesuperphylumEcdysozoacontainsanincrediblylargenumberofspecies.Thisisbecauseitcontainstwoof
themostdiverseanimalgroups:phylumNematoda(theroundworms)andphylumArthropoda(thearthropods).
Themostprominentdistinguishingfeatureofecdysozoansisthecuticle—atough,butflexibleexoskeletonthat
protects these animals from water loss, predators, and other dangers of the external environment. One small
phylum within the Ecdysozoa, with exceptional resistance to desiccation and other environmental hazards, is
theTardigrada.Thenematodes,tardigrades,andarthropodsallbelongtothesuperphylumEcdysozoa,whichis
believed to be monophyletic—a clade consisting of all evolutionary descendants from one common ancestor.
All members of this superphylum periodically go through a molting process that culminates in ecdysis—the
actualsheddingoftheoldexoskeleton.(Theterm“ecdysis”translatesroughlyas“takeoff”or“strip.”)Duringthe
molting process, old cuticle is replaced by a new cuticle, which is secreted beneath it, and which will last until
the next growth period.
Phylum Nematoda
TheNematoda,likeothermembersofthesuperphylumEcdysozoa,aretriploblasticandpossessanembryonic
mesoderm that is sandwiched between the ectoderm and endoderm. They are also bilaterally symmetrical,
meaningthatalongitudinalsectionwilldividethemintorightandleftsidesthataresuperficiallysymmetrical.In
contrast with flatworms, nematodes are pseudocoelomates and show a tubular morphology and circular cross-
section. Nematodes include both free-living and parasitic forms.
In1914,N.A.Cobbsaid,“Inshort,ifallthematterintheuniverseexceptthenematodesweresweptaway,our
worldwouldstillbedimlyrecognizable,andif,asdisembodiedspirits,wecouldtheninvestigateit,weshouldfind
its mountains, hills, vales, rivers, lakes and oceans represented by a thin film of nematodes...” To paraphrase
Cobb, nematodes are so abundant that if all the non-nematode matter of the biosphere were removed, there
[1]
wouldstillremainashadowoftheformerworldoutlinedbynematodes! ThephylumNematodaincludesmore
than 28,000 species with an estimated 16,000 being parasitic in nature. However, nematologists believe there
may be over one million unclassified species.
The name Nematoda is derived from the Greek word “Nemos,” which means “thread,” and includes all true
roundworms. Nematodes are present in all habitats, typically with each species occurring in great abundance.
The free-living nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, has been extensively used as a model system for many
different avenues of biological inquiry in laboratories all over the world.
Morphology
The cylindrical bodyformofthe nematodes isseeninFigure 28.32.These animalshaveacomplete digestive
systemwithadistinctmouthandanus,whereasonlyoneopeningispresentinthedigestivetractofflatworms.
The mouth opens into a muscular pharynx and intestine, which leads to a rectum and anal opening at the
posteriorend.Theepidermiscanbeeitherasinglelayerofcellsorasyncytium—amultinucleatedtissuethat
in this case is formed by the fusion of many single cells. The cuticle of nematodes is rich in collagen and a
polymercalledchitin,whichformsaprotectivearmoroutsidetheepidermis.Thecuticleextendsintobothends
of the digestive tract, the pharynx, and rectum. In the head, an anterior mouth opening is composed of three
(or six) “lips” as well as teeth derived from the cuticle (in some species). Some nematodes may present other
modifications of the cuticle such as rings, head shields, or warts. These external rings, however, do not reflect
true internal body segmentation, which as we have seen is a hallmark of phylum Annelida. The attachment of
1. Stoll, N. R., “This wormy world. 1947,”Journal of Parasitology85(3) (1999): 392-396.
PAGE: 833
822 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
themusclesofnematodesdiffersfromthatofmostanimals:theyhavealongitudinallayeronly,andtheirdirect
attachmenttothedorsalandventralnervecordscreatesastrongmuscularcontractionthatresultsinawhiplike,
almost spastic, body movement.
Figure 28.32 Nematode morphology. Scanning electron micrograph shows (a) the soybean cyst nematode
(Heteroderaglycines)andanematodeegg.(b)Aschematicrepresentationshowstheanatomyofatypicalnematode.
(credit a: modification of work by USDA ARS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Excretory System
In nematodes, specialized excretory systems are not well developed. Nitrogenous wastes, largely in the form
of ammonia, are released directly across the body wall. In some nematodes, osmoregulation and salt balance
are performed by simple excretory cells or glands that may be connected to paired canals that release wastes
throughananteriorpore.Inmarinenematodes,theexcretorycellsarecalledrenettecells,whichareuniqueto
nematodes.
Nervous system
Mostnematodeshavefourlongitudinalnervecordsthatrunalongthelengthofthebodyindorsal,ventral,and
lateral positions. The ventral nerve cord is better developed than the dorsal and lateral cords. Nonetheless,
all nerve cords fuse at the anterior end, to form a pharyngeal nerve ring around the pharynx, which acts as
the head ganglion or the “brain” of the roundworm. A similar fusion forms a posterior ganglion at the tail. In C.
elegans, the nervous system accounts for nearly one-third of the total number of cells in the animal!
Reproduction
Nematodes employ a variety of reproductive strategies ranging from monoecious to dioecious to
parthenogenetic, depending upon the species. C. elegans is a mostly monoecious species with both self-
fertilizing hermaphroditesandsomemales.Inthehermaphrodites, ovaandspermdevelopatdifferenttimesin
the same gonad. Ova are contained in a uterus and amoeboid sperm are contained in a spermatheca ("sperm
receptacle").Theuterushasanexternalopeningknownasthevulva.Thefemalegenitalporeisnearthemiddle
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 834
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 823
ofthebody,whereasthemalegenitalporeisnearertothetip.Inanatomicalmales,specializedstructurescalled
copulatory spicules at the tail of the male keep him in place and open the vulva of the female into which the
amoeboid sperm travel into the spermatheca.
Fertilization is internal, and embryonic development starts very soon after fertilization. The embryo is released
fromthevulvaduringthegastrulationstage.Theembryonicdevelopmentstagelastsfor14hours;development
then continues through four successive larval stages with molting and ecdysis taking place between each
stage—L1,L2,L3,andL4—ultimatelyleadingtothedevelopmentofayoungadultworm.Adverseenvironmental
conditionssuchasovercrowdingorlackoffoodcanresultintheformationofanintermediatelarvalstageknown
as the dauer larva. An unusual feature of some nematodes is eutely: the body of a given species contains a
specific number of cells as the consequence of a rigid developmental pathway.
PAGE: 835
824 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
C. elegans: The Model System for Linking Developmental Studies
with Genetics
Ifbiologistswantedtoresearchhownicotinedependencedevelopsinthebody,howlipidsareregulated,or
observetheattractantorrepellantpropertiesofcertainodors,theywouldclearlyneedtodesignthreevery
different experiments. However, they might only need one subject of study: Caenorhabditis elegans. The
nematodeC.eleganswasbroughtintothefocusofmainstreambiologicalresearchbyDr.SydneyBrenner.
Since1963,Dr.Brennerandscientistsworldwidehaveusedthisanimalasamodelsystemtostudymany
different physiological and developmental mechanisms.
C. elegans is a free-living nematode found in soil. Only about a millimeter long, it can be cultured on agar
plates (10,000 worms/plate!), feeding on the common intestinal bacterium Escherichia coli (another long-
term resident of biological laboratories worldwide), and therefore can be readily grown and maintained in
a laboratory. The biggest asset of this nematode is its transparency, which helps researchers to observe
and monitor changes within the animal with ease. It is also a simple organism with about 1,000 cells and
a genome of only 20,000 genes. Its chromosomes are organized into five pairs of autosomes plus a pair
of sex chromosomes, making it an ideal candidate with which to study genetics. Since every cell can be
visualizedandidentified,thisorganismisusefulforstudyingcellularphenomenalikecell-to-cellinteractions,
cell-fate determinations, cell division, apoptosis (cell death), and intracellular transport.
Another tremendous asset is the short life cycle of this worm (Figure 28.33). It takes only three days
to achieve the “egg to adult to daughter egg”; therefore, the developmental consequences of genetic
changes can be quickly identified. The total life span of C. elegans is two to three weeks; hence, age-
related phenomena are also easy to observe. There are two sexes in this species: hermaphrodites (XX)
and males (XO). However, anatomical males are relatively infrequently obtained from matings between
hermaphrodites, since their XO chromosome composition requires meiotic nondisjunction when both
parentsareXX.AnotherfeaturethatmakesC.elegansanexcellentexperimentalmodelisthattheposition
and number of the 959 cells present in adult hermaphrodites of this organism is constant. This feature is
extremelysignificantwhenstudyingcelldifferentiation,cell-to-cellcommunication,andapoptosis.Lastly,C.
elegansisalsoamenabletogeneticmanipulationsusingmolecularmethods,roundingoffitsusefulnessas
a model system.
Biologists worldwide have created information banks and groups dedicated to research using C. elegans.
Their findings have led, for example, to better understandings of cell communication during development,
neuronal signaling, and insight into lipid regulation (which is important in addressing health issues like the
development of obesity and diabetes). In recent years, studies have enlightened the medical community
withabetterunderstandingofpolycystickidneydisease.Thissimpleorganismhasledbiologiststocomplex
and significant findings, growing the field of science in ways that touch the everyday world.
Figure 28.33 Caenorhabditis elegans. (a) This light micrograph shows the bodies of a group of roundworms.
These hermaphrodites consist of exactly 959 cells. (b) The life cycle of C. elegans has four juvenile stages (L1
through L4) and an adult stage. Under ideal conditions, the nematode spends a set amount of time at each
juvenile stage, but under stressful conditions, it may enter a dauer state that does not age significantly and is
somewhatanalogoustothediapausingstateofsomeinsects.(credita:modificationofworkby“snickclunk”/Flickr:
credit b: modification of work by NIDDK, NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 836
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 825
Parasitic Nematodes
A number of common parasitic nematodes serve as prime examples of parasitism (endoparasitism). These
economically and medically important animals exhibit complex life cycles that often involve multiple hosts, and
they can have significant medical and veterinary impacts. Here is a partial list of nasty nematodes: Humans
may become infected by Dracunculus medinensis, known as guinea worms, when they drink unfiltered water
containing copepods (Figure 28.34), an intermediate crustacean host. Hookworms, such as Ancylostoma and
Necator,infesttheintestinesandfeedonthebloodofmammals,especiallyofdogs,cats,andhumans.Trichina
worms (Trichinella) are the causal organism of trichinosis in humans, often resulting from the consumption of
undercookedpork;Trichinellacaninfectothermammalianhostsaswell.Ascaris,alargeintestinalroundworm,
stealsnutritionfromitshumanhostandmaycreatephysicalblockageoftheintestines.Thefilarialworms,such
as Dirofilaria and Wuchereria, are commonly vectored by mosquitoes, which pass the infective agents among
mammals through their blood-sucking activity. One species, Wuchereria bancrofti, infects the lymph nodes of
over120millionpeopleworldwide,usuallyproducinganon-lethalbutdeformingconditioncalledelephantiasis.
In this disease, parts of the body often swell to gigantic proportions due to obstruction of lymphatic drainage,
inflammation of lymphatic tissues, and resulting edema. Dirofilaria immitis, a blood-infective parasite, is the
notorious dog heartworm species.
PAGE: 837
826 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.34Lifecycleoftheguineaworm.TheguineawormDracunculusmedinensisinfectsabout3.5millionpeople
annually, mostly in Africa. (a) Here, the worm is wrapped around a stick so it can be slowly extracted. (b) Infection
occurs when people consume water contaminated by infected copepods, but this can easily be prevented by simple
filtration systems. (credit: modification of work by CDC)
Phylum Tardigrada
Thetardigrades("slow-steppers")compriseaphylumofinconspicuouslittleanimalslivinginmarine,freshwater,
or damp terrestrial environments throughout the world. They are commonly called "water bears" because of
their plump bodies and the large claws on their stubby legs. There are over 1,000 species, most of which are
less than 1 mm in length. A chitinous cuticle covers the body surface and may be divided into plates (Figure
28.35). Tardigrades are known for their ability to enter a state called cryptobiosis, which provides them with
areresistancetomultipleenvironmentalchallenges,includingdesiccation,verylowtemperatures,vacuum,high
pressure, and radiation. They can suspend their metabolic activity for years, and survive the loss of up to 99%
of their water content. Their remarkable resistance has recently been attributed to unique proteins that replace
water in their cells and protect their internal cell structure and their DNA from damage.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 838
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 827
Figure 28.35 Scanning electronmicrograph of Milnesium tardigradum. (credit: Schokraie E, Warnken U, Hotz-
Wagenblatt A, Grohme MA, Hengherr S, et al. (2012) -https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/
index.php?curid=22716809 (http://openstax.org/l/waterbear))
Morphology and Physiology
Tardigrades have cylindrical bodies, with four pairs of legs terminating in a number of claws. The cuticle is
periodicallyshed,includingthecuticularcoveringoftheclaws.Thefirstthreepairsoflegsareusedforwalking,
and the posterior pair for clinging to the substrate. A circular mouth leads to a muscular pharynx and salivary
glands. Tardigrades feed on plants, algae, or small animals. Plant cells are pierced with a chitinous stylet and
the cellular contents are then sucked into the gut by the muscular pharynx. Bands of single muscle cells are
attached to the various points of the epidermis and extend into the legs to provide ambulatory movement. The
major body cavity is a hemocoel, but there are no specialized circulatory structures for moving the blood, nor
are there specialized respiratory structures. Malpighian tubules in the hemocoel remove metabolic wastes and
transportthemtothegut.Adorsalbrainisconnectedtoaventralnervecordwithsegmentalgangliaassociated
withtheappendages.Sensorystructuresaregreatlyreduced,butthereisapairofsimpleeyespotsonthehead,
and sensory cilia or bristles concentrated toward the head end of the animal.
Reproduction
Mosttardigradesaredioecious,andmalesandfemaleseachhaveasinglegonad.Matingusuallyoccursatthe
timeofamoltandfertilizationisexternal.Eggsmaybedepositedinamoltedcuticleorattachedtootherobjects.
Developmentisdirect,andtheanimalmaymoltadozentimesduringitslifetime.Intardigrades,likenematodes,
developmentproducesafixednumberofcells,withtheactualnumberofcellsbeingdependentonthespecies.
Further growth occurs by enlarging the cells, not by multiplying them.
28.6 | Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Arthropods
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare the internal systems and appendage specializations of phylum Arthropoda
• Discuss the environmental importance of arthropods
• Discuss the reasons for arthropod success and abundance
ThesuperphylumEcdysozoaalsoincludesthephylumArthropoda,oneofthemostsuccessfulcladesofanimals
ontheplanet.Arthropodsarecoelomateorganismscharacterizedbyasturdychitinousexoskeletonandjointed
appendages.Therearewelloveramillionarthropodspeciesdescribed,andsystematistsbelievethatthereare
millions of species awaiting proper classification. Like other Ecdysozoa, all arthropods periodically go through
the physiological process of molting, followed by ecdysis (the actual shedding of the exoskeleton), as they
PAGE: 839
828 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
grow. Arthropods are eucoelomate, protostomic organisms, often with incredibly complicated life cycles.
Phylum Arthropoda
Thename“arthropoda”means“jointedfeet.”Thenameaptlydescribestheinvertebratesincludedinthisphylum.
Arthropods have probably always dominated the animal kingdom in terms of number of species and likely will
continue to do so: An estimated 85 percent of all known species are included in this phylum! In effect, life on
Earth could conceivably be called the Age of Arthropods beginning nearly 500 million years ago.
The principal characteristics of all the animals in this phylum are the structural and functional segmentation
of the body and the presence of jointed appendages. Arthropods have an exoskeleton made principally of
chitin—a waterproof, tough polysaccharide composed of N-acetylglucosamine. Phylum Arthropoda is the most
speciosecladeintheanimalworld(Table28.1),andinsectsformthesinglelargestclasswithinthisphylum.For
comparison, refer to the approximate numbers of species in the phyla listed below.
Phylum # species
Ctenophora 100
Porifera 5,000
Cnidaria 11,000
Platyhelminthes 25,000
Rotifera 2,000
Nemertea 1,200
Annelida 22,000
Mollusca 112,000
Nematoda 28,000+
Tardigrades >1,000
Arthropoda 1,134,000
Echinodermata 7,000
Chordata 100,000
Table 28.1
Phylum Arthropoda includes animals that have been successful in colonizing terrestrial, aquatic, and aerial
habitats. This phylum is further classified into five subphyla: Trilobita (trilobites, all extinct), Chelicerata
(horseshoe crabs, spiders, scorpions, ticks, mites, and daddy longlegs or harvestmen), Myriapoda (millipedes,
centipedes, and their relatives), Crustacea (crabs, lobsters, crayfish, isopods, barnacles, and some
zooplankton), and Hexapoda (insects and their six-legged relatives). Trilobites, an extinct group of arthropods
found chiefly in the pre-Cambrian Era (about 500 million years ago), are probably most closely related to the
Chelicerata. These are identified based on their fossils; they were quite diverse and radiated significantly into
thousands of species before their complete extinction at the end of the Permian about 240 million years ago
(Figure 28.36).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 840
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 829
Figure28.36Atrilobite.Trilobites,liketheoneinthisfossil,areanextinctgroupofarthropods.Theirname"trilobite"
refers to the three longitudinal lobes making up the body: right pleural lobe, axial lobe, and left pleural lobe (credit:
Kevin Walsh).
Morphology
Characteristic features of the arthropods include the presence of jointed appendages, body segmentation,
and chitinized exoskeleton. Fusion of adjacent groups of segments gave rise to functional body regions
called tagmata (singular = tagma). Tagmata may be in the form of a head, thorax, and abdomen, or a
cephalothorax and abdomen, or a head and trunk, depending on the taxon. Commonly described tagmata
may be composed of different numbers of segments; for example, the head of most insects results from the
fusion of six ancestral segments, whereas the “head” of another arthropod may be made of fewer ancestral
segments, due to independent evolutionary events. Jointed arthropod appendages, often in segmental pairs,
have been specialized for various functions: sensing their environment (antennae), capturing and manipulating
food (mandibles and maxillae), as well as for walking, jumping, digging, and swimming.
Inthearthropodbody,acentralcavity,calledthehemocoel(orbloodcavity),ispresent,andthehemocoelfluids
aremovedbycontractionofregionsofthetubulardorsalbloodvesselcalled"hearts."Groupsofarthropodsalso
differintheorgansusedfornitrogenouswasteexcretion,withcrustaceanspossessinggreenglandsandinsects
using Malpighian tubules, which work in conjunction with the hindgut to reabsorb water while ridding the body
of nitrogenous waste. The nervous system tends to be distributed among the segments, with larger ganglia in
segments with sensory structures or appendages. The ganglia are connected by a ventral nerve cord.
Respiratory systems vary depending on the group of arthropod. Insects and myriapods use a series of tubes
(tracheae) that branch through the body, ending in minute tracheoles. These fine respiratory tubes perform
gas exchange directly between the air and cells within the organism. The major tracheae open to the surface
of the cuticle via apertures called spiracles. We should note that these tracheal systems of ventilation have
evolved independently in hexapods, myriapods, and arachnids. Although the tracheal system works extremely
wellinterrestrialenvironments,italsoworkswellinfreshwateraquaticenvironments:Infact,numerousspecies
of aquatic insects in both immature and adult stages possess tracheal systems. However, although there are
insects that live on the surface of marine environments, none is strictly marine—meaning that they complete
their entire metamorphosisinsalt water.
Incontrast,aquaticcrustaceansutilizegills,terrestrialcheliceratesemploybooklungs,andaquaticchelicerates
use book gills (Figure 28.37). The book lungs of arachnids (scorpions, spiders, ticks, and mites) contain a
vertical stack of hemocoel wall tissue that somewhat resembles the pages of a book. Between each of the
"pages" of tissue is an air space. This allows both sides of the tissue to be in contact with the air at all
times,greatlyincreasingtheefficiencyofgasexchange.Thegillsofcrustaceansarefilamentousstructuresthat
exchange gases with the surrounding water.
The cuticle is the hard “covering” of an arthropod. It is made up of two layers: the epicuticle, which is a
thin, waxy, water-resistant outer layer containing no chitin, and the layer beneath it, the chitinous procuticle,
which itself is composed of an exocuticle and a lower endocuticle, all supported ultimately by a basement
membrane. The exoskeleton is very protective (it is sometimes difficult to squish a big beetle!), but does not
sacrifice flexibility or mobility. Both the exocuticle (which is secreted before a molt), and an endocuticle, (which
is secreted after a molt), are composed of chitin bound with a protein; chitin is insoluble in water, alkalis, and
weak acids. The procuticle is not only flexible and lightweight, but also provides protection against dehydration
andotherbiologicalandphysicalstresses.Somehexapods,suchasthecrustaceans,addcalciumsaltstotheir
exoskeleton, which increases the strength of the cuticle, but does reduce its flexibility. In some cases, such as
lobsters,theamountofcalciumsaltdepositedwithinthechitinisextreme.Inordertogrow,thearthropodmust
“shed” the exoskeleton during the physiological process called molting, following by the actual stripping of the
PAGE: 841
830 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
outer cuticle, called ecdysis (“to strip off”). At first, this seems to be a dangerous method of growth, because
while the new exoskeleton is hardening, the animal is vulnerable to predation; however, molting and ecdysis
alsoallowforgrowthandchangeinmorphology,aswellasforgreatdiversification insize,simplybecausethe
numbers of molts can be modified through evolution.
The characteristic morphology of representative animals from each subphylum is described below.
Figure28.37Arthropodrespiratorystructures.Thebooklungsof(a)arachnidsaremadeupofalternatingairpockets
and hemocoel tissue shaped like a stack of books (hence the name, “book lung”). The book gills of (b) horseshoe
crabsaresimilartobooklungsbutareexternalsothatgasexchangecanoccurwiththesurroundingwater.(credita:
modification ofworkbyRyanWilson basedonoriginalworkbyJohnHenryComstock; credit b:modification ofwork
by Angel Schatz)
Subphylum Chelicerata
This subphylum includes animals such as horseshoe crabs, sea spiders, spiders, mites, ticks, scorpions, whip
scorpions, and harvestmen. Chelicerates are predominantly terrestrial, although some freshwater and marine
species also exist. An estimated 77,000 species of chelicerates can be found in almost all terrestrial habitats.
The body of chelicerates is divided into two tagmata: prosoma and opisthosoma, which are basically the
equivalents of a cephalothorax (usually smaller) and an abdomen (usually larger). A distinct “head” tagma is
not usually discernible. The phylum derives its name from the first pair of appendages: the chelicerae (Figure
28.38), which serve as specialized clawlike or fanglike mouthparts. We should note here that chelicerae are
actually modified legs, but they are not the exact serial equivalent of mandibles, which are the modified leglike
chewing mouthparts of insects and crustaceans: The chelicerae are borne on the first segment making up
the prosoma, whereas the mandibles are embryonically on the fourth segment of the mandibulate head. The
chelicerates have secondarily lost their antennae and hence do not have them. Some of the functions of the
antennae (such as touch) are now performed by the second pair of appendages— the pedipalps, which may
also be used for general sensing the environment as well as the manipulation of food. In some species, such
asseaspiders,anadditionalpairofderivedlegappendages,calledovigers,ispresentbetweenthechelicerae
and pedipalps. Ovigers are used for grooming and by males to carry eggs. In spiders, the chelicerae are often
modified and terminate in fangs that inject venom into their prey before feeding (Figure 28.39).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 842
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 831
Figure 28.38 Chelicerae. The chelicerae (first set of appendages) are well developed in the scorpion. (credit: Kevin
Walsh)
Mostcheliceratesingestfoodusingapreoralcavityformedbythecheliceraeandpedipalps.Somechelicerates
may secrete digestive enzymes to pre-digest food before ingesting it. Parasitic chelicerates like ticks and
mites have evolved blood-sucking apparatuses. Members of this subphylum have an open circulatory system
with a heart that pumps blood into the hemocoel. Aquatic species, like horseshoe crabs, have gills, whereas
terrestrial species have either tracheae or book lungs for gaseous exchange. Chelicerate hemolymph contains
hemocyanin a copper-containing oxygen transport protein.
Figure28.39Spider.Thetrapdoorspider,likeallspiders,isamemberofthesubphylumChelicerata.(credit:Marshal
Hedin)
Thenervoussystemincheliceratesconsistsofabrainandtwoventralnervecords.Cheliceratesaredioecious,
meaning that the sexes are separate. These animals use external fertilization as well as internal fertilization
strategiesforreproduction,dependinguponthespeciesanditshabitat.Parentalcarefortheyoungrangesfrom
absolutely none to relatively prolonged care.
PAGE: 843
832 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/arthropodstory) to click through a lesson on arthropods,
including interactive habitat maps, and more.
Subphylum Myriapoda
SubphylumMyriapodacomprisesarthropodswithnumerouslegs.Althoughthenameismisleading,suggesting
that thousands of legs are present in these invertebrates, the number of legs typically varies from 10 to 750.
This subphylum includes 16,000 species; the most commonly found examples are millipedes and centipedes.
Virtuallyallmyriapodsareterrestrialanimalsandpreferahumidenvironment.Ancientmyriapods(ormyriapod-
likearthropods)fromtheSiluriantotheDevoniangrewupto10feetinlength(threemeters).Unfortunately,they
are all extinct!
Myriapods are typically found in moist soils, decaying biological material, and leaf litter. Subphylum Myriapoda
is divided into four classes: Chilopoda, Symphyla, Diplopoda, and Pauropoda. Centipedes like Scutigera
coleoptrata (Figure 28.40) are classified as chilopods. These animals bear one pair of legs per segment,
mandiblesasmouthparts,andaresomewhatdorsoventrallyflattened.Thelegsinthefirstsegmentaremodified
to form forcipules (poison claws) that deliver poison to prey like spiders and cockroaches, as these animals
are all predatory. Symphyla are similar to centipedes, but lack the poison claws and are vegetarian. Millipedes
bear two pairs of legs per diplosegment—a feature that results from the embryonic fusion of adjacent pairs of
body segments. These arthropods are usually rounder in cross-section than centipedes, and are herbivores or
detritivores.Millipedeshavevisiblymorenumbersoflegsascomparedtocentipedes,althoughtheydonothave
a thousand legs (Figure 28.40b). The Pauropods are similar to millipedes, but have fewer segments.
Figure 28.40 Myriapods. The centipede Scutigera coleoptrata (a) has up to 15 pairs of legs. The North American
millipede Narceus americanus (b) bears many legs, although not a thousand, as its name might suggest. (credit a:
modification of work by Bruce Marlin; credit b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
Subphylum Crustacea
Crustaceans are the most dominant aquatic (both freshwater and marine) arthropods, with the total number of
marinecrustaceans standing atabout 70,000 species. Krill, shrimp, lobsters, crabs, andcrayfish areexamples
of crustaceans (Figure 28.41). However, there are also a number of terrestrial crustacean species as well:
Terrestrial species like the wood lice (Armadillidium spp), also called pill bugs, roly-polies, potato bugs, or
isopods,arealsocrustaceans.Nonetheless,thenumberofterrestrialspeciesinthissubphylumisrelativelylow.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 844
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 833
Figure28.41Crustaceans.The(a)craband(b)shrimpkrillarebothaquaticcrustaceans.ThepillbugArmadillidium
is a terrestrial crustacean. (credit a: modification of work by William Warby; credit b: modification of work by Jon
Sullivancreditc:modificationofworkbyFrancoFolini.https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=789616
(http://openstax.org/l/pillbug))
Crustaceanstypicallypossesstwopairsofantennae,mandiblesasmouthparts,andbiramous(“twobranched”)
appendages,whichmeansthattheirlegsareformedintwopartscalledendopodsandexopods,whichappear
superficiallydistinctfromtheuniramous(“onebranched”)legsofmyriapodsandhexapods(Figure28.42).Since
biramousappendagesarealsoseeninthetrilobites,biramousappendagesrepresenttheancestralconditionin
the arthropods. Currently, we describe various arthropods as having uniramous or biramous appendages, but
thesearedescriptiveonly,anddonotnecessarilyreflectevolutionaryrelationshipsotherthanthatalljointedlegs
of arthropods share common ancestry.
Figure 28.42 Arthropod appendages. Arthropods may have (a) biramous (two-branched) appendages or (b)
uniramous (one-branched) appendages. (credit b: modification of work by Nicholas W. Beeson)
In most crustaceans, the head and thorax is fused to form a cephalothorax (Figure 28.43), which is covered
by a plate called the carapace, thus producing a body plan comprising two tagmata: cephalophorax and
abdomen.Crustaceanshaveachitinousexoskeletonthatisshedbymoltingandecdysiswhenevertheanimal
requires an increase in size or the next stage of development. The exoskeletons of many aquatic species
are also infused with calcium carbonate, which makes them even stronger than those of other arthropods.
Crustaceanshaveanopencirculatorysystemwherebloodispumpedintothehemocoelbythedorsallylocated
heart. Hemocyanin is the major respiratory pigment present in crustaceans, but hemoglobin is found in a few
species and both are dissolved in the hemolymph rather than carried in cells.
PAGE: 845
834 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.43 Crustacean anatomy. The crayfish is an example of a crustacean. It has a carapace around the
cephalothorax and the heart in the dorsal thorax area. (credit: Jane Whitney)
As in the chelicerates, most crustaceans are dioecious. However, some species like barnacles may be
hermaphrodites. Serial hermaphroditism, where the gonad can switch from producing sperm to ova, is also
exhibited in some species. Fertilized eggs may be held within the female of the species or may be released in
the water. Terrestrial crustaceans seek out damp spaces in their habitats to lay eggs.
Larval stages—nauplius or zoea—are seen in the early development of aquatic crustaceans. A cypris larva is
also seen in the early development of barnacles (Figure 28.44).
Figure28.44Crustaceanlarvae.Allcrustaceansgothroughdifferentlarvalstages.Shownare(a)thenaupliuslarval
stageofatadpoleshrimp,(b)thecyprislarvalstageofabarnacle,and(c)thezoealarvalstageofagreencrab.(credit
a:modificationofworkbyUSGS;creditb:modificationofworkbyMª.C.MingoranceRodríguez;creditc:modification
of work by B. Kimmel based on original work by Ernst Haeckel)
Crustaceans possess a brain formed by the fusion of the first three segmental ganglia, as well as two
compoundeyes.Aventralnervecordconnectsadditionalsegmentalganglia.Mostcrustaceansarecarnivorous,
but herbivorous and detritivorous species, and even endoparasitic species are known. A highly evolved
endoparasitic species, such as Sacculina spp, parasitizes its crab host and ultimately destroys it after it forces
thehosttoincubatetheparasite’seggs!Crustaceansmayalsobecannibalisticwhenextremelyhighpopulations
of these organisms are present.
Subphylum Hexapoda
The insects comprise the largest class of arthropods in terms of species diversity as well as in terms of
biomass—at least in terrestrial habitats.
ThenameHexapodadescribesthepresenceofsixlegs(threepairs)intheseanimals,whichdifferentiatesthem
from other groups of arthropods that have different numbers of legs. In some cases, however, the number of
legshasbeenevolutionarilyreduced,orthelegshavebeenhighlymodifiedtoaccommodatespecificconditions,
such as endoparasitism. Hexapod bodies are organized into three tagmata: head, thorax, and abdomen.
Individual segments of the head have mouthparts derived from jointed legs, and the thorax has three pairs of
jointedappendages,andalsowings,inmostderivedgroups.Forexample,inthepterygotes(wingedinsects),
in addition to a pair of jointed legs on all three segments comprising the thorax: prothorax, mesothorax, and
metathorax.
Appendages found on other body segments are also evolutionarily derived from modified legs. Typically, the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 846
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 835
head bears an upper “lip” or labrum and mandibles (or derivation of mandibles) that serve as mouthparts;
maxillae, and a lower “lip” called a labium: both of which manipulate food. The head also has one pair of
sensory antennae, as well as sensory organs such as a pair of compound eyes, ocelli (simple eyes), and
numeroussensoryhairs.Theabdomenusuallyhas11segmentsandbearsexternalreproductiveapertures.The
subphylumHexapodaincludessomeinsectsthatarewinged(suchasfruitflies)andothersthataresecondarily
wingless (such as fleas). The only order of “primitively wingless” insects is the Thysanura, the bristletails. All
other orders are winged or are descendants of formally winged insects.
The evolution of wings is a major, unsolved mystery. Unlike vertebrates, whose “wings” are simply
preadaptationsof“arms”thatservedasthestructuralfoundationsfortheevolutionoffunctionalwings(thishas
occurred independently in pterosaurs, dinosaurs [birds], and bats), the evolution of wings in insects is a what
wecalladenovo(new)developmentthathasgiventhepteryogotesdominationovertheEarth.Wingedinsects
existed over 425 million years ago, and by the Carboniferous, several orders of winged insects ( Paleoptera),
most of which are now extinct, had evolved. There is good physical evidence that Paleozoic nymphs with
thoracic winglets (perhaps hinged, former gill covers of semi-aquatic species) used these devices on land to
elevate the thoracic temperature (the thorax is where the legs are located) to levels that would enable them to
escape predators faster, find more food resources and mates, and disperse more easily. The thoracic winglets
(whichcanbefound onfossilized insects precedingtheadvent oftrulywingedinsects) couldhaveeasilybeen
selected for thermoregulatory purposes prior to reaching a size that would have allowed them the capacity for
gliding or actual flapping flight. Even modern insects with broadly attached wings, such as butterflies, use the
basalone-thirdoftheirwings(theareanexttothethorax)forthermoregulation,andtheoutertwo-thirdsforflight,
camouflage, and mate selection.
Many of the common insects we encounter on a daily basis—including ants, beetles, cockroaches, butterflies,
crickets and flies—are examples of Hexapoda. Among these, adult ants, beetles, flies, and butterflies develop
by complete metamorphosis from grub-like or caterpillar-like larvae, whereas adult cockroaches and crickets
developthroughagradualorincompletemetamorphosisfromwinglessimmatures.Allgrowthoccursduringthe
juvenilestages.Adultsdonotgrowfurther(butmaybecomelarger)aftertheirfinalmolt.Variationsinwing,leg,
andmouthpartmorphologyallcontributetotheenormousvarietyseenintheinsects.Insectvariabilitywasalso
encouraged by their activity as pollinators and their coevolution with flowering plants. Some insects, especially
termites, ants, bees, and wasps, are eusocial, meaning that they live in large groups with individuals assigned
to specific roles or castes, like queen, drone, and worker. Social insects use pheromones—external chemical
signals—to communicate and maintain group structure as well as a cohesive colony.
PAGE: 847
836 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure28.45Insectanatomy.Inthisbasicanatomyofahexapodinsect,notethatinsectshaveawell-developed
digestivesystem(yellow),arespiratorysystem(blue),acirculatorysystem(red),andanervoussystem(purple).
Note the multiple "hearts" and the segmental ganglia.
Which of the following statements about insects is false?
a. Insects have both dorsal and ventral blood vessels.
b. Insects have spiracles, openings that allow air to enter into the tracheal system.
c. The trachea is part of the digestive system.
d. Most insects have a well-developed digestive system with a mouth, crop, and intestine.
28.7 | Superphylum Deuterostomia
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the distinguishing characteristics of echinoderms
• Describe the distinguishing characteristics of chordates
The phyla Echinodermata and Chordata (the phylum that includes humans) both belong to the superphylum
Deuterostomia. Recall that protostomes and deuterostomes differ in certain aspects of their embryonic
development, and they are named based on which opening of the archenteron (primitive gut tube) develops
first. The word deuterostome comes from the Greek word meaning “mouth second,” indicating that the mouth
develops as a secondary structure opposite the location of the blastopore, which becomes the anus. In
protostomes(“mouthfirst”),thefirstembryonicopeningbecomesthemouth,andthesecondopeningbecomes
the anus.
There are a series of other developmental characteristics that differ between protostomes and deuterostomes,
including the type of early cleavage (embryonic cell division) and the mode of formation of the coelom of the
embryo: Protosomes typically exhibit spiral mosaic cleavage whereas deuterostomes exhibit radial regulative
cleavage. In deuterostomes, the endodermal lining of the archenteron usually forms buds called coelomic
pouchesthatexpandandultimatelyobliteratetheembryonicblastocoel(thecavitywithintheblastulaandearly
gastrula) to become the embryonic mesoderm, the third germ layer. This happens when the mesodermal
pouchesbecomeseparatedfromtheinvaginatingendodermallayerformingthearchenteron,thenexpandand
fuse to form the coelomic cavity. The resulting coelom is termed an enterocoelom. The archenteron develops
into the alimentary canal, and a mouth opening is formed by invagination of ectoderm at the pole opposite the
blastopore of the gastrula. The blastopore forms the anus of the alimentary system in the juvenile and adult
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 848
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 837
forms. Cleavage in most deuterostomes is also indeterminant, meaning that the developmental fates of early
embryonic cells are not decided at that point of embryonic development (this is why we could potentially clone
most deuterostomes, including ourselves).
The deuterostomes consist of two major clades—the Chordata and the Ambulacraria. The Chordata include
the vertebrates and two invertebrate subphyla, the urochordates and the cephalochordates. The Ambulacraria
include the echinoderms and the hemichordates, which were once considered to be a chordate subphylum
(Figure 28.46). The two clades, in addition to being deuterostomes, have some other interesting features in
common. As we have seen, the vast majority of invertebrate animals do not possess a defined bony vertebral
endoskeleton, or a bony cranium. However, one of the most ancestral groups of deuterostome invertebrates,
the Echinodermata, do produce tiny skeletal “bones” called ossicles that make up a true endoskeleton, or
internal skeleton, covered by an epidermis. The Hemichordata (acorn worms and pterobranchs) will not be
coveredhere,butsharewiththeechinodermsathree-part(tripartite)coelom,similarlarvalforms,andaderived
metanephridiumthatridstheanimalsofnitrogenouswastes.Theyalsosharepharyngealslitswiththechordates
(Figure 28.46). In addition, hemichordates have a dorsal nerve cord in the midline of the epidermis, but lack a
neural tube, a true notochord and the endostyle and post-anal tail characteristic of chordates.
Figure28.46AmbulacrariaandChordata.(a)Themajordeuterostometaxa.(b)pharyngealslitsinhemichordatesand
urochordates. (credit a MAC; credit b modification of Gill Slits By Own work by Zebra.element [Public domain], via
Wikimedia Commons)
Phylum Echinodermata
Echinodermata are named after their “prickly skin” (from the Greek “echinos” meaning “prickly” and “dermos”
meaning “skin”). This phylum is a collection of about 7,000 described living species of exclusively marine,
bottom-dwellingorganisms.Seastars(Figure28.47),seacucumbers,seaurchins,sanddollars,andbrittlestars
are all examples of echinoderms.
Morphology and Anatomy
Despite the adaptive value of bilaterality for most free-living cephalized animals, adult echinoderms exhibit
pentaradialsymmetry(with“arms”typicallyarrayedinmultiplesoffivearoundacentralaxis).Echinodermshave
anendoskeletonmadeofcalcareousossicles(smallbonyplates),coveredbytheepidermis.Forthisreason,it
isanendoskeletonlikeourown,notanexoskeletonlikethatofarthropods.Theossiclesmaybefusedtogether,
embeddedseparatelyintheconnectivetissueofthedermis,orbereducedtominutespiculesofboneasinsea
cucumbers.Thespinesforwhichtheechinodermsarenamedareconnectedtosomeoftheplates.Thespines
maybemovedbysmallmuscles,buttheycanalsobelockedintoplacefordefense.Insomespecies,thespines
aresurroundedbytinystalkedclawscalledpedicellaria,whichhelpkeeptheanimal'ssurfacecleanofdebris,
protectpapulaeused in respiration, and sometimes aid in food capture.
The endoskeleton is produced by dermal cells, which also produce several kinds of pigments, imparting vivid
colors to these animals. In sea stars, fingerlike projections (papillae) of dermal tissue extend through the
endoskeleton and function as gills. Some cells are glandular, and may produce toxins. Each arm or section of
the animal contains several different structures: for example, digestive glands, gonads, and the tube feet that
areuniquetotheechinoderms.Inechinodermslikeseastars,everyarmbearstworowsoftubefeetontheoral
side,runningalonganexternalambulacralgroove.Thesetubefeetassistinlocomotion,feeding,andchemical
sensations, as well as serve to attach some species to the substratum.
PAGE: 849
838 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
Figure 28.47 Anatomy of a sea star. This diagram of a sea star shows the pentaradial pattern typical of adult
echinoderms, and the water vascular system that is their defining characteristic.
Water Vascular and Hemal Systems
Echinoderms have a unique ambulacral (water vascular) system, derived from part of the coelom, or “body
cavity.”Thewatervascularsystemconsistsofacentralringcanalandradialcanalsthatextendalongeacharm.
Each radial canal is connected to a double row of tube feet, which project through holes in the endoskeleton,
and function as tactile and ambulatory structures. These tube feet can extend or retract based on the volume
of water present in the system of that arm, allowing the animal to move and also allowing it to capture prey
withtheirsuckerlikeaction.Individualtubefeetarecontrolledbybulblikeampullae.Seawaterentersthesystem
through an aboral madreporite (opposite the oral area where the mouth is located) and passes to the ring
canalthroughashortstonecanal.Watercirculatingthroughthesestructuresfacilitatesgaseousexchangeand
providesahydrostaticsourceforlocomotionandpreymanipulation.Ahemalsystem,consistingoforal,gastric,
and aboral rings, as well as other vessels running roughly parallel to the water vascular system, circulates
nutrients.Transportofnutrientsandgasesissharedbythewatervascularandhemalsystemsinadditiontothe
visceral body cavity that surrounds the major organs.
Nervous System
The nervous system in these animals is a relatively simple, comprising a circumoral nerve ring at the center
and five radial nerves extending outward along the arms. In addition, several networks of nerves are located
in different parts of the body. However, structures analogous to a brain or large ganglia are not present in
these animals. Depending on the group, echinoderms may have well-developed sensory organs for touch and
chemoreception (e.g., within the tube feet and on tentacles at the tips of the arms), as well as photoreceptors
and statocysts.
Digestive and Excretory Systems
A mouth, located on the oral (ventral) side, opens through a short esophagus to a large, baglike stomach. The
so-called “cardiac” stomach can be everted through the mouth during feeding (for example, when a starfish
evertsitsstomachintoabivalvepreyitemtodigesttheanimal—alive—withinitsownshell!)Therearemasses
ofdigestiveglands(pyloriccaeca)ineacharm,runningdorsallyalongthearmsandoverlyingthereproductive
glands below them. After passing through the pyloric caeca in each arm, the digested food is channeled to a
small anus, if one exists.
Podocytes—cells specialized for ultrafiltration of bodily fluids—are present near the center of the echinoderm
disc, at the junction of the water vascular and hemal systems. These podocytes are connected by an internal
systemofcanalstothemadreporite,wherewaterentersthestonecanal.Theadultechinodermtypicallyhasa
spaciousandfluid-filledcoelom.Ciliaaidincirculatingthefluidwithinthebodycavity,andleadtothefluid-filled
papulae,wheretheexchangeofoxygenandcarbondioxidetakesplace,aswellasthesecretionofnitrogenous
waste such as ammonia, by diffusion.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 850
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 839
Reproduction
Echinoderms are dioecious, but males and females are indistinguishable apart from their gametes. Males and
females release their gametes into water at the same time and fertilization is external. The early larval stages
of all echinoderms (e.g., the bipinnaria of asteroid echinoderms such as sea stars) have bilateral symmetry,
althougheachclassofechinodermshasitsownlarvalform.Theradiallysymmetricaladultformsfromacluster
ofcellsinthelarva.Seastars,brittlestars,andseacucumbersmayalsoreproduceasexuallybyfragmentation,
as well as regenerate body parts lost in trauma, even when over 75 percent of their body mass is lost!
Classes of Echinoderms
This phylum is divided into five extant classes: Asteroidea (sea stars), Ophiuroidea (brittle stars), Echinoidea
(sea urchins and sand dollars), Crinoidea (sea lilies or feather stars), and Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers)
(Figure 28.48).
Themostwell-knownechinodermsaremembersofclassAsteroidea,orseastars.Theycomeinalargevariety
of shapes, colors, and sizes, with more than 1,800 species known so far. The key characteristic of sea stars
thatdistinguishesthemfromotherechinodermclassesincludesthickarmsthatextendfromacentraldiskfrom
which various body organs branch into the arms. At the end of each arm are simple eye spots and tentacles
that serve as touch receptors. Sea stars use their rows of tube feet not only for gripping surfaces but also for
graspingprey.MostseastarsarecarnivoresandtheirmajorpreyareinthephylumMollusca.Bymanipulating
its tube feet, a sea star can open molluscan shells. Sea stars have two stomachs, one of which can protrude
through their mouths and secrete digestive juices into or onto prey, even before ingestion. A sea star eating a
clam can partially open the shell, and then evert its stomach into the shell, introducing digestive enzymes into
theinteriorofthemollusk.Thisprocesscanbothweakenthestrongadductor(closing)musclesofabivalveand
begin the process of digestion.
Exploretheseastar’sbodyplan(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sea_star)upclose,watchonemoveacross
the sea floor, and see it devour a mussel.
BrittlestarsbelongtotheclassOphiuroidea("snake-tails").Unlikeseastars,whichhaveplumparms,brittlestars
have long, thin, flexible arms that are sharply demarcated from the central disk. Brittle stars move by lashing
out their arms or wrapping them around objects and pulling themselves forward. Their arms are also used for
grasping prey. The water vascular system in ophiuroids is not used for locomotion.
SeaurchinsandsanddollarsareexamplesofEchinoidea("prickly").Theseechinodermsdonothavearms,but
arehemisphericalorflattenedwithfiverowsoftubefeetthatextendthroughfiverowsofporesinacontinuous
internal shell called a test. Their tube feet are used to keep the body surface clean. Skeletal plates around the
mouthareorganizedintoacomplexmultipartfeedingstructurecalled"Aristotle'slantern."Mostechinoidsgraze
on algae, but some are suspension feeders, and others may feed on small animals or organic detritus—the
fragmentary remains of plants or animals.
Sea lilies and feather stars are examples of Crinoidea. Sea lilies are sessile, with the body attached to a stalk,
butthefeatherstarscanactivelymoveaboutusingleglikecirrithatemergefromtheaboralsurface.Bothtypes
ofcrinoidaresuspensionfeeders,collectingsmallfoodorganismsalongtheambulacralgroovesoftheirfeather-
like arms. The "feathers" consisted of branched arms lined with tube feet. The tube feet are used to move
captured food toward the mouth. There are only about 600 extant species of crinoids, but they were far more
numerous and abundant in ancient oceans. Many crinoids are deep-water species, but feather stars typically
inhabit shallow areas, especially in substropical and tropical waters.
Sea cucumbers of class Holothuroidea exhibit an extended oral-aboral axis. These are the only echinoderms
that demonstrate “functional” bilateral symmetry as adults, because the extended oral-aboral axis compels the
animal to lie horizontally rather than stand vertically. The tube feet are reduced or absent, except on the side
on which the animal lies. They have a single gonad and the digestive tract is more typical of a bilaterally
symmetricalanimal.Apairofgill-likestructurescalledrespiratorytreesbranchfromtheposteriorgut;muscles
PAGE: 851
840 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
around the cloaca pump water in and out of these trees. There are clusters of tentacles around the mouth.
Some sea cucumbers feed on detritus, while others are suspension feeders, sifting out small organisms with
theiroraltentacles.Somespeciesofseacucumbersareuniqueamongtheechinodermsinthatcellscontaining
hemoglobincirculate in the coelomic fluid, the water vascular system and/or the hemal system.
Figure 28.48 Classes of echinoderms. Different members of Echinodermata include the (a) sea star of class
Asteroidea,(b)thebrittlestarofclassOphiuroidea,(c)theseaurchinsofclassEchinoidea,(d)thesealiliesbelonging
toclassCrinoidea,and(e)seacucumbers,representingclassHolothuroidea.(credita:modificationofworkbyAdrian
Pingstone;creditb:modificationofworkbyJoshuaGanderson;creditc:modificationofworkbySamuelChow;credit
d: modification of work by Sarah Depper; credit e: modification of work by Ed Bierman)
Phylum Chordata
Animals in the phylum Chordata share five key features that appear at some stage of their development:
a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, a post-anal tail, and an endostyle/thyroid gland
that secretes iodinated hormones. In some groups, some of these traits are present only during embryonic
development. In addition to containing vertebrate classes, the phylum Chordata contains two clades of
“invertebrates”:Urochordata(tunicates,salps,andlarvaceans)andCephalochordata(lancelets).Mosttunicates
liveontheoceanfloorandaresuspensionfeeders.Lanceletsaresuspensionfeedersthatfeedonphytoplankton
and other microorganisms. The invertebrate chordates will be discussed more extensively in the following
chapter.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 852
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 841
KEY TERMS
amoebocyte spongecellwithmultiplefunctions,includingnutrientdelivery,eggformation,spermdelivery,and
cell differentiation
Annelida phylum of vermiform animals with metamerism
archenteron primitive gut cavity within the gastrula that opens outward via the blastopore
Arthropoda phylum of animals with jointed appendages
biramous referring to two branches per appendage
captacula tentacle-like projection that is present in tusks shells to catch prey
cephalothorax fused head and thorax in some species
chelicera modified first pair of appendages in subphylum Chelicerata
choanocyte (also,collarcell)spongecellthatfunctionstogenerateawatercurrentandtotrapandingestfood
particles via phagocytosis
Chordata phylumofanimalsdistinguishedbytheirpossessionofanotochord,adorsal,hollownervecord,an
endostyle, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail at some point in their development
clitellum specialized band of fused segments, which aids in reproduction
Cnidaria phylum of animals that are diploblastic and have radial symmetry
cnidocyte specialized stinging cell found in Cnidaria
conispiral shell shape coiled around a horizontal axis
corona wheel-like structure on the anterior portion of the rotifer that contains cilia and moves food and water
toward the mouth
ctenidium specialized gill structure in mollusks
cuticle (animal) the tough, external layer possessed by members of the invertebrate class Ecdysozoa that is
periodically molted and replaced
cypris larval stage in the early development of crustaceans
Echinodermata phylum of deuterostomes with spiny skin; exclusively marine organisms
enterocoelom coelom formed by fusion of coelomic pouches budded from the endodermal lining of the
archenteron
epidermis outer layer (from ectoderm) that lines the outside of the animal
extracellular digestion foodistakenintothegastrovascularcavity,enzymesaresecretedintothecavity,and
the cells lining the cavity absorb nutrients
gastrodermis inner layer (from endoderm) that lines the digestive cavity
gastrovascular cavity opening that serves as both a mouth and an anus, which is termed an incomplete
digestive system
gemmule structure produced by asexual reproduction in freshwater sponges where the morphology is inverted
hemocoel internal body cavity seen in arthropods
hermaphrodite referring to an animal where both male and female gonads are present in the same individual
PAGE: 853
842 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
invertebrata (also, invertebrates) category of animals that do not possess a cranium or vertebral column
madreporite pore for regulating entry and exit of water into the water vascular system
mantle (also, pallium) specialized epidermis that encloses all visceral organs and secretes shells
mastax jawed pharynx unique to the rotifers
medusa free-floating cnidarian body plan with mouth on underside and tentacles hanging down from a bell
mesoglea non-living, gel-like matrix present between ectoderm and endoderm in cnidarians
mesohyl collagen-like gel containing suspended cells that perform various functions in the sponge
metamerism series of body structures that are similar internally and externally, such as segments
Mollusca phylum of protostomes with soft bodies and no segmentation
nacre calcareous secretion produced by bivalves to line the inner side of shells as well as to coat intruding
particulate matter
nauplius larval stage in the early development of crustaceans
nematocyst harpoon-like organelle within cnidocyte with pointed projectile and poison to stun and entangle
prey
Nematoda phylum of worm-like animals that are triploblastic, pseudocoelomates that can be free-living or
parasitic
Nemertea phylum of dorsoventrally flattened protostomes known as ribbon worms
osculum large opening in the sponge’s body through which water leaves
ostium pore present on the sponge’s body through which water enters
oviger additional pair of appendages present on some arthropods between the chelicerae and pedipalps
parapodium fleshy, flat, appendage that protrudes in pairs from each segment of polychaetes
pedipalp second pair of appendages in Chelicerata
pilidium larval form found in some nemertine species
pinacocyte epithelial-like cell that forms the outermost layer of sponges and encloses a jelly-like substance
called mesohyl
planospiral shell shape coiled around a vertical axis
planuliform larval form found in phylum Nemertea
polymorphic possessing multiple body plans within the lifecycle of a group of organisms
polyp stalk-likesessilelifeformofacnidarianswithmouthandtentaclesfacingupward,usuallysessilebutmay
be able to glide along surface
Porifera phylum of animals with no true tissues, but a porous body with rudimentary endoskeleton
radula tongue-like organ with chitinous ornamentation
rhynchocoel cavity present above the mouth that houses the proboscis
schizocoelom coelom formed by groups of cells that split from the endodermal layer
sclerocyte cell that secretes silica spicules into the mesohyl
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 854
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 843
seta/chaeta chitinous projection from the cuticle
siphonophore tubular structure that serves as an inlet for water into the mantle cavity
spicule structure made of silica or calcium carbonate that provides structural support for sponges
spongocoel central cavity within the body of some sponges
trochophore first of the two larval stages in mollusks
uniramous referring to one branch per appendage
veliger second of the two larval stages in mollusks
water vascular system system in echinoderms where water is the circulatory fluid
zoea larval stage in the early development of crustaceans
CHAPTER SUMMARY
28.1Phylum Porifera
Animals included in phylum Porifera are parazoans because they do not show the formation of true
embryonically derived tissues, although they have a number of specific cell types and “functional” tissues such
as pinacoderm. These organisms show very simple organization, with a rudimentary endoskeleton of spicules
and spongin fibers. Glass sponge cells are connected together in a multinucleated syncytium. Although
sponges are very simple in organization, they perform most of the physiological functions typical of more
complex animals.
28.2Phylum Cnidaria
Cnidarians represent a more complex level of organization than Porifera. They possess outer and inner tissue
layers that sandwich a noncellular mesoglea between them. Cnidarians possess a well-formed digestive
system and carry out extracellular digestion in a digestive cavity that extends through much of the animal. The
mouth is surrounded by tentacles that contain large numbers of cnidocytes—specialized cells bearing
nematocysts used for stinging and capturing prey as well as discouraging predators. Cnidarians have separate
sexes and many have a lifecycle that involves two distinct morphological forms—medusoid and polypoid—at
various stages in their life cycles. In species with both forms, the medusa is the sexual, gamete-producing
stage and the polyp is the asexual stage. Cnidarian species include individual or colonial polypoid forms,
floating colonies, or large individual medusa forms (sea jellies).
28.3Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Flatworms, Rotifers, and Nemerteans
This section describes three phyla of relatively simple invertebrates: one acoelomate, one pseudocoelomate,
and one eucoelomate. Flatworms are acoelomate, triploblastic animals. They lack circulatory and respiratory
systems, and have a rudimentary excretory system. This digestive system is incomplete in most species, and
absent in tapeworms. There are four traditional groups of flatworms, the largely free-living turbellarians, which
include polycladid marine worms and tricladid freshwater species, the ectoparasitic monogeneans, and the
endoparasitic trematodes and cestodes. Trematodes have complex life cycles involving a molluscan secondary
host and a primary host in which sexual reproduction takes place. Cestodes, or tapeworms, infect the digestive
systems of their primary vertebrate hosts.
Rotifers are microscopic, multicellular, mostly aquatic organisms that are currently under taxonomic revision.
The group is characterized by the ciliated, wheel-like corona, located on their head. Food collected by the
corona is passed to another structure unique to this group of organisms—the mastax or jawed pharynx.
The nemerteans are probably simple eucoelomates. These ribbon-shaped animals also bear a specialized
proboscis enclosed within a rhynchocoel. The development of a closed circulatory system derived from the
coelom is a significant difference seen in this species compared to other phyla described here. Alimentary,
nervous, and excretory systems are more developed in the nemerteans than in the flatworms or rotifers.
Embryonic development of nemertean worms proceeds via a planuliform or trochophore-like larval stage.
PAGE: 855
844 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
28.4Superphylum Lophotrochozoa: Molluscs and Annelids
Phylum Mollusca is a large, group of protostome schizocoelous invertebrates that occupy marine, freshwater,
and terrestrial habitats. Mollusks can be divided into seven classes, each of which exhibits variations on the
basic molluscan body plan. Two defining features are the mantle, which secretes a protective calcareous shell
in many species, and the radula, a rasping feeding organ found in most classes. Some mollusks have evolved
a reduced shell, and others have no radula. The mantle also covers the body and forms a mantle cavity, which
is quite distinct from the coelomic cavity—typically reduced to the area surrounding the heart, kidneys, and
intestine. In aquatic mollusks, respiration is facilitated by gills (ctenidia) in the mantle cavity. In terrestrial
mollusks, the mantle cavity itself serves as an organ of gas exchange. Mollusks also have a muscular foot,
which is modified in various ways for locomotion or food capture. Most mollusks have separate sexes. Early
development in aquatic species occurs via one or more larval stages, including a trochophore larva, that
precedes a veliger larva in some groups.
Phylum Annelida includes vermiform, segmented animals. Segmentation is metameric (i.e., each segment is
partitioned internally as well as externally, with various structures repeated in each segment). These animals
have well-developed neuronal, circulatory, and digestive systems. The two major groups of annelids are the
polychaetes, which have parapodia with multiple bristles, and oligochaetes, which have no parapodia and
fewer bristles or no bristles. Oligochaetes, which include earthworms and leeches, have a specialized band of
segments known as a clitellum, which secretes a cocoon and protects gametes during reproduction. The
leeches do not have full internal segmentation. Reproductive strategies include separate sexes,
hermaphroditism, and serial hermaphroditism. Polychaetes typically have trochophore larvae, while the
oligochaetes develop more directly.
28.5Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Nematodes and Tardigrades
The defining feature of the Ecdysozoa is a collagenous/chitinous cuticle that covers the body, and the necessity
to molt the cuticle periodically during growth. Nematodes are roundworms, with a pseudocoel body cavity. They
have a complete digestive system, a differentiated nervous system, and a rudimentory excretory system. The
phylum includes free-living species likeCaenorhabditis elegansas well as many species of endoparasitic
organisms such asAscarisspp. They include dioeceous as well as hermaphroditic species. Embryonic
development proceeds via several larval stages, and most adults have a fixed number of cells.
The tardigrades, sometimes called "water bears," are a widespread group of tiny animals with a segmented
cuticle covering the epidermis and four pairs of clawed legs. Like the nematodes, they are pseudocoelomates
and have a fixed number of cells as adults. Specialized proteins enable them to enter cryptobiosis, a kind of
suspended animation during which they can resist a number of adverse environmental conditions.
28.6Superphylum Ecdysozoa: Arthropods
Arthropods represent the most successful animal phylum on Earth, both in terms of the number of species and
the number of individuals. As members of the Ecdysozoa, all arthropods have a protective chitinous cuticle that
must be periodically molted and shed during development or growth. Arthropods are characterized by a
segmented body as well as the presence of jointed appendages. In the basic body plan, a pair of appendages
is present per body segment. Within the phylum, traditional classification is based on mouthparts, body
subdivisions, number of appendages, and modifications of appendages present. In aquatic arthropods, the
chitinous exoskeleton may be calcified. Gills, tracheae, and book lungs facilitate respiration. Unique larval
stages are commonly seen in both aquatic and terrestrial groups of arthropods.
28.7Superphylum Deuterostomia
Echinoderms are deuterostome marine organisms, whose adults show five-fold symmetry. This phylum of
animals has a calcareous endoskeleton composed of ossicles, or body plates. Epidermal spines are attached
to some ossicles and serve in a protective capacity. Echinoderms possess a water-vascular system that serves
both for respiration and for locomotion, although other respiratory structures such as papulae and respiratory
trees are found in some species. A large aboral madreporite is the point of entry and exit for sea water pumped
into the water vascular system. Echinoderms have a variety of feeding techniques ranging from predation to
suspension feeding. Osmoregulation is carried out by specialized cells known as podocytes associated with the
hemal system.
The characteristic features of the Chordata are a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, a
post-anal tail, and an endostyle/thyroid that secretes iodinated hormones. The phylum Chordata contains two
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 856
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 845
clades of invertebrates: Urochordata (tunicates, salps, and larvaceans) and Cephalochordata (lancelets),
together with the vertebrates in the Vertebrata. Most tunicates live on the ocean floor and are suspension
feeders. Lancelets are suspension feeders that feed on phytoplankton and other microorganisms. The sister
taxon of the Chordates is the Ambulacraria, which includes both the Echinoderms and the hemichordates,
which share pharyngeal slits with the chordates.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 28.3Which of the following statements is a. Mollusks have a radula for grinding food.
false? b. A digestive gland is connected to the
a. Choanocytes have flagella that propel water stomach.
through the body. c. The tissue beneath the shell is called the
b. Pinacocytes can transform into any cell mantle.
type. d. The digestive system includes a gizzard, a
c. Lophocytes secrete collagen. stomach, a digestive gland, and the
d. Porocytes control the flow of water through intestine.
pores in the sponge body.
3.Figure 28.45Which of the following statements
2.Figure 28.21Which of the following statements about insects is false?
about the anatomy of a mollusk is false? a. Insects have both dorsal and ventral blood
vessels.
b. Insects have spiracles, openings that allow
air to enter.
c. The trachea is part of the digestive system.
d. Insects have a developed digestive system
with a mouth, crop, and intestine.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Mesohyl contains: a. phylum Porifera
a. a polysaccharide gel and dead cells. b. phylum Nemertea
b. a collagen-like gel and suspended cells for c. phylum Nematoda
various functions. d. phylum Cnidaria
c. spicules composed of silica or calcium
8.Cubozoans are ________.
carbonate.
a. polyps
d. multiple pores.
b. medusoids
5.The large central opening in the parazoan body is c. polymorphs
called the: d. sponges
a. gemmule.
9.While collecting specimens, a marine biologist
b. spicule.
finds a sessile Cnidarian. The medusas that bud from
c. ostia.
it swim by contracting a ring of muscle in their bells.
d. osculum.
To which class does this specimen belong?
6.Most sponge body plans are slight variations on a a. Class Hydrozoa
simple tube-within-a-tube design. Which of the b. Class Cubozoa
following is a key limitation of sponge body plans? c. Class Scyphozoa
d. Class Anthozoa
a. Sponges lack the specialized cell types
10.Which group of flatworms are primarily
needed to produce more complex body
ectoparasites of fish?
plans.
a. monogeneans
b. The reliance on osmosis/diffusion requires a
b. trematodes
design that maximizes the surface area to
c. cestodes
volume ratio of the sponge.
d. turbellarians
c. Choanocytes must be protected from the
hostile exterior environment. 11.The rhynchocoel is a ________.
d. Spongin cannot support heavy bodies. a. circulatory system
b. fluid-filled cavity
7.Cnidocytes are found in _____.
c. primitive excretory system
d. proboscis
PAGE: 857
846 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
12.Annelids have (a): a. chelicerates
a. pseudocoelom. b. hexapods
b. true coelom. c. arachnids
c. no coelom. d. crustaceans
d. none of the above
19.Which of the following isnota key advantage
13.A mantle and mantle cavity are present in: provided by the exoskeleton of terrestrial arthropods?
a. phylum Echinodermata. a. Prevents dessication
b. phylum Adversoidea. b. Protects internal tissue
c. phylum Mollusca. c. Provides mechanical support
d. phylum Nemertea. d. Grows with the arthropod throughout its life
14.How does segmentation enhance annelid 20.Echinoderms have _____.
locomotion? a. triangular symmetry
a. Segmentation creates repeating body b. radial symmetry
structures so the entire organism functions c. hexagonal symmetry
in synchrony. d. pentaradial symmetry
b. Segmentation allows specialization of
21.The circulatory fluid in echinoderms is _____.
different body regions.
c. Neural segmentation allows annelids to
a. blood
localize sensations.
b. mesohyl
d. Muscle contractions can be localized to
c. water
specific regions of the body to coordinate
d. saline
movement.
22.Which of the following features does not
15.The embryonic development in nematodes can
distinguish humans as a member of phylum
have up to __________ larval stages.
Chordata?
a. one
a. Human embryos undergo indeterminate
b. two
cleavage.
c. three
b. A spinal cord runs along an adult human’s
d. five
dorsal side.
16.The nematode cuticle contains _____. c. Human embryos exhibit pharyngeal arches
a. glucose and gill slits.
b. skin cells d. The human coccyx forms from an
c. chitin embryonic tail.
d. nerve cells
23.The sister taxon of the Chordata is the _____.
17.Crustaceans are _____.
a. ecdysozoans a. Mollusca
b. nematodes b. Arthropoda
c. arachnids c. Ambulacraria
d. parazoans d. Rotifera
18.Flies are_______.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
24.Describe the different cell types and their 29.How does the tapeworm body plan support
functions in sponges. widespread dissemination of the parasite?
25.Describe the feeding mechanism of sponges and 30.Describe the morphology and anatomy of
identify how it is different from other animals. mollusks.
26.Explain the function of nematocysts in cnidarians. 31.What are the anatomical differences between
nemertines and mollusks?
27.Compare the structural differences between
Porifera and Cnidaria. 32.How does a change in the circulatory system
organization support the body designs in
28.Compare the differences in sexual reproduction
cephalopods compared to other mollusks?
between Porifera and Cubozoans. How does the
difference in fertilization provide an evolutionary 33.Enumerate features ofCaenorhabditis elegans
advantage to the Cubozoans? that make it a valuable model system for biologists.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 858
Chapter 28 | Invertebrates 847
34.What are the different ways in which nematodes phylum Annelida with that seen in phylum
can reproduce? Arthropoda.
35.Why are tardigrades essential to recolonizing 38.How do terrestrial arthropods of the subphylum
habits following destruction or mass extinction? Hexapoda impact the world’s food supply? Provide at
least two positive and two negative effects.
36.Describe the various superclasses that phylum
Arthropoda can be divided into. 39.Describe the different classes of echinoderms
using examples.
37.Compare and contrast the segmentation seen in
PAGE: 859
848 Chapter 28 | Invertebrates
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 860
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 849
29 | VERTEBRATES
Figure 29.1 Examples of critically endangered vertebrate species include (a) the Siberian tiger (Panthera tigris), (b)
themountaingorilla(Gorillaberingei),and(c)theharpyeagle(Harpiaharpyja).(Theharpyeagleisconsidered"near
threatened" globally, but critically endangered in much of its former range in Mexico and Central America.) (credit a:
modification of work by Dave Pape; credit b: modification of work by Dave Proffer; credit c: modification of work by
Haui Ared)
Chapter Outline
29.1:Chordates
29.2:Fishes
29.3:Amphibians
29.4:Reptiles
29.5:Birds
29.6:Mammals
29.7:The Evolution of Primates
Introduction
Vertebrates are among the most recognizable organisms of the Animal Kingdom, and more than 62,000
vertebratespecieshavebeenidentified.Thevertebratespeciesnowlivingrepresentonlyasmallportionofthe
vertebratesthathaveexistedinthepast.Thebest-knownextinctvertebratesarethedinosaurs,auniquegroup
of reptiles, some of which reached sizes not seen before or after in terrestrial animals. In fact, they were the
dominantterrestrialanimalsfor150millionyears,untilmostofthemdiedoutinamassextinctionneartheendof
theCretaceousperiod(exceptforthefeatheredtheropodancestorsofmodernbirds,whosedirectdescendents
now number nearly 10,000 species). Although it is not known with certainty what caused this mass extinction
(notonlyofdinosaurs,butofmanyothergroupsoforganisms),agreatdealisknownabouttheanatomyofthe
dinosaurs and early birds, given the preservation of numerous skeletal elements, nests, eggs, and embryos in
the fossil record.
The vertebrates exhibit two major innovations in their evolution from the invertebrate chordates. These
innovationsmaybeassociatedwiththewholegenomeduplicationsthatresultedinaquadruplicationofthebasic
chordategenome,includingtheHoxgenelocithatregulatetheplacementofstructuresalongthethreeaxesof
the body. One of the first major steps was the emergence of the quadrupeds in the form of the amphibians. A
secondstepwastheevolutionoftheamnioticegg,which,similartotheevolutionofpollenandseedsinplants,
freedterrestrialanimalsfromtheirdependenceonwaterforfertilizationandembryonicdevelopment.Withinthe
amniotes, modifications of keratinous epidermal structures have given rise to scales, claws, hair, and feathers.
Thescalesofreptilessealedtheirskinsagainstwaterloss,whilehairandfeathersprovidedinsulationtosupport
the evolution of endothermy, as well as served other functions such as camouflage and mate attraction in the
vertebrate lineages that led to birds and mammals.
Currently, a number of vertebrate species face extinction primarily due to habitat loss and pollution. According
PAGE: 861
850 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
to the International Union for the Conservation of Nature, more than 6,000 vertebrate species are classified as
threatened.Amphibiansandmammalsaretheclasseswiththegreatestpercentageofthreatenedspecies,with
29percentofallamphibiansand21percentofallmammalsclassifiedasthreatened.Attemptsarebeingmade
aroundtheworldtopreventtheextinctionofthreatenedspecies.Forexample,theBiodiversityActionPlanisan
international program, ratified by 188 countries, which is designed to protect species and habitats.
29.1 | Chordates
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the distinguishing characteristics of chordates
• Identify the derived characters of craniates that sets them apart from other chordates
• Describe the developmental fate of the notochord in vertebrates
VertebratesaremembersofthekingdomAnimaliaandthephylumChordata(Figure29.2).Recallthatanimals
that possess bilateral symmetry can be divided into two groups—protostomes and deuterostomes—based on
their patterns of embryonic development. The deuterostomes, whose name translates as “second mouth,”
consist of two major phyla: Echinodermata and Chordata. Echinoderms are invertebrate marine animals that
have pentaradial symmetry and a spiny body covering, a group that includes sea stars, sea urchins, and sea
cucumbers. The most conspicuous and familiar members of Chordata are vertebrates, but this phylum also
includes two groups of invertebrate chordates.
Figure29.2Deuterostomephylogeny.Allchordatesaredeuterostomespossessinganotochordatsomestageoftheir
life cycle.
Characteristics of Chordata
Animals in the phylum Chordata share five key chacteristics that appear at some stage during their
development: a notochord, a dorsal hollow (tubular) nerve cord, pharyngeal gill arches or slits, a post-anal tail,
andanendostyle/thyroidgland(Figure29.3).Insomegroups,someofthesekeychacteristicsarepresentonly
during embryonic development.
Thechordatesarenamedforthenotochord,whichisaflexible,rod-shapedmesodermalstructurethatisfound
intheembryonicstageofallchordatesandintheadultstageofsomechordatespecies.Itisstrengthenedwith
glycoproteins similar to cartilage and covered with a collagenous sheath. The notocord is located between the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 862
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 851
digestivetubeandthenervecord,andprovidesrigidskeletalsupportaswellasaflexiblelocationforattachment
of axial muscles. In some chordates, the notochord acts as the primary axial support of the body throughout
the animal’s lifetime. However, in vertebrates (craniates), the notochord is present only during embryonic
development, at which time it induces the development of the neural tube and serves as a support for the
developing embryonic body. The notochord, however, is not found in the postembryonic stages of vertebrates;
at this point, it has been replaced by the vertebral column (that is, the spine).
Figure29.3Chordatefeatures.Inchordates,fourcommonfeaturesappearatsomepointduringdevelopment:a
notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail. The endostyle is embedded in the
floor of the pharynx.
Which of the following statements about common features of chordates is true?
1. The dorsal hollow nerve cord is part of the chordate central nervous system.
2. In vertebrate fishes, the pharyngeal slits become the gills.
3. Humans are not chordates because humans do not have a tail.
4. Vertebrates donothaveanotochordatanypointintheirdevelopment; instead, theyhaveavertebral
column.
5. The endostyle secretes steroid hormones.
The dorsal hollow nerve cord is derived from ectoderm that rolls into a hollow tube during development. In
chordates,itislocateddorsallytothenotochord.Incontrast,thenervoussysteminprotostomeanimalphylais
characterizedbysolidnervecordsthatarelocatedeitherventrallyand/orlaterallytothegut.Invertebrates,the
neuraltubedevelopsintothebrainandspinalcord,whichtogethercomprisethecentralnervoussystem(CNS).
Theperipheralnervoussystem(PNS)referstotheperipheralnerves(includingthecranialnerves)lyingoutside
of the brain and spinal cord.
Pharyngealslitsareopeningsinthepharynx(theregionjustposteriortothemouth)thatextendtotheoutside
environment. In organisms that live in aquatic environments, pharyngeal slits allow for the exit of water that
enters the mouth during feeding. Some invertebrate chordates use the pharyngeal slits to filter food out of
the water that enters the mouth. The endostyle is a strip of ciliated mucus-producing tissue in the floor of the
pharynx.Foodparticlestrappedinthemucusaremovedalongtheendostyletowardthegut.Theendostylealso
produces substances similar to thyroid hormones and is homologous with the thyroid gland in vertebrates. In
vertebrate fishes, the pharyngeal slits are modified into gill supports, and in jawed fishes, into jaw supports. In
tetrapods (land vertebrates), the slits are highly modified into components of the ear, and tonsils and thymus
glands.Inothervertebrates,pharyngealarches,derivedfromallthreegermlayers,giverisetotheoraljawfrom
the first pharyngeal arch, with the second arch becoming the hyoid and jaw support.
The post-anal tail is a posterior elongation of the body, extending beyond the anus. The tail contains skeletal
elements and muscles, which provide a source of locomotion in aquatic species, such as fishes. In some
terrestrial vertebrates, the tail also helps with balance, courting, and signaling when danger is near. In humans
and other great apes, the post-anal tail is reduced to a vestigial coccyx (“tail bone”) that aids in balance during
sitting.
PAGE: 863
852 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Click for a video discussing the evolution of chordates and five characteristics that they share. (This
multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66588/1.3/#eip-
id1165239610289)
Chordates and the Evolution of Vertebrates
Two clades of chordates are invertebrates: Cephalochordata and Urochordata. Members of these groups also
possess the five distinctive features of chordates at some point during their development.
Cephalochordata
Members of Cephalochordata possess a notochord, dorsal hollow tubular nerve cord, pharyngeal slits,
endostyle/thyroid gland, and a post-anal tail in the adult stage (Figure 29.4). The notochord extends into the
head,whichgivesthesubphylumitsname.Althoughtheneuraltubealsoextendsintotheheadregion,thereis
nowell-definedbrain,andthenervoussystemiscenteredaroundahollownervecordlyingabovethenotochord.
Extinct members of this subphylum include Pikaia, which is the oldest known cephalochordate. Excellently
preserved Pikaia fossils were recovered from the Burgess shales of Canada and date to the middle of the
Cambrianage,makingthemmorethan500millionyearsold.ItsanatomyofPikaiacloselyresemblesthatofthe
extant lancelet in the genusBranchiostoma.
The lancelets are named for their bladelike shape. Lancelets are only a few centimeters long and are usually
found buried in sand at the bottom of warm temperate and tropical seas. Cephalochordates are suspension
feeders. A water current is created by cilia in the mouth, and is filtered through oral tentacles. Water from the
mouththenentersthepharyngealslits,whichfilteroutfoodparticles.Thefilteredwatercollectsinagillchamber
called the atrium and exits through the atriopore. Trapped food particles are caught in a stream of mucus
produced by the endostyle in a ventral ciliated fold (or groove) of the pharynx and carried to the gut. Most gas
exchangeoccursacrossthebodysurface.Sexesareseparateandgametesarereleasedintothewaterthrough
the atriopore for external fertilization.
Figure 29.4 Cephalochordate anatomy. In the lancelet and other cephalochordates, the notochord extends into the
head region. Adult lancelets retain all five key characteristics of chordates: a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord,
pharyngeal slits, an endostyle, and a post-anal tail.
Urochordata
The1,600speciesofUrochordataarealsoknownastunicates(Figure29.5).Thenametunicatederivesfrom
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 864
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 853
the cellulose-like carbohydrate material, called the tunic, which covers the outer body of tunicates. Although
tunicatesareclassifiedaschordates,theadultsdonothaveanotochord,adorsalhollownervecord,orapost-
analtail,althoughtheydohavepharyngealslitsandanendostyle.The“tadpole”larvalform,however,possesses
all five structures. Most tunicates are hermaphrodites; their larvae hatch from eggs inside the adult tunicate’s
body. After hatching, a tunicate larva (possessing all five chordate features) swims for a few days until it finds
a suitable surface on which it can attach, usually in a dark or shaded location. It then attaches via the head to
the surface and undergoes metamorphosis into the adult form, at which point the notochord, nerve cord, and
tail disappear, leaving the pharyngeal gill slits and the endostyle as the two remaining features of its chordate
morphology.
Figure29.5Urochordateanatomy.(a)ThisphotographshowsacolonyofthetunicateBotrylloidesviolaceus.(b)The
larvalstageofthetunicatepossessesallofthefeaturescharacteristicofchordates:anotochord,adorsalhollownerve
cord, pharyngeal slits, an endostyle, and a post-anal tail. (c) In the adult stage, the notochord, nerve cord, and tail
disappear, leaving just the pharyngeal slits and endostyle. (credit: modification of work by Dann Blackwood, USGS)
Adult tunicates may be either solitary or colonial forms, and some species may reproduce by budding. Most
tunicatesliveasessileexistenceontheoceanfloorandaresuspensionfeeders.However,chainsofthaliacean
tunicatescalledsalps(Figure29.6)canswimactivelywhilefeeding,propellingthemselvesastheymovewater
through the pharyngeal slits. The primary foods of tunicates are plankton and detritus. Seawater enters the
tunicate’s body through its incurrent siphon. Suspended material is filtered out of this water by a mucous net
produced by the endostyle and is passed into the intestine via the action of cilia. The anus empties into the
excurrentsiphon,whichexpelswastesandwater.Tunicatesarefoundinshallowoceanwatersaroundtheworld.
PAGE: 865
854 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.6 Salps. These colonial tunicates feed on phytoplankton. Salps are sequential hermaphrodites, with
youngerfemalecoloniesfertilizedbyoldermalecolonies.(credit:OregonDepartmentofFish&WildlifeviaWikimedia
Commons)
Subphylum Vertebrata (Craniata)
A cranium is a bony, cartilaginous, or fibrous structure surrounding the brain, jaw, and facial bones (Figure
29.7).Mostbilaterallysymmetricalanimalshaveahead;ofthese,thosethathaveacraniumcomprisetheclade
Craniata/Vertebrata, which includes the primitively jawless Myxini (hagfishes), Petromyzontida (lampreys), and
all of the organisms called “vertebrates.” (We should note that the Myxini have a cranium but lack a backbone.)
Figure 29.7 A craniate skull. The subphylum Craniata (or Vertebrata), including this placoderm fish (Dunkleosteus
sp.),arecharacterizedbythepresenceofacranium,mandible,andotherfacialbones.(credit:“Steveoc86”/Wikimedia
Commons)
Members of the phylum Craniata/Vertebrata display the five characteristic features of the chordates; however,
members of this group also share derived characteristics that distinguish them from invertebrate chordates.
Vertebrates are named for the vertebral column, composed of vertebrae—a series of separate, irregularly
shapedbonesjoinedtogethertoformabackbone(Figure29.8).Initially,thevertebraeforminsegmentsaround
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 866
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 855
theembryonicnotochord,buteventuallyreplaceitinadults.Inmostderivedvertebrates,thenotochordbecomes
thenucleus pulposusof the intervertebral discs that cushion and support adjacent vertebrae.
Figure29.8Avertebrateskeleton.Vertebrataarecharacterizedbythepresenceofabackbone,suchastheonethat
runs through the middle of this fish. All vertebrates are in the Craniata clade and have a cranium. (credit: Ernest V.
More; taken at Smithsonian Museum of Natural History, Washington, D.C.)
The relationship of the vertebrates to the invertebrate chordates has been a matter of contention, but although
thesecladisticrelationshipsarestillbeingexamined,itappearsthattheCraniata/Vertebrataareamonophyletic
group that shares the five basic chordate characteristics with the other two subphyla, Urochordata and
Cephalochordata. Traditional phylogenies place the cephalochordates as a sister clade to the chordates, a
view that has been supported by most current molecular analyses. This hypothesis is further supported by the
discovery of a fossil in China from the genus Haikouella. This organism seems to be an intermediate form
between cephalochordates and vertebrates. The Haikouella fossils are about 530 million years old and appear
similartomodernlancelets.Theseorganismshadabrainandeyes,asdovertebrates,butlacktheskullfound
[1]
in craniates. This evidence suggests that vertebrates arose during the Cambrian explosion.
Vertebratesarethelargestgroupofchordates,withmorethan62,000livingspecies,whicharegroupedbased
on anatomical and physiological traits. More than one classification and naming scheme is used for these
animals.HerewewillconsiderthetraditionalgroupsAgnatha,Chondrichthyes,Osteichthyes,Amphibia,Reptilia,
Aves, and Mammalia, which constitute classes in the subphylum Vertebrata/Craniata. Virtually all modern
cladists classify birds within Reptilia, which correctly reflects their evolutionary heritage. Thus, we now have
the nonavian reptiles and the avian reptiles in our reptilian classification. We consider them separately only
for convenience. Further, we will consider hagfishes and lampreys together as jawless fishes, the Agnatha,
although emerging classification schemes separate them into chordate jawless fishes (the hagfishes) and
vertebrate jawless fishes (the lampreys).
Animals that possess jaws are known as gnathostomes, which means “jawed mouth.” Gnathostomes include
fishes and tetrapods. Tetrapod literally means “four-footed,” which refers to the phylogenetic history of various
land vertebrates, even though in some of the tetrapods, the limbs may have been modified for purposes other
than walking. Tetrapods include amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, and technically could also refer to
the extinct fishlike groups that gave rise to the tetrapods. Tetrapods can be further divided into two groups:
amphibians and amniotes. Amniotes are animals whose eggs contain four extraembryonic membranes (yolk
sac, amnion, chorion, and allantois) that provide nutrition and a water-retaining environment for their embryos.
Amniotes are adapted for terrestrial living, and include mammals, reptiles, and birds.
29.2 | Fishes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the difference between jawless and jawed fishes
• Discuss the distinguishing features of sharks and rays compared to other modern fishes
Modern fishes include an estimated 31,000 species, by far the most of all clades within the Vertebrata. Fishes
1. Chen, J. Y., Huang, D. Y., and Li, C. W., “An early Cambrian craniate-like chordate,”Nature402 (1999): 518–522, doi:10.1038/990080.
PAGE: 867
856 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
were the earliest vertebrates, with jawless species being the earliest forms and jawed species evolving later.
They are active feeders, rather than sessile, suspension feeders. The Agnatha (jawless fishes)—the hagfishes
and lampreys—have a distinct cranium and complex sense organs including eyes, that distinguish them from
the invertebrate chordates, the urochordates and cephalochordates.
Jawless Fishes: Superclass Agnatha
Jawless fishes (Agnatha) are craniates representing an ancient vertebrate lineage that arose over 550 million
years ago. In the past, hagfishes and lampreys were sometimes recognized as separate clades within the
Agnatha,primarilybecauselampreyswereregardedastruevertebrates,whereashagfisheswerenot.However,
recent molecular data, both from rRNA and mtDNA, as well as embryological data, provide strong support for
thehypothesisthatlivingagnathans—previouslycalledcyclostomes—aremonophyletic,andthussharerecent
common ancestry. The discussion below, for convenience, separates the modern “cyclostomes” into the class
Myxini and class Petromyzontida. The defining features of the living jawless fishes are the lack of jaws and
lack of paired lateral appendages (fins). They also lack internal ossification and scales, although these are not
defining features of the clade.
Someoftheearliestjawlessfisheswerethearmoredostracoderms(whichtranslatesto“shell-skin”):vertebrate
fishes encased in bony armor—unlike present-day jawless fishes, which lack bone in their scales. Some
ostracoderms, also unlike living jawless fishes, may have had paired fins. We should note, however, that the
“ostracoderms” represent an assemblage of heavily armored extinct jawless fishes that may not form a natural
evolutionarygroup.FossilsofthegenusHaikouichthysfromChina,withanageofabout530millionyears,show
many typical vertebrate characteristics including paired eyes, auditory capsules, and rudimentary vertebrae.
Class Myxini: Hagfishes
The class Myxini includes at least 70 species of hagfishes—eel-like scavengers that live on the ocean floor
andfeedonlivingordeadinvertebrates,fishes,andmarinemammals(Figure29.9).Althoughtheyarealmost
completelyblind,sensorybarbelsaroundthemouthhelpthemlocatefoodbysmellandtouch.Theyfeedusing
keratinizedteethonamovablecartilaginousplateinthemouth,whichrasppiecesoffleshfromtheirprey.These
feedingstructuresallowthegillstobeusedexclusivelyforrespiration,notforfilterfeedingasintheurochordates
and cephalochordates. Hagfishes are entirely marine and are found in oceans around the world, except for
the polar regions. Unique slime glands beneath the skin release a milky mucus (through surface pores) that
uponcontactwithwaterbecomesincrediblyslippery,makingtheanimalalmostimpossibletohold.Thisslippery
mucus thus allows the hagfish to escape from the grip of predators. Hagfish can also twist their bodies into a
knot, which provides additional leverage to feed. Sometimes hagfish enter the bodies of dead animals and eat
carcasses from the inside out! Interestingly, they do not have a stomach!
Figure29.9Hagfish.Pacifichagfisharescavengersthatliveontheoceanfloor.(credit:LindaSnook,NOAA/CBNMS)
Hagfishes have a cartilaginous skull, as well as a fibrous and cartilaginous skeleton, but the major supportive
structure is the notochord that runs the length of the body. In hagfishes, the notochord is not replaced by the
vertebralcolumn,asitisintruevertebrates,andthustheymay(morphologically)representasistergrouptothe
true vertebrates, making them the most basal clade among the skull-bearing chordates.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 868
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 857
Class Petromyzontida: Lampreys
The class Petromyzontida includes approximately 40 species of lampreys, which are superficially similar to
hagfishesinsizeandshape.However,lampreyspossessextrinsiceyemuscles,atleasttwosemicircularcanals,
andatruecerebellum,aswellassimplevertebralelements, calledarcualia—cartilaginousstructuresarranged
above the notochord. These features are also shared with the gnathostomes—vertebrates with jawed mouths
and paired appendages (see below). Lampreys also have a dorsal tubular nerve cord with a well-differentiated
brain,asmallcerebellum,and10pairsofnerves.Theclassificationoflampreysisstilldebated,buttheyclearly
representoneoftheoldestdivergencesofthevertebratelineage.Lampreyslackpairedappendages,asdothe
hagfishes,althoughtheyhaveoneortwofleshydorsalfins.Asadults,lampreysarecharacterizedbyarasping
tonguewithinatoothed,funnel-likesuckingmouth.Manyspecieshaveaparasiticstageoftheirlifecycleduring
whichtheyarefishectoparasites(somecallthempredatorsbecausetheyattackandeventuallyfalloff)(Figure
29.10).
Figure29.10Lamprey.Theseparasiticsealampreys,Petromyzonmarinus,attachbysuctiontotheirlaketrouthost,
and use their rough tongues to rasp away flesh in order to feed on the trout’s blood. (credit: USGS)
Lampreysliveprimarilyincoastalandfreshwaterenvironments,andhaveaworldwidedistribution,exceptforthe
tropicsandpolarregions.Somespeciesaremarine,butallspeciesspawninfreshwater.Interestingly,northern
lampreys in the family Petromyzontidae, have the highest number of chromosomes (164 to 174) among the
vertebrates.Eggsarefertilizedexternally,andthelarvae(calledammocoetes)differgreatlyfromtheadultform,
closelyresemblingtheadultcephalocordateamphioxus.Afterspendingthreeto15yearsassuspensionfeeders
in rivers and streams, they attain sexual maturity. Shortly afterward, the adults swim upstream, reproduce, and
die within days.
Gnathostomes: Jawed Fishes
Gnathostomes, or “jaw-mouths,” are vertebrates that possess true jaws—a milestone in the evolution of the
vertebrates.Infact,oneofthemostsignificantdevelopmentsinearlyvertebrateevolutionwasthedevelopment
ofthejaw:ahingedstructureattachedtothecraniumthatallowsananimaltograspandtearitsfood.Jawswere
probably derived from the first pair of gill arches supporting the gills of jawless fishes.
Earlygnathostomesalsopossessedtwosetsofpairedfins,allowingthefishestomaneuveraccurately.Pectoral
finsaretypicallylocatedontheanteriorbody,andpelvicfinsontheposterior.Evolutionofthejawandpairedfins
permitted gnathostomes to expand their food options from the scavenging and suspension feeding of jawless
fishes to active predation. The ability of gnathostomes to exploit new nutrient sources probably contributed to
their replacing most jawless fishes during the Devonian period. Two early groups of gnathostomes were the
acanthodiansandplacoderms(Figure29.11),whicharoseinthelateSilurianperiodandarenowextinct.Most
modernfishesaregnathostomesthatbelongtothecladesChondrichthyesandOsteichthyes(whichincludethe
class Actinoptertygii and class Sarcopterygii).
PAGE: 869
858 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure29.11Aplacoderm.DunkleosteuswasanenormousplacodermfromtheDevonianperiod,380to360million
years ago. It measured up to 10 meters in length and weighed up to 3.6 tons. Its head and neck were armored with
heavybonyplates.AlthoughDunkleosteushadnotrueteeth,theedgeofthejawwasarmedwithsharpbonyblades.
(credit: Nobu Tamura)
Class Chondrichthyes: Cartilaginous Fishes
The class Chondrichthyes (about 1,000 species) is a morphologically diverse clade, consisting of subclass
Elasmobranchii (sharks [Figure 29.12], rays, and skates, together with the obscure and critically endangered
sawfishes),andafewdozenspeciesoffishescalledchimaeras,or“ghostsharks”inthesubclassHolocephali.
Chondrichthyes are jawed fishes that possess paired fins and a skeleton made of cartilage. This clade arose
approximately370millionyearsagointheearlyormiddleDevonian.Theyarethoughttobedescendedfromthe
placoderms,whichhadendoskeletonsmadeofbone;thus,thelightercartilaginousskeletonofChondrichthyes
is a secondarily derived evolutionary development. Parts of shark skeleton are strengthened by granules of
calcium carbonate, but this is not the same as bone.
Most cartilaginous fishes live in marine habitats, with a few species living in fresh water for a part or all of their
lives.Mostsharksarecarnivoresthatfeedonliveprey,eitherswallowingitwholeorusingtheirjawsandteethto
tearitintosmallerpieces.Sharkshaveabrasiveskincoveredwithtooth-likescalescalledplacoidscales.Shark
teeth probably evolved from rows of these scales lining the mouth. A few species of sharks and rays, like the
enormous whale shark (Figure 29.13), are suspension feeders that feed on plankton. The sawfishes have an
extended rostrum that looks like a double-edged saw. The rostrum is covered with electrosensitive pores that
allowthesawfishtodetectslightmovementsofpreyhidinginthemuddyseafloor.Theteethintherostrumare
actually modified tooth-like structures called denticles, similar to scales.
Figure 29.12 Shark. Hammerhead sharks tend to school during the day and hunt prey at night. (credit: Masashi
Sugawara)
Sharks have well-developed sense organs that aid them in locating prey, including a keen sense of smell and
theabilitytodetectelectromagneticfields.ElectroreceptorscalledampullaeofLorenziniallowsharkstodetect
the electromagnetic fields that are produced by all living things, including their prey. (Electroreception has only
been observed in aquatic or amphibious animals and sharks have perhaps the most sensitive electroreceptors
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 870
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 859
ofanyanimal.)Sharks,togetherwithmostfishesandaquaticandlarvalamphibians,alsohavearowofsensory
structurescalledthelateralline,whichisusedtodetectmovementandvibrationinthesurroundingwater,and
isoftenconsideredtobefunctionallysimilartothesenseof“hearing”interrestrialvertebrates.Thelaterallineis
visibleasadarkerstripethatrunsalongthelengthofafish’sbody.Sharkshavenomechanismformaintaining
neutralbuoyancyandmustswimcontinuouslytostaysuspendedinthewater.Somemustalsoswiminorderto
ventilate their gills but others have muscular pumps in their mouths to keep water flowing over the gills.
Figure29.13WhalesharkintheGeorgiaAquarium.Whalesharksarefilter-feedersandcangrowtobeover10meters
long.Whalesharks,likemostothersharks,areovoviviparous.(credit:modifiedfromZacWolf[Ownwork][CCBY-SA
2.5 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.5 (http://openstax.org/l/CCSA))], via Wikimedia Commons)
Sharksreproducesexually,andeggsarefertilizedinternally.Mostspeciesareovoviviparous:Thefertilizedegg
is retained in the oviduct of the mother’s body and the embryo is nourished by the egg yolk. The eggs hatch
in the uterus, and young are born alive and fully functional. Some species of sharks are oviparous: They lay
eggsthathatchoutsideofthemother’sbody.Embryosareprotectedbyasharkeggcaseor“mermaid’spurse”
(Figure29.14)thathastheconsistencyofleather.Thesharkeggcasehastentaclesthatsnaginseaweedand
givethenewbornsharkcover.Afewspeciesofsharks,e.g.,tigersharksandhammerheads,areviviparous:the
yolksacthat initially contains the eggyolkandtransfers itsnutrients tothe growingembryobecomesattached
totheoviductofthefemale,andnutrientsaretransferreddirectlyfromthemothertothegrowingembryo.Inboth
viviparous and ovoviviparous sharks, gas exchange uses this yolk sac transport.
Figure 29.14 Shark egg cases. Shark embryos are clearly visible through these transparent egg cases. The round
structure is the yolk that nourishes the growing embryo. (credit: Jek Bacarisas)
Ingeneral,theChondrichthyeshaveafusiformordorsoventrallyflattenedbody,aheterocercalcaudalfinortail
(unequallysizedfinlobes,withthetailvertebraeextendingintothelargerupperlobe)pairedpectoralandpelvic
fins (in males these may be modified as claspers), exposed gill slits (elasmobranch), and an intestine with a
spiral valve that condenses the length of the intestine. They also have three pairs of semicircular canals, and
excellentsensesofsmell,vibration,vision,andelectroreception.Averylargelobedliverproducessqualeneoil
(alightweightbiochemicalprecursortosteroids)thatservestoaidinbuoyancy(becausewithaspecificgravity
of 0.855, it is lighter than that of water).
PAGE: 871
860 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Raysandskatescomprisemorethan500species.Theyarecloselyrelatedtosharksbutcanbedistinguished
fromsharksbytheirflattenedbodies,pectoralfinsthatareenlargedandfusedtothehead,andgillslitsontheir
ventral surface (Figure 29.15). Like sharks, rays and skates have a cartilaginous skeleton. Most species are
marine and live on the sea floor, with nearly a worldwide distribution.
Unlikethestereotypicalsharksandrays,theHolocephali(chimaerasorratfish)haveadiphycercaltail(equally
sized fin lobes, with the tail vertebrae located between them), lack scales (lost secondarily in evolution), and
have teeth modified as grinding plates that are used to feed on mollusks and other invertebrates (Figure
29.15b). Unlike sharks with elasmobranch or naked gills, chimaeras have four pairs of gills covered by an
operculum. Many species have a pearly iridescence and are extremely pretty.
Figure29.15Cartilaginousfish.(a)Stingray.Thisstingrayblendsintothesandybottomoftheoceanfloor.Aspotted
ratfish(b)Hydrolaguscollieicredita"Sailn1"/Flickr;(credit:a"Sailn1"/Flickrb:LindaSnook/MBNMS[Publicdomain],
via Wikimedia Commons.)
Osteichthyes: Bony Fishes
Members of the clade Osteichthyes, also called bony fishes, are characterized by a bony skeleton. The vast
majority of present-day fishes belong to this group, which consists of approximately 30,000 species, making it
the largest class of vertebrates in existence today.
Nearly all bony fishes have an ossified skeleton with specialized bone cells (osteocytes) that produce and
maintain a calcium phosphate matrix. This characteristic has been reversed only in a few groups of
Osteichthyes,suchassturgeonsandpaddlefish,whichhaveprimarilycartilaginousskeletons.Theskinofbony
fishes is often covered by overlapping scales, and glands in the skin secrete mucus that reduces drag when
swimming and aids the fish in osmoregulation. Like sharks, bony fishes have a lateral line system that detects
vibrations in water.
Allbonyfishesusegillstobreathe.Waterisdrawnovergillsthatarelocatedinchamberscoveredandventilated
by a protective, muscular flap called the operculum. Many bony fishes also have a swim bladder, a gas-filled
organderivedasapouchfromthegut.Theswimbladderhelpstocontrolthebuoyancyofthefish.Inmostbony
fish, the gases of the swim bladder are exchanged directly with the blood. The swim bladder is believed to be
homologous to the lungs of lungfish and the lungs of land vertebrates.
Bony fishes are further divided into two extant clades: Class Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes) and Class
Sarcopterygii(lobe-finned fishes).
Actinopterygii(Figure29.16a),theray-finnedfishes,includemanyfamiliarfishes—tuna,bass,trout,andsalmon
among others—and represent about half of all vertebrate species. Ray-finned fishes are named for the fan of
slender bones that supports their fins.
In contrast, the fins of Sarcopterygii (Figure 29.16b) are fleshy and lobed, supported by bones that are similar
in type and arrangement to the bones in the limbs of early tetrapods. The few extant members of this clade
include several species of lungfishes and the less familiar coelacanths, which were thought to be extinct until
livingspecimenswerediscoveredbetweenAfricaandMadagascar.Currently,twospeciesofcoelocanthshave
been described.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 872
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 861
Figure29.16Osteichthyes.The(a)sockeyesalmonand(b)coelacantharebothbonyfishesoftheOsteichthyesclade.
Thecoelacanth,sometimescalledalobe-finnedfish,wasthoughttohavegoneextinctintheLateCretaceousperiod,
100millionyearsago,untilonewasdiscoveredin1938neartheComorosIslandsbetween Africa andMadagascar.
(credit a: modification of work by Timothy Knepp, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by Robbie Cada)
29.3 | Amphibians
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the important difference between the life cycle of amphibians and the life cycles of other
vertebrates
• Distinguish between the characteristics of Urodela, Anura, and Apoda
• Describe the evolutionary history of amphibians
Amphibians are vertebrate tetrapods (“four limbs”), and include frogs, salamanders, and caecilians. The term
“amphibian” loosely translates from the Greek as “dual life,” which is a reference to the metamorphosis that
manyfrogsandsalamandersundergoandtheuniquemixofaquaticandterrestrialphasesthatarerequiredin
theirlifecycle.Infact,theycannotstrayfarfromwaterbecausetheirreproductionisintimatelytiedtoaqueous
environments.AmphibiansevolvedduringtheDevonianperiodandweretheearliestterrestrialtetrapods.They
represent an evolutionary transition from water to land that occurred over many millions of years. Thus, the
Amphibiaaretheonlylivingtruevertebratesthathavemadeatransitionfromwatertolandinboththeirontogeny
(life development) and phylogeny (evolution). They have not changed much in morphology over the past 350
million years!
Watch this series of five Animal Planet videos on tetrapod evolution:
1: The evolution from fish to earliest tetrapod
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66590/1.3/#eip-
id1165240950500)
2: Fish to Earliest Tetrapod
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66590/1.3/#eip-
id1165238909112)
3: The discovery of coelacanth and Acanthostega fossils
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66590/1.3/#eip-
id1165238838011)
4: The number of fingers on “legs”
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66590/1.3/#eip-
id1165241069476)
5: Reconstructing the environment of early tetrapods
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66590/1.3/#eip-
id5626625)
PAGE: 873
862 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Characteristics of Amphibians
Astetrapods,mostamphibiansarecharacterizedbyfourwell-developedlimbs.Insomespeciesofsalamanders,
hindlimbs are reduced or absent, but all caecilians are (secondarily) limbless. An important characteristic of
extantamphibiansisamoist,permeableskinthatisachievedviamucusglands.Mostwateristakeninacross
theskinratherthanbydrinking.Theskinisalsooneofthreerespiratorysurfacesusedbyamphibians.Theother
two are the lungs and the buccal (mouth) cavity. Air is taken first into the mouth through the nostrils, and then
pushed by positive pressure into the lungs by elevating the throat and closing the nostrils.
All extant adult amphibians are carnivorous, and some terrestrial amphibians have a sticky tongue used to
captureprey.Amphibiansalsohavemultiplesmallteethattheedgeofthejaws.Insalamandersandcaecilians,
teeth are present in both jaws, sometimes in multiple rows. In frogs and toads, teeth are seen only in the
upperjaw.Additionalteeth,calledvomerineteeth,maybefoundintheroofofthemouth.Amphibianteethare
pedicellate, which means that the root and crown are calcified, separated by a zone of noncalcified tissue.
Amphibians have image-forming eyes and color vision. Ears are best developed in frogs and toads, which
vocalizetocommunicate.Frogsuseseparateregionsoftheinnerearfordetectinghigherandlowersounds:the
papilla amphibiorum, which is sensitive to frequencies below 10,000 hertz and unique to amphibians, and the
papilla basilaris, which is sensitive to higher frequencies, including mating calls, transmitted from the eardrum
through the stapes bone. Amphibians also have an extra bone in the ear, the operculum, which transmits low-
frequency vibrations from the forelimbs and shoulders to the inner ear, and may be used for the detection of
seismic signals.
Evolution of Amphibians
The fossil record provides evidence of the first tetrapods: now-extinct amphibian species dating to nearly 400
millionyearsago.Evolutionoftetrapodsfromlobe-finnedfreshwaterfishes(similartocoelacanthsandlungfish)
represented a significant change in body plan from one suited to organisms that respired and swam in water,
to organisms that breathed air and moved onto land; these changes occurred over a span of 50 million years
during the Devonian period.
AquatictetrapodsoftheDevonianperiodincludeIchthyostegaandAcanthostega.Bothwereaquatic,andmay
havehadbothgillsandlungs.Theyalsohadfourlimbs,withtheskeletalstructureoflimbsfoundinpresent-day
tetrapods,includingamphibians.However,thelimbscouldnotbepulledinunderthebodyandwouldnothave
supportedtheirbodieswelloutofwater.Theyprobablylivedinshallowfreshwaterenvironments,andmayhave
taken brief terrestrial excursions, much like “walking” catfish do today in Florida. In Ichthyostega, the forelimbs
weremoredevelopedthanthehindlimbs,soitmighthavedraggeditselfalongwhenitventuredontoland.What
precededAcanthostegaandIchthyostega?
In2006,researcherspublishednewsoftheirdiscoveryofafossilofa“tetrapod-likefish,”Tiktaalikroseae,which
seemstobeamorphologically“intermediateform”betweensarcopterygianfisheshavingfeet-likefinsandearly
tetrapodshavingtruelimbs(Figure29.17).Tiktaaliklikelylivedinashallowwaterenvironmentabout375million
[2]
yearsago. Tiktaalikalsohadgillsandlungs,butthelossofsomegillelementsgaveitaneck,whichwouldhave
alloweditsheadtomovesidewaysforfeeding.Theeyeswereontopofthehead.Ithadfins,buttheattachment
ofthefinbonestotheshouldersuggested theymightbeweight-bearing. Tiktaalik precededAcanthostega and
Ichthyostega, with their four limbs, by about 10 million years and is considered to be a true intermediate clade
between fish and amphibians.
2. Daeschler, E. B., Shubin, N. H., and Jenkins, F. J. “A Devonian tetrapod-like fish and the evolution of the tetrapod body plan,”Nature440
(2006): 757–763, doi:10.1038/nature04639,http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v440/n7085/abs/nature04639.html (http://openstax.org/l/
tetrapod).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 874
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 863
Figure29.17Tiktaalik.TherecentfossildiscoveryofTiktaalikroseaesuggestsevidenceforananimalintermediateto
finned fish and legged tetrapods, sometimes called a "fishapod." (credit: Zina Deretsky, National Science Foundation)
Theearlytetrapodsthatmovedontolandhadaccesstonewnutrientsourcesandrelativelyfewpredators.This
ledtothewidespreaddistributionoftetrapodsduringtheearlyCarboniferousperiod,aperiodsometimescalled
the “age of the amphibians.”
Modern Amphibians
Amphibia comprises an estimated 6,770 extant species that inhabit tropical and temperate regions around the
world. All living species are classified in the subclass Lissamphibia ("smooth-amphibian"), which is divided into
threeclades:Urodela(“tailed”),thesalamanders;Anura(“tail-less”),thefrogs;andApoda(“leglessones”),the
caecilians.
Urodela: Salamanders
Salamanders are amphibians that belong to the order Urodela (or Caudata). These animals are probably the
most similar to ancestral amphibians. Living salamanders (Figure 29.18) include approximately 620 species,
someofwhichareaquatic,othersterrestrial,andsomethatliveonlandonlyasadults.Mostadultsalamanders
haveageneralizedtetrapodbodyplanwithfourlimbsandatail.Theplacementoftheirlegsmakesitdifficultto
lifttheirbodiesoffthegroundandtheymovebybendingtheirbodiesfromsidetoside,calledlateralundulation,
inafish-likemannerwhile“walking”theirarmsandlegsfore-and-aft.Itisthoughtthattheirgaitissimilartothat
used by early tetrapods. The majority of salamanders are lungless, and respiration occurs through the skin or
throughexternalgillsinaquaticspecies.Someterrestrialsalamandershaveprimitivelungs;afewspecieshave
bothgillsandlungs.ThegiantJapanesesalamander,thelargestlivingamphibian,hasadditionalfoldsinitsskin
that enlarge its respiratory surface.
Most salamanders reproduce using an unusual process of internal fertilization of the eggs. Mating between
salamanders typically involves an elaborate and often prolonged courtship. Such a courtship ends in the
deposition of sperm by the males in a packet called a spermatophore, which is subsequently picked up
by the female, thus ultimately fertilization is internal. All salamanders except one, the fire salamander, are
oviparous. Aquatic salamanders lay their eggs in water, where they develop into legless larvae called efts.
Terrestrial salamanders lay their eggs in damp nests, where the eggs are guarded by their mothers. These
embryos go through the larval stage and complete metamorphosis before hatching into tiny adult forms. One
aquatic salamander, the Mexican axolotl, never leaves the larval stage, becoming sexually mature without
metamorphosis.
PAGE: 875
864 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.18 Salamander. Most salamanders have legs and a tail, but respiration varies among species. (credit:
Valentina Storti)
ViewRiverMonsters:FishWithArmsandHands?(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/river_monster)toseea
video about an unusually large salamander species.
Anura: Frogs
Frogs(Figure29.19)areamphibiansthatbelongtotheorderAnuraorSalientia("jumpers").Anuransareamong
the most diverse groups of vertebrates, with approximately 5,965 species that occur on all of the continents
exceptAntarctica.Anurans,rangingfromtheminuteNewGuineafrogat7mmtothehugegoliathfrogat32cm
from tropical Africa, have a body plan that is more specialized for movement. Adult frogs use their hind limbs
andtheirarrow-likeendoskeletontojumpaccuratelytocapturepreyonland.Treefrogshavehandsadaptedfor
graspingbranchesastheyclimb.Intropicalareas,“flyingfrogs”canglidefromperchtoperchontheextended
webs of their feet. Frogs have a number of modifications that allow them to avoid predators, including skin
that acts as camouflage. Many species of frogs and salamanders also release defensive chemicals that are
poisonous to predators from glands in the skin. Frogs with more toxic skins have bright warning (aposematic)
coloration.
Figure29.19Treefrog.TheAustraliangreentreefrogisanocturnalpredatorthatlivesinthecanopiesoftreesneara
water source.
Frog eggs are fertilized externally, and like other amphibians, frogs generally lay their eggs in moist
environments.Althoughamphibianeggsareprotectedbyathickjellylayer,theywouldstilldehydratequicklyin
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 876
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 865
a dry environment. Frogs demonstrate a great diversity of parental behaviors, with some species laying many
eggsandexhibitinglittleparentalcare,tospeciesthatcarryeggsandtadpolesontheirhindlegsorembedded
intheirbacks.ThemalesofDarwin'sfrogcarrytadpolesintheirvocalsac.Manytreefrogslaytheireggsoffthe
ground in a folded leaf located over water so that the tadpoles can drop into the water as they hatch.
The life cycle of most frogs, as other amphibians, consists of two distinct stages: the larval stage followed by
metamorphosis to an adult stage. However, the eggs of frogs in the genus Eleutherodactylus develop directly
intolittlefroglets,guardedbyaparent.Thelarvalstageofafrog,thetadpole,isoftenafilter-feedingherbivore.
Tadpolesusuallyhavegills,alaterallinesystem,longfinnedtails,andlacklimbs.Attheendofthetadpolestage,
frogsundergometamorphosisintotheadultform(Figure29.20).Duringthisstage,thegills,tail,andlateralline
systemdisappear,andfourlimbsdevelop.Thejawsbecomelargerandaresuitedforcarnivorousfeeding,and
thedigestivesystemtransformsintothetypicalshortgutofapredator.Aneardrumandair-breathinglungsalso
develop. These changes during metamorphosis allow the larvae to move onto land in the adult stage.
Figure 29.20 Amphibian metapmorphosis. A juvenile frog metamorphoses into a frog. Here, the frog has started to
develop limbs, but its tadpole tail is still evident.
Apoda: Caecilians
Anestimated185speciescomprisethecaecilians,agroupofamphibiansthatbelongtotheorderApoda.They
have no limbs, although they evolved from a legged vertebrate ancestor. The complete lack of limbs makes
them resemble earthworms. This resemblance is enhanced by folds of skin that look like the segments of an
earthworm.However,unlikeearthworms,theyhaveteethinbothjaws,andfeedonavarietyofsmallorganisms
found in soil, including earthworms! Caecilians are adapted for a burrowing or aquatic lifestyle, and they are
nearlyblind,withtheirtinyeyessometimescoveredbyskin.Althoughtheyhaveasinglelung,theyalsodepend
oncutaneousrespiration.TheseanimalsarefoundinthetropicsofSouthAmerica,Africa,andSouthernAsia.In
thecaecelians,theonlyamphibiansinwhichthemaleshavecopulatorystructures,fertilizationisinternal.Some
caecilians are oviparous, but most bear live young. In these cases, the females help nourish their young with
tissue from their oviduct before birth and from their skin after birth.
PAGE: 877
866 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
The Paleozoic Era and the Evolution of Vertebrates
When the vertebrates arose during the Paleozoic Era (542 to 251 MYA), the climate and geography of
Earth was vastly different. The distribution of landmasses on Earth were also very different from that of
today.Neartheequatorweretwolargesupercontinents,LaurentiaandGondwana,whichincludedmostof
today'scontinents,butinaradicallydifferentconfiguration(Figure29.21).Atthistime,sealevelswerevery
high, probably at a level that hasn’t been reached since. As the Paleozoic progressed, glaciations created
acoolglobalclimate,butconditionswarmedneartheendofthefirsthalfofthePaleozoic.Duringthelatter
half of the Paleozoic, the landmasses began moving together, with the initial formation of a large northern
blockcalledLaurasia,whichcontainedpartsofwhatisnowNorthAmerica,alongwithGreenland,partsof
Europe,andSiberia.Eventually,asinglesupercontinent,calledPangaea,wasformed,startinginthelatter
thirdofthePaleozoic.GlaciationsthenbegantoaffectPangaea’sclimateandthedistributionofvertebrate
life.
Figure 29.21 Paleozoic continents. During the Paleozoic Era, around 550 million years ago, the continent
Gondwana formed. Both Gondwana and the continent Laurentia were located near the equator.
During the early Paleozoic, the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was much greater than it is
today. This may have begun to change later, as land plants became more common. As the roots of land
plantsbegantoinfiltraterockandsoilbegantoform,carbondioxidewasdrawnoutoftheatmosphereand
becametrappedintherock.Thisreducedthelevelsofcarbondioxideandincreasedthelevelsofoxygenin
the atmosphere, so that by the end of the Paleozoic, atmospheric conditions were similar to those of today.
As plants became more common through the latter half of the Paleozoic, microclimates began to emerge
andecosystemsbegantochange.Asplantsandecosystemscontinuedtogrowandbecomemorecomplex,
vertebrates moved from the water to land. The presence of shoreline vegetation may have contributed to
the movement of vertebrates onto land. One hypothesis suggests that the fins of aquatic vertebrates were
used to maneuver through this vegetation, providing a precursor to the movement of fins on land and the
further development of limbs. The late Paleozoic was a time of diversification of vertebrates, as amniotes
emergedandbecametwodifferentlinesthatgaverise,ononehand,tosynapsidsandmammals,and,on
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 878
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 867
theotherhand,tothecodonts,reptiles,dinosaurs,andbirds.Manymarinevertebratesbecameextinctnear
the end of the Devonian period, which ended about 360 million years ago, and both marine and terrestrial
vertebrates were decimated by a mass extinction in the early Permian period about 250 million years ago.
View Earth’s Paleogeography: Continental Movements Through Time (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
paleogeography)to see changes in Earth as life evolved.
29.4 | Reptiles
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the main characteristics of amniotes
• Explain the difference between anapsids, synapsids, and diapsids, and give an example of each
• Identify the characteristics of reptiles
• Discuss the evolution of reptiles
Thereptiles(includingdinosaursandbirds)aredistinguishedfromamphibiansbytheirterrestriallyadaptedegg,
whichissupportedbyfourextraembryonicmembranes:theyolksac,theamnion,thechorion,andtheallantois
(Figure 29.22). The chorion and amnion develop from folds in the body wall, and the yolk sac and allantois
are extensions of the midgut and hindgut respectively. The amnion forms a fluid-filled cavity that provides the
embryo with its own internal aquatic environment. The evolution of the extraembryonic membranes led to less
dependence on water for development and thus allowed the amniotes to branch out into drier environments.
In addition to these membranes, the eggs of birds, reptiles, and a few mammals have shells. An amniote
embryowasthenenclosedintheamnion,whichwasinturnencasedinanextra-embryoniccoelomcontained
withinthechorion.Betweentheshellandthechorionwasthealbuminoftheegg,whichprovidedadditionalfluid
and cushioning. This was a significant development that further distinguishes the amniotes from amphibians,
which were and continue to be restricted to moist environments due their shell-less eggs. Although the shells
ofvariousreptilianamnioticspeciesvarysignificantly,theyallpermittheretentionofwaterandnutrientsforthe
developing embryo. The egg shells of bird (avian reptiles) are hardened with calcium carbonate, making them
rigid, but fragile. The shells of most nonavian reptile eggs, such as turtles, are leathery and require a moist
environment. Most mammals do not lay eggs (except for monotremes such as the echindnas and platypuses).
Instead, the embryo grows within the mother’s body, with the placenta derived from two of the extraembryonic
membranes.
Characteristics of Amniotes
Theamnioticeggisthekeycharacteristicofamniotes.Inamniotesthatlayeggs,theshelloftheeggprovides
protectionforthedevelopingembryowhilebeingpermeableenoughtoallowfortheexchangeofcarbondioxide
and oxygen. The albumin, or egg white, outside of the chorion provides the embryo with water and protein,
whereasthefattiereggyolkcontainedintheyolksacprovidesnutrientsfortheembryo,asisthecasewiththe
eggs of many other animals, such as amphibians. Here are the functions of the extraembryonic membranes:
1. Blood vessels in theyolk sactransport yolk nutrients to the circulatory system of the embryo.
2. Thechorionfacilitatesexchangeofoxygenandcarbondioxidebetweentheembryoandtheegg’sexternal
environment.
3. Theallantoisstores nitrogenous wastes produced by the embryo and also facilitates respiration.
PAGE: 879
868 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
4. Theamnionprotects the embryo from mechanical shock and supports hydration.
Inmammals,theyolksacisveryreduced,buttheembryoisstillcushionedandenclosedwithintheamnion.The
placenta,whichtransportsnutrientsandfunctionsingasexchangeandwastemanagement,isderivedfromthe
chorion and allantois.
Figure 29.22An amniotic egg. The key features of an amniotic egg are shown.
Which of the following statements about the parts of an egg are false?
1. The allantois stores nitrogenous waste and facilitates respiration.
2. The chorion facilitates gas exchange.
3. The yolk provides food for the growing embryo.
4. The amniotic cavity is filled with albumen.
Additional derived characteristics of amniotes include a waterproof skin, accessory keratinized structures, and
costal (rib) ventilation of the lungs.
Evolution of Amniotes
The first amniotes evolved from tetrapod ancestors approximately 340 million years ago during the
Carboniferous period. The early amniotes quickly diverged into two main lines: synapsids and sauropsids.
Synapsidsincludedthetherapsids,acladefromwhichmammalsevolved.Sauropsidswerefurtherdividedinto
anapsidsanddiapsids.Diapsidsgaverisetothereptiles,includingthedinosaursandbirds.Thekeydifferences
between the synapsids, anapsids, and diapsids are the structures of the skull and the number of temporal
fenestrae (“windows”) behind each eye (Figure 29.23). Temporal fenestrae are post-orbital openings in the
skull that allow muscles to expand and lengthen. Anapsids have no temporal fenestrae, synapsids have one
(fusedancestrallyfromtwofenestrae),anddiapsidshavetwo(althoughmanydiapsidssuchasbirdshavehighly
modified diapsid skulls). Anapsids include extinct organisms and traditionally included turtles. However, more
recentmolecularandfossilevidenceclearlyshowsthatturtlesarosewithinthediapsidlineandsecondarilylost
the temporal fenestrae; thus they appear to be anapsids because modern turtles do not have fenestrae in the
temporal bones of the skull. The canonical diapsids include dinosaurs, birds, and all other extinct and living
reptiles.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 880
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 869
Figure 29.23 Amniote skulls. Compare the skulls and temporal fenestrae of anapsids, synapsids, and diapsids.
Anapsids have no openings, synapsids have one opening, and diapsids have two openings.
The diapsids in turn diverged into two groups, the Archosauromorpha (“ancient lizard form”) and the
Lepidosauromorpha (“scaly lizard form”) during the Mesozoic period (Figure 29.24). The lepidosaurs include
modernlizards,snakes,andtuataras.Thearchosaursincludemoderncrocodilesandalligators,andtheextinct
ichthyosaurs (“fish lizards” superficially resembling dolphins), pterosaurs (“winged lizard”), dinosaurs (“terrible
lizard”), and birds. (We should note that clade Dinosauria includes birds, which evolved from a branch of
maniraptoran theropod dinosaurs in the Mesozoic.)
The evolutionarily derived characteristics of amniotes include the amniotic egg and its four extraembryonic
membranes, a thicker and more waterproof skin, and rib ventilation of the lungs (ventilation is performed by
drawing air into and out of the lungs by muscles such as the costal rib muscles and the diaphragm).
Figure 29.24 Amniote phylogeny. This chart shows the evolution of amniotes. The placement of Testudines
(turtles) is currently still debated.
Question:MembersoftheorderTestudineshaveananapsid-likeskullwithoutobvioustemporalfenestrae.
However,molecularstudiesclearlyindicatethatturtlesdescendedfromadiapsidancestor.Whymightthis
be the case?
In the past, the most common division of amniotes has been into the classes Mammalia, Reptilia, and Aves.
However,bothbirdsandmammalsaredescendedfromdifferentamniotebranches:thesynapsidsgivingriseto
the therapsids and mammals, and the diapsids giving rise to the lepidosaurs and archosaurs. We will consider
both the birds and the mammals as groups distinct from reptiles for the purpose of this discussion with the
understanding that this does not accurately reflect phylogenetic history and relationships.
PAGE: 881
870 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Characteristics of Reptiles
Reptilesaretetrapods.Limblessreptiles—snakesandleglesslizards—areclassifiedastetrapodsbecausethey
aredescendedfromfour-limbedancestors.Reptileslaycalcareousorleatheryeggsenclosedinshellsonland.
Even aquatic reptiles return to the land to lay eggs. They usually reproduce sexually with internal fertilization.
Somespeciesdisplayovoviviparity,withtheeggsremaininginthemother’sbodyuntiltheyarereadytohatch.
In ovoviviparous reptiles, most nutrients are supplied by the egg yolk, while the chorioallantois assists with
respiration. Other species are viviparous, with the offspring born alive, with their development supported by a
yolk sac-placenta, a chorioallantoic-placenta, or both.
One of the key adaptations that permitted reptiles to live on land was the development of their scaly skin,
containing the protein keratin and waxy lipids, which reduced water loss from the skin. A number of keratinous
epidermal structures have emerged in the descendants of various reptilian lineages and some have become
definingcharactersfortheselineages:scales,claws,nails,horns,feathers,andhair.Theirocclusiveskinmeans
that reptiles cannot use their skin for respiration, like amphibians, and thus all amniotes breathe with lungs. All
reptiles grow throughout their lives and regularly shed their skin, both to accommodate their growth and to rid
themselvesofectoparasites.Snakestendtoshedtheentireskinatonetime,butotherreptilesshedtheirskins
in patches.
Reptiles ventilate their lungs using various muscular mechanisms to produce negative pressure (low pressure)
within the lungs that allows them to expand and draw in air. In snakes and lizards, the muscles of the spine
and ribs are used to expand or contract the rib cage. Since walking or running interferes with this activity,
the squamates cannot breathe effectively while running. Some squamates can supplement rib movement with
buccal pumping through the nose, with the mouth closed. In crocodilians, the lung chamber is expanded and
contracted by moving the liver, which is attached to the pelvis. Turtles have a special problem with breathing,
becausetheirribcagecannotexpand.However,theycanchangethepressurearoundthelungsbypullingtheir
limbsinandoutoftheshell,andbymovingtheirinternalorgans.Someturtlesalsohaveaposteriorrespiratory
sac that opens off the hindgut that aids in the diffusion of gases.
Mostreptilesareectotherms,animalswhosemainsourceofbodyheatcomesfromtheenvironment;however,
somecrocodiliansmaintainelevatedthoracictemperaturesandthusappeartobeatleastregionalendotherms.
This is in contrast to true endotherms, which use heat produced by metabolism and muscle contraction
to regulate body temperature over a very narrow temperature range, and thus are properly referred to as
homeotherms. Reptiles have behavioral adaptations to help regulate body temperature, such as basking in
sunnyplacestowarmupthroughtheabsorptionofsolarradiation,orfindingshadyspotsorgoingunderground
to minimize the absorption of solar radiation, which allows them to cool down and prevent overheating. The
advantageofectothermyisthatmetabolicenergyfromfoodisnotrequiredtoheatthebody;therefore,reptiles
cansurviveonabout10percentofthecaloriesrequiredbyasimilarlysizedendotherm.Incoldweather,some
reptilessuchasthegartersnakebrumate.Brumationissimilartohibernationinthattheanimalbecomesless
active and can go for long periods without eating, but differs from hibernation in that brumating reptiles are not
asleep or living off fat reserves. Rather, their metabolism is slowed in response to cold temperatures, and the
animal is very sluggish.
Evolution of Reptiles
Reptiles originated approximately 300 million years ago during the Carboniferous period. One of the oldest
known amniotes is Casineria, which had both amphibian and reptilian characteristics. One of the earliest
undisputed reptile fossils was Hylonomus, a lizardlike animal about 20 cm long. Soon after the first amniotes
appeared,theydivergedintothreegroups—synapsids,anapsids,anddiapsids—duringthePermianperiod.The
Permian period also saw a second major divergence of diapsid reptiles into stem archosaurs (predecessors of
thecodonts, crocodilians, dinosaurs, and birds) and lepidosaurs (predecessors of snakes and lizards). These
groupsremainedinconspicuousuntiltheTriassicperiod,whenthearchosaursbecamethedominantterrestrial
group possibly due to the extinction of large-bodied anapsids and synapsids during the Permian-Triassic
extinction.About250millionyearsago,archosaursradiatedintothepterosaursandbothsaurischian“lizardhip”
and ornithischian “bird-hip” dinosaurs (see below).
Although they are sometimes mistakenly called dinosaurs, the pterosaurs were distinct from true dinosaurs
(Figure 29.25). Pterosaurs had a number of adaptations that allowed for flight, including hollow bones (birds
alsoexhibithollowbones,acaseofconvergentevolution).Theirwingswereformedbymembranesofskinthat
attached to the long, fourth finger of each arm and extended along the body to the legs.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 882
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 871
Figure 29.25 Pterosaurs. Pterosaurs, such as this Quetzalcoatlus, which existed from the late Triassic to the
Cretaceous period (230 to 65.5 million years ago), possessed wings but are not believed to have been capable of
poweredflight.Instead,theymayhavebeenabletosoarafterlaunchingfromcliffs.(credit:MarkWitton,DarrenNaish)
Archosaurs: Dinosaurs
Dinosaurs (“fearfully-great lizard”) include the Saurischia (“lizard-hipped”) with a simple, three-pronged pelvis,
and Ornithischia (“bird-hipped”) dinosaurs with a more complex pelvis, superficially similar to that of birds.
However, it is a fact that birds evolved from the saurischian “lizard hipped” lineage, not the ornithischian “bird
hip”lineage.Dinosaursandtheirtheropoddescendants,thebirds,areremnantsofwhatwasformerlyahugely
diverse group of reptiles, some of which like Argentinosaurus were nearly 40 meters (130 feet) in length and
weighedatleast80,000kg(88tons).Theywerethelargestlandanimalstohavelived,challengingandperhaps
exceeding the great blue whale in size, but probably not weight—which could be greater than 200 tons.
Herrerasaurus,abipedaldinosaurfromArgentina,wasoneoftheearliestdinosaursthatwalkeduprightwiththe
legs positioned directly below the pelvis, rather than splayed outward to the sides as in the crocodilians. The
Ornithischiawereallherbivores,andsometimesevolvedintocrazyshapes,suchasankylosaur“armoredtanks”
andhorneddinosaurssuchasTriceratops.Some,suchasParasaurolophus,livedingreatherdsandmayhave
amplified their species-specific calls through elaborate crests on their heads.
Both the ornithischian and saurischian dinosaurs provided parental care for their broods, just as crocodilians
and birds do today. The end of the age of dinosaurs came about 65 million years ago, during the Mesozoic,
coinciding with the impact of a large asteroid (that produced the Chicxulub crater) in what is now the Yucatan
PeninsulaofMexico.Besidestheimmediateenvironmentaldisastersassociatedwiththisasteroidimpactingthe
Earthatabout45,000milesperhour,theimpactmayalsohavehelpedgenerateanenormousseriesofvolcanic
eruptionsthatchangedthedistributionandabundanceofplantlifeworldwide,aswellasitsclimate.Attheend
of the Triassic, massive volcanic activity across North America, South America, Africa, and southwest Europe
ultimatelywouldleadtothebreak-upofPangeaandtheopeningoftheAtlanticOcean.Theformerlyincredibly
diverse dinosaurs (save for the evolving birds) met their extinction during this time period.
Archosaurs: Pterosaurs
More than 200 species of pterosaurs have been described, and in their day, beginning about 230 million years
ago, they were the undisputed rulers of the Mesozoic skies for over 170 million years. Recent fossils suggest
that hundreds of pterosaur species may have lived during any given period, dividing up the environment much
likebirdsdotoday.Pterosaurscameinamazingsizesandshapes,ranginginsizefromthatofasmallsongbird
tothatoftheenormousQuetzalcoatlusnorthropi,whichstoodnearly6meters(19feet)highandhadawingspan
ofnearly14meters(40feet).Thismonstrouspterosaur,namedaftertheAztecgodQuetzalcoatl,thefeathered
flyingserpentthatcontributedlargelytothecreationofhumankind,mayhavebeenthelargestflyinganimalthat
ever evolved!
Somemalepterosaursapparentlyhadbrightlycoloredcreststhatmayhaveservedinsexualdisplays;someof
these crests were much higher than the actual head! Pterosaurs had ultralight skeletons, with a pteroid bone,
unique to pterosaurs, that strengthened the forewing membrane. Much of their wing span was exaggerated
by a greatly elongated fourth finger that supported perhaps half of the wing. It is tempting to relate to them in
termsofbirdcharacteristics,butinreality,theirproportionsweredecidedlynotlikebirdsatall.Forexample,itis
PAGE: 883
872 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
commontofindspecimens,suchasQuetzalcoatlus,withaheadandneckregionthattogetherwasthreetofour
timesaslargeasthetorso.Inaddition,unlikethefeatheredbirdwing,thereptilianwinghadalayerofmuscles,
connective tissue, and blood vessels, all reinforced with a webbing of fibrous cords.
Incontrasttotheaerialpterosaurs,thedinosaurswereadiversegroupofterrestrialreptileswithmorethan1,000
speciesclassifiedtodate.Paleontologistscontinuetodiscovernewspeciesofdinosaurs.Somedinosaurswere
quadrupeds (Figure 29.26); others were bipeds. Some were carnivorous, whereas others were herbivorous.
Dinosaurslaideggs,andanumberofnestscontainingfossilizedeggs,withintactembryos,havebeenfound.It
isnotknownwithcertaintywhetherdinosaurswerehomeothermsorfacultativeendotherms.However,giventhat
modernbirdsareendothermic,thedinosaursthatweretheimmediateancestorstobirdslikelywereendothermic
as well. Some fossil evidence exists for dinosaurian parental care, and comparative biology supports this
hypothesis since the archosaur birds and crocodilians both display extensive parental care.
Figure 29.26 Ornithischian and saurischian Dinosaurs. Edmontonia was an armored dinosaur that lived in the Late
Cretaceous period, 145.5 to 65.6 million years ago. Herrerrasaurus and Eoraptor (b) were late Triassic saurischian
dinosaursdatingtoabout230millionyearsago.(credit:aMarianaRuizVillarealbZachTirrellfromPlymouth,USA,
Dino Origins)
DinosaursdominatedtheMesozoicera,whichwasknownasthe“AgeofReptiles.”Thedominanceofdinosaurs
lasted until the end of the Cretaceous, the last period of the Mesozoic era. The Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction
resultedinthelossofmostofthelarge-bodiedanimalsoftheMesozoicera.Birdsaretheonlylivingdescendants
of one of the major clades of theropod dinosaurs.
Visitthissitetoseeavideo(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/K-T_extinction)discussingthehypothesisthatan
asteroid caused the Cretaceous-Triassic (KT) extinction.
Modern Reptiles
ClassReptiliaincludesmanydiversespeciesthatareclassifiedintofourlivingclades.Therearethe25species
of Crocodilia, two species of Sphenodontia, approximately 9,200 Squamata species, and about 325 species of
Testudines.
Crocodilia
Crocodilia (“small lizard”) arose as a distinct lineage by the middle Triassic; extant species include alligators,
crocodiles, gharials, and caimans. Crocodilians (Figure 29.27) live throughout the tropics and subtropics of
Africa, South America, Southern Florida, Asia, and Australia. They are found in freshwater, saltwater, and
brackish habitats, such as rivers and lakes, and spend most of their time in water. Crocodiles are descended
from terrestrial reptiles and can still walk and run well on land. They often move on their bellies in a swimming
motion, propelled by alternate movements of their legs. However, some species can lift their bodies off the
ground, pulling their legs in under the body with their feet rotated to face forward. This mode of locomotion
takes a lot of energy, and seems to be used primarily to clear ground obstacles. Amazingly, some crocodiles
canalsogallop,pushingoffwiththeirhindlegsandmovingtheirhindandforelegsalternatelyinpairs.Galloping
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 884
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 873
crocodileshavebeenclockedatspeedsover17kphand,overshortdistances,inanambushsituation,theycan
easily chase down most humans if they are taken by surprise. However, they are short distance runners, not
interested in a long chase, and most fit humans can probably outrun them in a sprint (assuming they respond
quickly to the ambush!).
Figure 29.27 A crocodilian. Crocodilians, such as this Siamese crocodile (Crocodylus siamensis), provide parental
care for their offspring. (credit: Keshav Mukund Kandhadai)
Sphenodontia
Sphenodontia (“wedge tooth”) arose in the early Mesozoic era, when they had a moderate radiation, but
now are represented by only two living species: Sphenodon punctatus and Sphenodon guntheri, both found
on offshore islands in New Zealand (Figure 29.28). The common name "tuatara" comes from a Maori word
describing the crest along its back. Tuataras have a primitive diapsid skull with biconcave vertebrae. They
measure up to 80 centimeters and weigh about 1 kilogram. Although superficially similar to an iguanid lizard,
severaluniquefeaturesoftheskullandjawsclearlydefinethemanddistinguishthisgroupfromtheSquamata.
Theyhavenoexternalears.Tuatarasbrieflyhaveathird(parietal)eye—withalens,retina,andcornea—inthe
middleoftheforehead.Theeyeisvisibleonlyinveryyounganimals;itissooncoveredwithskin.Parietaleyes
cansenselight,buthavelimitedcolordiscrimination.Similarlight-sensingstructuresarealsoseeninsomeother
lizards. In their jaws, tuataras have two rows of teeth in the upper jaw that bracket a single row of teeth in the
lower jaw. These teeth are actually projections from the jawbones, and are not replaced as they wear down.
Figure 29.28 A tuatara. This tuatara from New Zealand may resemble a lizard but belongs to a distinct lineage, the
Sphenodontidae family. (credit: Sid Mosdell)
Squamata
The Squamata (“scaly or having scales”) arose in the late Permian, and extant species include lizards and
snakes. Both are found on all continents except Antarctica. Lizards and snakes are most closely related to
tuataras, both groups having evolved from a lepidosaurian ancestor. Squamata is the largest extant clade of
reptiles (Figure 29.29).
PAGE: 885
874 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.29A chameleon. This Jackson’s chameleon (Trioceros jacksonii) blends in with its surroundings.
Mostlizardsdifferfromsnakesbyhavingfourlimbs,althoughthesehaveoftenbeenlostorsignificantlyreduced
in at least 60 lineages. Snakes lack eyelids and external ears, which are both present in lizards. There are
about6,000speciesoflizards,ranginginsizefromtinychameleonsandgeckos,someofwhichareonlyafew
centimeters in length, to the Komodo dragon, which is about 3 meters in length.
Some lizards are extravagantly decorated with spines, crests, and frills, and many are brightly colored. Some
lizards, like chameleons (Figure 29.29), can change their skin color by redistributing pigment within
chromatophores in their skins. Chameleons change color both for camouflage and for social signaling. Lizards
have multiple-colored oil droplets in their retinal cells that give them a good range of color vision. Lizards,
unlike snakes, can focus their eyes by changing the shape of the lens. The eyes of chameleons can move
independently.Severalspeciesoflizardshavea"hidden"parietaleye,similartothatinthetuatara.Bothlizards
andsnakesusetheirtonguestosampletheenvironmentandapitintheroofofthemouth,Jacobson'sorgan,is
used to evaluate the collected sample.
Mostlizardsarecarnivorous,butsomelargespecies,suchasiguanas,areherbivores.Somepredatorylizards
are ambush predators, waiting quietly until their prey is close enough for a quick grab. Others are patient
foragers, moving slowly through their environment to detect possible prey. Lizard tongues are long and sticky
and can be extended at high speed for capturing insects or other small prey. Traditionally, the only venomous
lizardsaretheGilamonsterandthebeadedlizard.However,venomglandshavealsobeenidentifiedinseveral
species of monitors and iguanids, but the venom is not injected directly and should probably be regarded as a
toxin delivered with the bite.
Specializedfeaturesofthejawarerelatedtoadaptationsforfeedingthathaveevolvedtofeedonrelativelylarge
prey(eventhoughsomecurrentspecieshavereversedthistrend).Snakesarethoughttohavedescendedfrom
eitherburrowingoraquaticlizardsover100millionyearsago(Figure29.30).Theyincludeabout3,600species,
ranging in size from 10 centimeter-long thread snakes to 10 meter-long pythons and anacondas. All snakes
are legless, except for boids (e.g., boa constrictors), which have vestigial hindlimbs in the form of pelvic spurs.
Likecaecilianamphibians,thenarrowbodiesofmostsnakeshaveonlyasinglefunctionallung.Allsnakesare
carnivorous and eat small animals, birds, eggs, fish, and insects.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 886
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 875
Figure29.30Anonvenomoussnake.ThegartersnakebelongstothegenusThamnophis,themostwidelydistributed
reptile genus in North America. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
Most snakes have a skull that is very flexible, involving eight rotational joints. They also differ from other
squamates by having mandibles (lower jaws) without either bony or ligamentous attachment anteriorly. Having
this connection via skin and muscle allows for great dynamic expansion of the gape and independent motion
of the two sides—both advantages in swallowing big prey. Most snakes are nonvenomous and simply swallow
theirpreyalive,orsubdueitbyconstrictionbeforeswallowingit.Venomoussnakesusetheirvenombothtokill
or immobilize their prey, and to help digest it.
Althoughsnakeshavenoeyelids,theireyesareprotectedwithatransparentscale.Theirretinashavebothrods
and cones, and like many animals, they do not have receptor pigments for red light. Some species, however,
can see in the ultraviolet, which allows them to track ultraviolet signals in rodent trails. Snakes adjust focus
by moving their heads. They have lost both external and middle ears, although their inner ears are sensitive
to ground vibrations. Snakes have a number of sensory structures that assist in tracking prey. In pit vipers,
like rattlesnakes, a sensory pit between the eye and nostrils is sensitive to infrared (“heat”) emissions from
warm-blooded prey. A row of similar pits is located on the upper lip of boids. As noted above, snakes also use
Jacobson's organfor detecting olfactory signals.
Testudines
Theturtles,terrapins,andtortoisesaremembersofthecladeTestudines(“havingashell”)(Figure29.31),and
are characterized by a bony or cartilaginous shell. The shell in turtles is not just an epidermal covering, but is
incorporated into the skeletal system. The dorsal shell is called the carapace and includes the backbone and
ribs; the ventral shell is called the plastron. Both shells are covered with keratinous plates or scutes, and the
twoshellsareheldtogetherbyabridge.Insometurtles,theplastronishingedtoallowtheheadandlegstobe
withdrawn under the shell.
Thetwolivinggroupsofturtles,PleurodiraandCryptodira,havesignificantanatomicaldifferencesandaremost
easily recognized by how they retract their necks. The more common Cryptodira retract their neck in a vertical
S-curve;theyappeartosimplypulltheirheadbackwardwhenretracting.LesscommonPleurodira("side-neck")
retract their neck with a horizontal curve, basically folding their neck to the side.
The Testudines arose approximately 200 million years ago, predating crocodiles, lizards, and snakes. There
are about 325 living species of turtles and tortoises. Like other reptiles, turtles are ectotherms. All turtles are
oviparous, laying their eggs on land, although many species live in or near water. None exhibit parental care.
Turtles range in size from the speckled padloper tortoise at 8 centimeters (3.1 inches) to the leatherback sea
turtle at 200 centimeters (over 6 feet). The term “turtle” is sometimes used to describe only those species of
Testudines that live in the sea, with the terms “tortoise” and “terrapin” used to refer to species that live on land
and in fresh water, respectively.
PAGE: 887
876 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.31 A tortoise. The African spurred tortoise (Geochelone sulcata) lives at the southern edge of the Sahara
Desert. It is the third largest tortoise in the world. (credit: Jim Bowen)
29.5 | Birds
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the evolutionary history of birds
• Describe the derived characteristics in birds that facilitate flight
With over 10,000 identified species, the birds are the most speciose of the land vertebrate classes. Abundant
research has shown that birds are really an extant clade that evolved from maniraptoran theropod dinosaurs
about 150 million years ago. Thus, even though the most obvious characteristic that seems to set birds apart
fromother extant vertebrates isthepresenceoffeathers, wenowknowthat feathers probablyappearedinthe
commonancestorofbothornithischianandsaurischianlineagesofdinosaurs.Feathersinthesecladesarealso
homologoustoreptilianscalesandmammalianhair,accordingtothemostrecentresearch.Whilethewingsof
vertebrateslikebatsfunctionwithoutfeathers,birdsrelyonfeathers,andwings,alongwithothermodifications
of body structure and physiology, for flight, as we shall see.
Characteristics of Birds
Birdsareendothermic,andmorespecifically,homeothermic—meaningthattheyusuallymaintainanelevated
and constant body temperature, which is significantly above the average body temperature of most mammals.
This is, in part, due to the fact that active flight—especially the hovering skills of birds such as
hummingbirds—requires enormous amounts of energy, which in turn necessitates a high metabolic rate. Like
mammals (which are also endothermic and homeothermic and covered with an insulating pelage), birds have
several different types of feathers that together keep “heat” (infrared energy) within the core of the body, away
from the surface where it can be lost by radiation and convection to the environment.
Modernbirdsproducetwomaintypesoffeathers:contourfeathersanddownfeathers.Contourfeathershave
a number of parallel barbs that branch from a central shaft. The barbs in turn have microscopic branches
called barbules that are linked together by minute hooks, making the vane of a feather a strong, flexible,
and uninterrupted surface. In contrast, the barbules of down feathers do not interlock, making these feathers
especially good for insulation, trapping air in spaces between the loose, interlocking barbules of adjacent
featherstodecreasetherateofheatlossbyconvectionandradiation.Certainpartsofabird’sbodyarecovered
indownfeathers,andthebaseofotherfeathershasadownyportion,whereasnewlyhatchedbirdsarecovered
almost entirely in down, which serves as an excellent coat of insulation, increasing the thermal boundary layer
between the skin and the outside environment.
Feathers not only provide insulation, but also allow for flight, producing the lift and thrust necessary for flying
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 888
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 877
birds to become and stay airborne. The feathers on a wing are flexible, so the feathers at the end of the
wing separate as air moves over them, reducing the drag on the wing. Flight feathers are also asymmetrical
and curved, so that air flowing over them generates lift. Two types of flight feathers are found on the wings,
primaryfeathersandsecondaryfeathers(Figure29.32).Primaryfeathersarelocatedatthetipofthewingand
providethrustasthebirdmovesitswingsdownward,usingthepectoralismajormuscles.Secondaryfeathers
are located closer to the body, in the forearm portion of the wing, and provide lift. In contrast to primary and
secondaryfeathers,contourfeathersarefoundonthebody,wheretheyhelpreduceformdragproducedbywind
resistance against the body during flight. They create a smooth, aerodynamic surface so that air moves swiftly
over the bird’s body, preventing turbulence and creating ideal aerodynamic conditions for efficient flight.
Figure29.32Flightfeathers.(a)Primaryfeathersarelocatedatthewingtipandprovidethrust;secondaryfeathersare
locatedclosetothebodyandprovidelift.(b)Primaryandsecondaryfeathersfromacommonbuzzard(Buteobuteo).
(Creditb:Mod.fromS.Seyferthttps://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?curid=613813(http://openstax.org/
l/buzzard_feathers))
Flappingoftheentirewingoccursprimarilythroughtheactionsofthechestmuscles:Specifically,thecontraction
of the pectoralis major muscles moves the wings downward (downstroke), whereas contraction of the
supracoracoideusmusclesmovesthewingsupward(upstroke)viaatoughtendonthatpassesoverthecoracoid
bone and the top of the humerus. Both muscles are attached to the keel of the sternum, and these are the
muscles that humans eat on holidays (this is why the back of the bird offers little meat!). These muscles are
highly developed in birds and account for a higher percentage of body mass than in most mammals. The
flight muscles attach to a blade-shaped keel projecting ventrally from the sternum, like the keel of a boat. The
sternum of birds is deeper than that of other vertebrates, which accommodates the large flight muscles. The
flightmusclesofbirdswhoareactiveflyersarerichwithoxygen-storingmyoglobin.Anotherskeletalmodification
foundinmostbirdsisthefusionofthetwoclavicles(collarbones),formingthefurculaorwishbone.Thefurcula
is flexible enough to bend and provide support to the shoulder girdle during flapping.
An important requirement forflight isalowbodyweight. Asbodyweight increases, the muscleoutput required
forflyingincreases.Thelargestlivingbirdistheostrich,andwhileitismuchsmallerthanthelargestmammals,it
issecondarilyflightless.Forbirdsthatdofly,reductioninbodyweightmakesflighteasier.Severalmodifications
arefoundinbirdstoreducebodyweight,includingpneumatizationofbones.Pneumaticbones(Figure29.33)
arebonesthatarehollow,ratherthanfilledwithtissue;crossstrutsofbonecalledtrabeculaeprovidestructural
reinforcement. Pneumatic bones are not found in all birds, and they are more extensive in large birds than in
small birds. Not all bones of the skeleton are pneumatic, although the skulls of almost all birds are. The jaw is
PAGE: 889
878 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
alsolightenedbythereplacementofheavyjawbonesandteethwithabeakmadeofkeratin(justashair,scales,
and feathers are).
Figure 29.33Pneumatic bone. Many birds have hollow, pneumatic bones, which make flight easier.
Othermodificationsthatreduceweightincludethelackofaurinarybladder.Birdspossessacloaca,anexternal
body cavity into which the intestinal, urinary, and genital orifices empty in reptiles, birds, and the monotreme
mammals. The cloaca allows water to be reabsorbed from waste back into the bloodstream. Thus, uric acid is
noteliminatedasaliquidbutisconcentratedintouratesalts,whichareexpelledalongwithfecalmatter.Inthis
way, water is not held in a urinary bladder, which would increase body weight. In addition, the females of most
bird species only possess one functional (left) ovary rather than two, further reducing body mass.
Therespiratorysystemofbirdsisdramaticallydifferentfromthatofreptilesandmammals,andiswelladapted
for the high metabolic rate required for flight. To begin, the air spaces of pneumatic bone are sometimes
connectedtoairsacsinthebodycavity,whichreplacecoelomicfluidandalsolightenthebody.Theseairsacs
arealsoconnectedtothepathofairflowthroughthebird'sbody,andfunctioninrespiration.Unlikemammalian
lungsinwhichairflowsintwodirections,asitisbreathedinandout,dilutingtheconcentrationofoxygen,airflow
through bird lungs is unidirectional (Figure 29.34). Gas exchange occurs in "air capillaries" or microscopic air
passages within the lungs. The arrangement of air capillaries in the lungs creates a counter-current exchange
system with the pulmonary blood. In a counter-current system, the air flows in one direction and the blood
flows in the opposite direction, producing a favorable diffusion gradient and creating an efficient means of gas
exchange.Thisveryeffectiveoxygen-deliverysystemofbirdssupportstheirhighermetabolicactivity.Ineffect,
ventilation is provided by the parabronchi (minimally expandible lungs) with thin air sacs located among the
visceralorgansandtheskeleton.Asyrinx(voicebox)residesnearthejunctionofthetracheaandbronchi.The
syrinx,however,isnothomologoustothemammalianlarynx,whichresideswithintheupperpartofthetrachea.
Figure 29.34 Air flow in bird lungs. Avian respiration is an efficient system of gas exchange with air flowing
unidirectionally. A full ventilation cycle takes two breathing cycles. During the first inhalation, air passes from the
tracheaintoposteriorairsacs,thenduringthefirstexhalationintothelungs.Thesecondinhalationmovestheairinthe
lungstotheanteriorairsacs,andthesecondexhalationmovestheairintheanteriorairsacsoutofthebody.Overall,
eachinhalationmovesairintotheairsacs,whileeachexhalationmovesfreshairthroughthelungsand"used"airout
of the body. The air sacs are connected to the hollow interior of bones. (credit: modification of work by L. Shyamal)
Beyond the unique characteristics discussed above, birds are also unusual vertebrates because of a number
of other features. First, they typically have an elongate (very “dinosaurian”) S-shaped neck, but a short tail or
pygostyle, produced from the fusion of the caudal vertebrae. Unlike mammals, birds have only one occipital
condyle,allowingthemextensivemovementoftheheadandneck.Theyalsohaveaverythinepidermiswithout
sweatglands,andaspecializeduropygialglandorsebaceous“preeninggland”foundatthedorsalbaseofthe
tail.Thisglandisanessentialtopreening(avirtuallycontinuousactivity)inmostbirdsbecauseitproducesan
oilysubstancethatbirdsusetohelpwaterprooftheirfeathersaswellaskeepthemflexibleforflight.Anumber
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 890
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 879
of birds, such as pigeons, parrots, hawks, and owls, lack a uropygial gland but have specialized feathers that
“disintegrate” into a powdery down, which serves the same purpose as the oils of the uropygial gland.
Like mammals, birds have 12 pairs of cranial nerves, and a very large cerebellum and optic lobes, but only a
single bone in the middle ear called the columella (the stapes in mammals). They have a closed circulatory
system with two atria and two ventricles, but rather than a “left-bending” aortic arch like that of mammals,
they have a “right-bending” aortic arch, and nucleated red blood cells (unlike the enucleated red blood cells of
mammals).
All these unique and highly derived characteristics make birds one of the most conspicuous and successful
groups of vertebrate animals, filling a range of ecological niches, and ranging in size from the tiny bee
hummingbird of Cuba (about 2 grams) to the ostrich (about 140,000 grams). Their large brains, keen senses,
and the abilities of many species to imitate vocalization and use tools make them some of the most intelligent
vertebrates on Earth.
Evolution of Birds
Thanks to amazing new fossil discoveries in China, the evolutionary history of birds has become clearer, even
thoughbirdbonesdonotfossilizeaswellasthoseofothervertebrates. Aswe’veseenearlier,birdsarehighly
modifieddiapsids,butratherthanhavingtwofenestrationsoropeningsintheirskullsbehindtheeye,theskulls
of modern birds are so specialized that it is difficult to see any trace of the original diapsid condition.
Birdsbelongtoagroupofdiapsidscalledthearchosaurs,whichincludesthreeothergroups:livingcrocodilians,
pterosaurs,anddinosaurs.OverwhelmingevidenceshowsthatbirdsevolvedwithinthecladeDinosauria,which
isfurthersubdividedintotwogroups,theSaurischia(“lizardhips”)andtheOrnithischia(“birdhips”).Despitethe
namesofthesegroups,itwasnotthebird-hippeddinosaursthatgaverisetomodernbirds.Rather,Saurischia
diverged into two groups: One included the long-necked herbivorous dinosaurs, such as Apatosaurus. The
secondgroup,bipedalpredatorscalledtheropods, gaverisetobirds.Thiscourseofevolutionishighlightedby
numeroussimilaritiesbetweenlate(maniraptoran)theropodfossilsandbirds,specificallyinthestructureofthe
hip and wrist bones, as well as the presence of the wishbone, formed by the fusion of the clavicles.
The clade Neornithes includes the avian crown group, which comprises all living birds and the descendants
from their most recent common maniraptoran ancestor. One well-known and important fossil of an animal that
appears“intermediate”betweendinosaursandbirdsisArchaeopteryx(Figure29.35),whichisfromtheJurassic
period(200to145MYA).Archaeopteryxhascharacteristicsofbothmaniraptorandinosaursandmodernbirds.
Somescientistsproposeclassifyingitasabird,butothersprefertoclassifyitasadinosaur.Traitsinskeletonsof
Archaeopteryxlikethoseofadinosaurincludedajawwithteethandalongbonytail.Likebirds,ithadfeathers
modifiedforflight,bothontheforelimbsandonthetail,atraitassociatedonlywithbirdsamongmodernanimals.
Fossilsofolderfeathereddinosaursexist,butthefeathersmaynothavehadthecharacteristicsofmodernflight
feathers.
Figure29.35Archaeopteryx.(a)ArchaeopteryxlivedinthelateJurassicperiodaround150millionyearsago.Ithad
cuplikethecodontteethlikeadinosaur,buthad(b)flightfeatherslikemodernbirds,whichcanbeseeninthisfossil.
Note the claws on the wings, which are still found in a number of birds, such as the newborn chicks of the South
American Hoatzin.
PAGE: 891
880 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
The Evolution of Flight in Birds
There are two basic hypotheses that explain how flight may have evolved in birds: the arboreal (“tree”)
hypothesisandtheterrestrial(“land”)hypothesis.Thearborealhypothesispositsthattree-dwellingprecursors
tomodernbirdsjumpedfrombranchtobranchusingtheir feathers forglidingbefore becomingfully capableof
flapping flight. In contrast to this, the terrestrial hypothesis holds that running (perhaps pursuing active prey
such as small cursorial animals) was the stimulus for flight. In this scenario, wings could be used to capture
prey and were preadapted for balance and flapping flight. Ostriches, which are large flightless birds, hold their
wings out when they run, possibly for balance. However, this condition may represent a behavioral relict of the
cladeofflyingbirdsthatweretheirancestors.Itseemsmorelikelythatsmallfeatheredarborealdinosaurs,were
capable of gliding (and flapping) from tree to tree and branch to branch, improving the chances of escaping
enemies, finding mates, and obtaining prey such as flying insects. This early flight behavior would have also
greatly increased the opportunity for species dispersal.
Although we have a good understanding of how feathers and flight may have evolved, the question of how
endothermy evolved in birds (and other lineages) remains unanswered. Feathers provide insulation, but this is
only beneficial for thermoregulatory purposes if body heat is being produced internally. Similarly, internal heat
production is only viable for the evolution of endothermy if insulation is present to retain that infrared energy.
It has been suggested that one or the other—feathers or endothermy—evolved first in response to some other
selective pressure (e.g., the ability to be active at night, provide camouflage, repel water, or serve as signals
for mate selection). It seems probable that feathers and endothermy coevolved together, the improvement and
evolutionary advancement of feathers reinforcing the evolutionary advancement of endothermy, and so on.
DuringtheCretaceousperiod(145to66MYA),agroupknownastheEnantiornitheswasthedominantbirdtype
(Figure29.36).Enantiornithesmeans“oppositebirds,”whichreferstothefactthatcertainbonesoftheshoulder
arejoineddifferentlythanthewaythebonesarejoinedinmodernbirds.LikeArchaeopteryx,thesebirdsretained
teethintheirjaws,butdidhaveashortenedtail,andatleastsomefossilshavepreserved“fans”oftailfeathers.
Thesebirdsformedanevolutionarylineageseparatefromthatofmodernbirds,andtheydidnotsurvivepastthe
Cretaceous.AlongwiththeEnantiornithes,however,anothergroupofbirds—theOrnithurae("birdtails"),witha
short, fused tail or pygostyle—emerged from the evolutionary line that includes modern birds. This clade was
also present in the Cretaceous.
After the extinction of Enantiornithes, the Ornithurae became the dominant birds, with a large and rapid
radiation occurring after the extinction of the dinosaurs during the Cenozoic era (66 MYA to the present).
Molecular analysis based on very large data sets has produced our current understanding of the relationships
among living birds. There are three major clades: the Paleognathae, the Galloanserae, and the Neoaves.
The Paleognathae (“old jaw”) or ratites (polyphyletic) are a group of flightless birds including ostriches, emus,
rheas, and kiwis. The Galloanserae include pheasants, ducks, geese and swans. The Neoaves ("new birds")
[3]
includesallotherbirds.TheNeoavesthemselveshavebeendistributedamongfiveclades: Strisores(nightjars,
swifts,andhummingbirds),Columbaves(turacos,bustards,cuckoos,pigeons,anddoves),Gruiformes(cranes),
Aequorlitornithes (diving birds, wading birds, and shorebirds), and Inopinaves (a very large clade of land birds
including hawks, owls, woodpeckers, parrots, falcons, crows, and songbirds). Despite the current classification
scheme,itisimportanttounderstandthatphylogeneticrevisions,evenfortheextantbirds,arestilltakingplace.
3. Prum, RO et al. 2015. A comprehensive phylogeny of birds (Aves) using targeted next-generation DNA sequencing. Nature 526: 569 -
573.http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature15697 (http://openstax.org/l/bird_phylogeny)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 892
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 881
Figure29.36Enantiornitheanbird.ShanweiniaocooperorumwasaspeciesofEnantiornithesthatdidnotsurvivepast
the Cretaceous period. (credit: Nobu Tamura)
Veterinarian
Veterinarians are concerned with diseases, disorders, and injuries in animals, primarily vertebrates. They
treatpets,livestock,andanimalsinzoosandlaboratories.Veterinariansoftentreatdogsandcats,butalso
take care of birds, reptiles, rabbits, and other animals that are kept as pets. Veterinarians that work with
farms and ranches care for pigs, goats, cows, sheep, and horses.
Veterinarians are required to complete a degree in veterinary medicine, which includes taking courses in
comparative zoology, animal anatomy and physiology, microbiology, and pathology, among many other
courses in chemistry, physics, and mathematics.
Veterinarians are also trained to perform surgery on many different vertebrate species, which requires an
understandingofthevastlydifferentanatomiesofvariousspecies.Forexample,thestomachofruminants
likecowshasfour“compartments”versusonecompartmentfornon-ruminants.Aswehaveseen,birdsalso
have unique anatomical adaptations that allow for flight, which requires additional training and care.
Some veterinarians conduct research in academic settings, broadening our knowledge of animals and
medical science. One area of research involves understanding the transmission of animal diseases to
humans, called zoonotic diseases. For example, one area of great concern is the transmission of the
avian flu virus to humans. One type of avian flu virus, H5N1, is a highly pathogenic strain that has been
spreadinginbirdsinAsia,Europe,Africa,andtheMiddleEast.Althoughthevirusdoesnotcrossovereasily
tohumans,therehavebeencasesofbird-to-humantransmission.Moreresearchisneededtounderstand
how this virus can cross the species barrier and how its spread can be prevented.
29.6 | Mammals
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Name and describe the distinguishing features of the three main groups of mammals
• Describe the likely line of evolutionary descent that produced mammals
• Listsomederivedfeaturesthatmayhaveariseninresponsetomammals’needforconstant,high-level
metabolism
• Identify the major clades of eutherian mammals
Mammals, comprising about 5,200 species, are vertebrates that possess hair and mammary glands. Several
other characteristics are distinctive to mammals, including certain features of the jaw, skeleton, integument,
PAGE: 893
882 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
and internal anatomy. Modern mammals belong to three clades: monotremes, marsupials, and eutherians (or
placental mammals).
Characteristics of Mammals
Thepresenceofhair,composedoftheproteinkeratin,isoneofthemostobviouscharacteristicsofmammals.
Although it is not very extensive or obvious on some species (such as whales), hair has many important
functionsformostmammals.Mammalsareendothermic,andhairtrapsaboundarylayerofairclosetothebody,
retainingheatgeneratedbymetabolicactivity.Alongwithinsulation,haircanserveasasensorymechanismvia
specializedhairscalledvibrissae,betterknownaswhiskers.Vibrissaeattachtonervesthattransmitinformation
about tactile vibration produced by sound sensation, which is particularly useful to nocturnal or burrowing
mammals. Hair can also provide protective coloration or be part of social signaling, such as when an animal’s
hair stands “on end” to warn enemies, or possibly to make the mammal “look bigger” to predators.
Unlike the skin of birds, the integument (skin) of mammals, includes a number of different types of secretory
glands. Sebaceous glands produce a lipid mixture called sebum that is secreted onto the hair and skin,
providingwaterresistanceandlubricationforhair.Sebaceousglandsarelocatedovermostofthebody.Eccrine
glands produce sweat, or perspiration, which is mainly composed of water, but also contains metabolic waste
products, and sometimes compounds with antibiotic activity. In most mammals, eccrine glands are limited to
certain areas of the body, and some mammals do not possess them at all. However, in primates, especially
humans, sweat glandsarelocated overmostofthebodysurface andfigure prominently inregulating thebody
temperaturethroughevaporativecooling.Apocrineglands,orscentglands,secretesubstancesthatareused
forchemicalcommunication,suchasinskunks.Mammaryglandsproducemilkthatisusedtofeednewborns.
In both monotremes and eutherians, both males and females possess mammary glands, while in marsupials,
mammaryglandshavebeenfoundonlyinsomeopossums.Mammaryglandslikelyaremodifiedsebaceousor
eccrine glands, but their evolutionary origin is not entirely clear.
Theskeletalsystemofmammalspossessesmanyuniquefeatures.Thelowerjawofmammalsconsistsofonly
one bone, the dentary, and the jaw hinge connects the dentary to the squamosal (flat) part of the temporal
bone in the skull. The jaws of other vertebrates are composed of several bones, including the quadrate bone
at the back of the skull and the articular bone at the back of the jaw, with the jaw connected between the
quadrate and articular bones. In the ear of other vertebrates, vibrations are transmitted to the inner ear by a
singlebone,thestapes.Inmammals,thequadrateandarticularboneshavemovedintothemiddleear(Figure
29.37). The malleus is derived from the articular bone, whereas the incus originated from the quadrate bone.
This arrangement of jaw and ear bones aids in distinguishing fossil mammals from fossils of other synapsids.
Figure29.37Mammalianearbones.Bonesofthemammalianmiddleeararemodifiedfrombonesofthejawandskull
inreptiles.Thestapesisfoundinothervertebrates(e.g.,thecolumellaofbirds)whereasinmammals,themalleusand
incus are derived from the articular and quadrate bones, respectively. (credit: NCI)
The adductor muscles that close the jaw comprise two major muscles in mammals: the temporalis and the
masseter.Workingtogether,thesemusclespermitup-and-downandside-to-sidemovementsofthejaw,making
chewingpossible—whichisuniquetomammals.Mostmammalshaveheterodontteeth,meaningthattheyhave
different types and shapes of teeth (incisors, canines, premolars, and molars) rather than just one type and
shapeoftooth.Mostmammalsarealsodiphyodonts,meaningthattheyhavetwosetsofteethintheirlifetime:
deciduous or “baby” teeth, and permanent teeth. Most other vertebrates with teeth are polyphyodonts, that is,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 894
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 883
their teeth are replaced throughout their entire life.
Mammals, like birds, possess a four-chambered heart; however, the hearts of birds and mammals are an
exampleofconvergentevolution,sincemammalsclearlyaroseindependentlyfromdifferentgroupsoftetrapod
ancestors. Mammals also have a specialized group of cardiac cells (fibers) located in the walls of their right
atriumcalledthesinoatrialnode,orpacemaker,whichdeterminestherateatwhichtheheartbeats.Mammalian
erythrocytes (red blood cells) donothave nuclei, whereas the erythrocytes of other vertebrates are nucleated.
ThekidneysofmammalshaveaportionofthenephroncalledtheloopofHenleornephriticloop,whichallows
mammals to produce urine with a high concentration of solutes—higher than that of the blood. Mammals lack
a renal portal system, which is a system of veins that moves blood from the hind or lower limbs and region of
thetailtothekidneys.Renalportalsystemsarepresentinallothervertebratesexceptjawlessfishes.Aurinary
bladder is present in all mammals.
Unlike birds, the skulls of mammals have two occipital condyles, bones at the base of the skull that articulate
withthefirstvertebra,aswellasasecondarypalateattherearofthepharynxthathelpstoseparatethepathway
of swallowing from that of breathing. Turbinate bones (chonchae in humans) are located along the sides of
the nasal cavity, and help warm and moisten air as it is inhaled. The pelvic bones are fused in mammals, and
therearetypicallysevencervicalvertebrae(exceptforsomeedentatesandmanatees).Mammalshavemovable
eyelids and fleshy external ears (pinnae), quite unlike the naked external auditory openings of birds. Mammals
also have a muscular diaphragm that is lacking in birds.
Mammalian brains also have certain characteristics that differ from the brains of other vertebrates. In some,
but not all mammals, the cerebral cortex, the outermost part of the cerebrum, is highly convoluted and folded,
allowingforagreatersurfaceareathanispossiblewithasmoothcortex.Theopticlobes,locatedinthemidbrain,
are divided into two parts in mammals, while other vertebrates possess a single, undivided lobe. Eutherian
mammalsalsopossessaspecializedstructure,thecorpuscallosum,whichlinksthetwocerebralhemispheres
together.Thecorpuscallosumfunctionstointegratemotor,sensory,andcognitivefunctionsbetweentheleftand
right cerebral cortexes.
Evolution of Mammals
Mammals are synapsids, meaning they have a single, ancestrally fused, postorbital opening in the skull. They
aretheonlylivingsynapsids,asearlierformsbecameextinctbytheJurassicperiod.Theearlynon-mammalian
synapsids can be divided into two groups, the pelycosaurs and the therapsids. Within the therapsids, a group
called the cynodonts are thought to have been the ancestors of mammals (Figure 29.38).
Figure 29.38 Cynodont. Cynodonts ("dog teeth"), which first appeared in the Late Permian period 260 million years
ago,arethoughttobetheancestorsofmodernmammals.Holesintheupperjawsofcynodontssuggestthattheyhad
whiskers, which might also indicate the presence of hair. (credit: Nobu Tamura)
As with birds, a key characteristic of synapsids is endothermy, rather than the ectothermy seen in many other
vertebrates (such as fish, amphibians, and most reptiles). The increased metabolic rate required to internally
modifybodytemperaturelikelywenthand-in-handwithchangestocertainskeletalstructuresthatimprovedfood
processing and ambulation. The later synapsids, which had more evolved characteristics unique to mammals,
possesscheeksforholdingfoodandheterodontteeth,whicharespecializedforchewing,mechanicallybreaking
down food to speed digestion, and releasing the energy needed to produce heat. Chewing also requires the
ability to breathe at the same time, which is facilitated by the presence of a secondary palate (comprising the
bony palate and the posterior continuation of the soft palate). The secondary palate separates the area of the
mouth where chewing occurs from the area above where respiration occurs, allowing breathing to proceed
uninterrupted while the animal is chewing. A secondary palate is not found in pelycosaurs but is present in
PAGE: 895
884 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
cynodontsandmammals.Thejawbonealsoshowschangesfromearlysynapsidstolaterones.Thezygomatic
arch, or cheekbone, is present in mammals and advanced therapsids such as cynodonts, but is not present in
pelycosaurs.Thepresenceofthezygomaticarchsuggeststhepresenceofmassetermuscles,whichclosethe
jaw and function in chewing.
In the appendicular skeleton, the shoulder girdle of therian mammals is modified from that of other vertebrates
in that it does not possess a procoracoid bone or an interclavicle, and the scapula is the dominant bone.
Mammals evolved from therapsids in the late Triassic period, as the earliest known mammal fossils are
from the early Jurassic period, some 205 million years ago. One group of transitional mammals was the
morganucodonts, smallnocturnal insectivores. The jawsof morganucodonts were“transitional,” with features
of both reptilian and mammalian jaws (Figure 29.39). Like modern mammals, the morganucodonts had
differentiated teeth and were diphyodonts. Mammals first began to diversify in the Mesozoic era, from the
Jurassic to the Cretaceous periods. Even some small gliding mammals appear in the fossil record during this
time period. However, most of the Jurassic mammals were extinct by the end of the Mesozoic. During the
Cretaceous period, another radiation of mammals began and continued through the Cenozoic era, about 65
million years ago.
Figure 29.39 A morganucodont. This morganucodont Megazotrodon, an extinct basal mammal, may have been
nocturnal and insectivorous. Inset: Jaw of a morganucodont, showing a double hinge, one between the dentary and
squamosal and one between the articular (yellow) and quadrate (blue) bones. In living mammals, the articular and
quadrate bones have been incorporated into the middle ear. (Credit: By Nordelch [Megazostrodon Natural History
Museum] Wikimedia Commons. Credit inset: Mod from Philcha. https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?
curid=3631949 (http://openstax.org/l/jaw_joint))
Living Mammals
There are three major groups of living mammals: monotremes (prototheria), marsupials (metatheria), and
placental (eutheria) mammals. The eutherians and the marsupials together comprise a clade of therian
mammals, with the monotremes forming a sister clade to both metatherians and eutherians.
Thereareveryfewlivingspeciesofmonotremes:theplatypusandfourspeciesofechidnas,orspinyanteaters.
Theleathery-beakedplatypusbelongstothefamilyOrnithorhynchidae(“birdbeak”),whereasechidnasbelong
to the family Tachyglossidae (“sticky tongue”) (Figure 29.40). The platypus and one species of echidna are
found in Australia, and the other species of echidna are found in New Guinea. Monotremes are unique among
mammalsbecausetheylayeggs,ratherthangivingbirthtoliveyoung.Theshellsoftheireggsarenotlikethe
hardshellsofbirds,buthavealeatheryshell,similartotheshellsofreptileeggs.Monotremesretaintheireggs
through about two-thirds of the developmental period, and then lay them in nests. A yolk-sac placenta helps
support development. The babies hatch in a fetal state and complete their development in the nest, nourished
by milk secreted by mammary glands opening directly to the skin. Monotremes, except for young platypuses,
donothaveteeth.Bodytemperatureinthethreemonotremespeciesismaintainedatabout30°C,considerably
lowerthantheaveragebodytemperatureofmarsupialandplacentalmammals,whicharetypicallybetween35
and 38°C.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 896
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 885
(a) (b)
Figure29.40Egg-layingmammals.(a)Theplatypus,amonotreme,possessesaleatherybeakandlayseggsrather
thangivingbirthtoliveyoung.(b)Theechidnaisanothermonotreme,withlonghairsmodifiedintospines.(creditb:
modification of work by Barry Thomas)
Over 2/3 of the approximately 330 living species of marsupials are found in Australia, with the rest, nearly all
various types of opossum, found in the Americas, especially South America. Australian marsupials include the
kangaroo, koala, bandicoot, Tasmanian devil (Figure 29.41), and several other species. Like monotremes, the
embryosofmarsupialsarenourishedduringashortgestationalperiod(aboutamonthinkangaroos)byayolk-
sac placenta, but with no intervening egg shell. Some marsupial embryos can enter an embryonic diapause,
and delay implantation, suspending development until implantation is completed. Marsupial young are also
effectively fetal at birth. Most, but not all, species of marsupials possess a pouch in which the very premature
youngreside,receivingmilkandcontinuingtheirdevelopment.Inkangaroos,theyoungjoeyscontinuetonurse
for about a year and a half.
Figure 29.41 A marsupial mammal. The Tasmanian devil is one of several marsupials native to Australia. (credit:
Wayne McLean)
Eutherians (placentals) are the most widespread and numerous of the mammals, occurring throughout
the world. Eutherian mammals are sometimes called “placental mammals” because all species possess a
complex chorioallantoic placenta that connects a fetus to the mother, allowing for gas, fluid, and nutrient
exchange. There are about 4,000 species of placental mammals in 18 to 20 orders with various adaptations
for burrowing, flying, swimming, hunting, running, and climbing. In the evolutionary sense, they have been
incredibly successful in form, diversity, and abundance. The eutherian mammals are classified in two major
clades, the Atlantogenata and the Boreoeutheria. The Atlantogeneta include the Afrotheria (e.g., elephants,
hyraxes, and manatees) and the Xenarthra (anteaters, armadillos, and sloths). The Boreoeutheria contain two
large groups, the Euarchontoglires and the Laurasiatheria. Familiar orders in the Euarchontoglires are the
Scandentia(treeshrews),Rodentia(rats,mice,squirrels,porcupines),Lagomorpha(rabbitsandhares),andthe
Primates(includinghumans).MajorLaurasiatherianordersincludethePerissodactyla(e.g.,horsesandrhinos),
the Cetartiodactyla (e.g., cows, giraffes, pigs, hippos, and whales), the Carnivora (e.g., cats, dogs, and bears),
and the Chiroptera (bats and flying foxes). The two largest orders are the rodents (2,000 species) and bats
(about 1,000 species), which together constitute approximately 60 percent of all eutherian species.
PAGE: 897
886 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
29.7 | The Evolution of Primates
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the derived features that distinguish primates from other animals
• Describe the defining features of the major groups of primates
• Identify the major hominin precursors to modern humans
• Explain why scientists are having difficulty determining the true lines of descent in hominids
OrderPrimatesofclassMammaliaincludeslemurs,tarsiers,monkeys,apes,andhumans.Non-humanprimates
liveprimarilyinthetropicalorsubtropicalregionsofSouthAmerica,Africa,andAsia.Theyrangeinsizefromthe
mouselemurat30grams(1ounce)tothemountaingorillaat200kilograms(441pounds).Thecharacteristics
andevolutionofprimatesareofparticularinteresttousastheyallowustounderstandtheevolutionofourown
species.
Characteristics of Primates
All primate species possess adaptations for climbing trees, as they all descended from tree-dwellers. This
arboreal heritage of primates has resulted in hands and feet that are adapted for climbing, or brachiation
(swingingthroughtreesusingthearms).Theseadaptationsinclude,butarenotlimitedto:1)arotatingshoulder
joint,2)abigtoethatiswidelyseparatedfromtheothertoes(excepthumans)andthumbssufficientlyseparated
fromfingerstoallowforgrippingbranches,and3)stereoscopicvision,twooverlappingfieldsofvisionfromthe
eyes,whichallowsfortheperceptionofdepthandgaugingdistance.Othercharacteristicsofprimatesarebrains
that are larger than those of most other mammals, claws that have been modified into flattened nails, typically
only one offspring per pregnancy, and a trend toward holding the body upright.
Order Primates is divided into two groups: Strepsirrhini (“turned-nosed”) and Haplorhini (“simple-nosed”)
primates.Strepsirrhines,alsocalledthewet-nosedprimates,includeprosimianslikethebushbabiesandpottos
of Africa, the lemurs of Madagascar, and the lorises of Southeast Asia. Haplorhines, or dry-nosed primates,
include tarsiers (Figure 29.42) and simians (New World monkeys, Old World monkeys, apes, and humans). In
general,strepsirrhinestendtobenocturnal,havelargerolfactorycentersinthebrain,andexhibitasmallersize
and smaller brain than anthropoids. Haplorhines, with a few exceptions, are diurnal, and depend more on their
vision.Anotherinterestingdifferencebetweenthestrepsirrhinesandhaplorhinesisthatstrepsirrhineshavethe
enzymes for making vitamin C, while haplorhines have to get it from their food.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 898
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 887
Figure 29.42 A Philippine tarsier. This tarsier, Carlito syrichta, is one of the smallest primates—about 5 inches
long, from nose to the base of the tail. The tail is not shown, but is about twice the length of the body. Note
the large eyes, each of which is about the same size as the animal's brain, and the long hind legs. (credit: mtoz
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0 (http://openstax.org/l/CCSA_2)), via Wikimedia Commons)
Evolution of Primates
The first primate-like mammals are referred to as proto-primates. They were roughly similar to squirrels
and tree shrews in size and appearance. The existing fossil evidence (mostly from North Africa) is very
fragmented. These proto-primates remain largely mysterious creatures until more fossil evidence becomes
available. Although genetic evidence suggests that primates diverged from other mammals about 85 MYA, the
oldestknownprimate-likemammalswitharelativelyrobustfossilrecorddatetoabout65MYA.Fossilslikethe
proto-primate Plesiadapis (although some researchers do not agree that Plesiadapis was a proto-primate) had
some features of the teeth and skeleton in common with true primates. They were found in North America and
Europe in the Cenozoic and went extinct by the end of the Eocene.
Thefirsttrueprimatesdatetoabout55MYAintheEoceneepoch.TheywerefoundinNorthAmerica,Europe,
Asia,andAfrica.Theseearlyprimatesresembledpresent-dayprosimianssuchaslemurs.Evolutionarychanges
continuedintheseearlyprimates,withlargerbrainsandeyes,andsmallermuzzlesbeingthetrend.Bytheend
of the Eocene epoch, many of the early prosimian species went extinct due either to cooler temperatures or
competition from the first monkeys.
Anthropoid monkeys evolved from prosimians during the Oligocene epoch. By 40 million years ago, evidence
indicates that monkeys were present in the New World (South America) and the Old World (Africa and Asia).
New World monkeys are also called Platyrrhini—a reference to their broad noses (Figure 29.43). Old World
monkeys are called Catarrhini—a reference to their narrow, downward-pointed noses. There is still quite a bit
of uncertainty about the origins of the New World monkeys. At the time the platyrrhines arose, the continents
of South American and Africa had drifted apart. Therefore, it is thought that monkeys arose in the Old World
and reached the New World either by drifting on log rafts or by crossing land bridges. Due to this reproductive
isolation,NewWorldmonkeysandOldWorldmonkeysunderwentseparateadaptiveradiationsovermillionsof
years.TheNewWorldmonkeysareallarboreal,whereasOldWorldmonkeysincludebotharborealandground-
dwelling species. The arboreal habits of the New World monkeys are reflected in the possession of prehensile
orgraspingtailsbymostspecies.ThetailsofOldWorldmonkeysareneverprehensileandareoftenreduced,
and some species have ischial callosities—thickened patches of skin on their seats.
PAGE: 899
888 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure29.43ANewWorldmonkey.ThehowlermonkeyisnativetoCentralandSouthAmerica.Itmakesacallthat
sounds like a lion roaring. (credit: Xavi Talleda)
ApesevolvedfromthecatarrhinesinAfricamidwaythroughtheCenozoic,approximately25millionyearsago.
Apesaregenerallylargerthanmonkeysandtheydonotpossessatail.Allapesarecapableofmovingthrough
trees,althoughmanyspeciesspendmosttheirtimeontheground.Whenwalkingquadrupedally,monkeyswalk
on their palms, while apes support the upper body on their knuckles. Apes are more intelligent than monkeys,
and they have larger brains relative to body size. The apes are divided into two groups. The lesser apes
comprise the family Hylobatidae, including gibbons and siamangs. The great apes include the genera Pan
(chimpanzees and bonobos)Gorilla(gorillas),Pongo(orangutans), andHomo(humans) (Figure 29.44).
Figure 29.44 Primate skeletons. All great apes have a similar skeletal structure. (credit: modification of work by Tim
Vickers)
The very arboreal gibbons are smaller than the great apes; they have low sexual dimorphism (that is, the
sexes are not markedly different in size), although in some species, the sexes differ in color; and they have
relatively longer arms used for swinging through trees (Figure 29.45a). Two species of orangutan are native
to different islands in Indonesia: Borneo (P. pygmaeus) and Sumatra (P. abelii). A third orangutan species,
Pongo tapanuliensis, was reported in 2017 from the Batang Toru forest in Sumatra. Orangutans are arboreal
and solitary. Males are much larger than females and have cheek and throat pouches when mature. Gorillas
allliveinCentralAfrica.Theeasternandwesternpopulationsarerecognizedasseparatespecies,G.berengei
and G. gorilla. Gorillas are strongly sexually dimorphic, with males about twice the size of females. In older
males,calledsilverbacks,thehaironthebackturnswhiteorgray.Chimpanzees(Figure29.45b)arethespecies
consideredtobemostcloselyrelatedtohumans.However,thespeciesmostcloselyrelatedtothechimpanzee
is the bonobo. Genetic evidence suggests that chimpanzee and human lineages separated 5 to 7 MYA, while
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 900
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 889
chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) and bonobo (Pan paniscus) lineages separated about 2 MYA. Chimpanzees
and bonobos both live in Central Africa, but the two species are separated by the Congo River, a significant
geographicbarrier.Bonobosareslighterthanchimpanzees,buthavelongerlegsandmorehairontheirheads.
Inchimpanzees,whitetailtuftsidentifyjuveniles,whilebonoboskeeptheirwhitetailtuftsforlife.Bonobosalso
have higher-pitched voices than chimpanzees. Chimpanzees are more aggressive and sometimes kill animals
from other groups, while bonobos are not known to do so. Both chimpanzees and bonobos are omnivorous.
Orangutan and gorilla diets also include foods from multiple sources, although the predominant food items are
fruits for orangutans and foliage for gorillas.
Figure29.45Lesserandgreatapes.Thiswhite-cheekedgibbon(a)isalesserape.Ingibbonsofthisspecies,females
andinfantsarebuffandmalesareblack.Thisyoungchimpanzee(b)isoneofthegreatapes.Itpossessesarelatively
large brain and has no tail. (credit a: MAC. credit b: modification of work by Aaron Logan)
Human Evolution
The family Hominidae of order Primates includes the hominoids: the great apes and humans (Figure 29.46).
EvidencefromthefossilrecordandfromacomparisonofhumanandchimpanzeeDNAsuggeststhathumans
and chimpanzees diverged from a common hominoid ancestor approximately six million years ago. Several
species evolved from the evolutionary branch that includes humans, although our species is the only surviving
member. The term hominin is used to refer to those species that evolved after this split of the primate line,
therebydesignatingspeciesthataremorecloselyrelatedtohumansthantochimpanzees.Anumberofmarker
features differentiate humans from the other hominoids, including bipedalism or upright posture, increase in
the size of the brain, and a fully opposable thumb that can touch the little finger. Bipedal hominins include
several groups that were probably part of the modern human lineage—Australopithecus, Homo habilis, and
Homoerectus—andseveralnon-ancestralgroupsthatcanbeconsidered“cousins”ofmodernhumans,suchas
Neanderthals and Denisovans.
Determining the true lines of descent in hominins is difficult. In years past, when relatively few hominin fossils
had been recovered, some scientists believed that considering them in order, from oldest to youngest, would
demonstratethecourseofevolutionfromearlyhomininstomodernhumans.Inthepastseveralyears,however,
manynewfossilshavebeenfound,anditisclearthattherewasoftenmorethanonespeciesaliveatanyone
time and that many of the fossils found (and species named) represent hominin species that died out and are
not ancestral to modern humans.
PAGE: 901
890 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.46Hominin phylogeny. This chart shows the evolution of modern humans.
Very Early Hominins
Three species of very early hominids have made news in the late 20th and early 21st centuries: Ardipithecus,
Sahelanthropus,andOrrorin.Theyoungestofthethreespecies,Ardipithecus,wasdiscoveredinthe1990s,and
datestoabout4.4MYA.Althoughthebipedalityoftheearlyspecimenswasuncertain,severalmorespecimens
ofArdipithecuswerediscoveredintheinterveningyearsanddemonstratedthattheorganismwasbipedal.Two
differentspeciesofArdipithecushavebeenidentified,A.ramidusandA.kadabba,whosespecimensareolder,
dating to 5.6 MYA. However, the status of this genus as a human ancestor is uncertain.
Theoldestofthethree,Sahelanthropustchadensis,wasdiscoveredin2001-2002andhasbeendatedtonearly
sevenmillionyearsago.Thereisasinglespecimenofthisgenus,askullthatwasasurfacefindinChad.The
fossil,informallycalled“Toumai,”isamosaicofprimitiveandevolvedcharacteristics,anditisunclearhowthis
fossilfitswiththepicturegivenbymoleculardata,namelythatthelineleadingtomodernhumansandmodern
chimpanzeesapparentlybifurcatedaboutsixmillionyearsago.Itisnotthoughtatthistimethatthisspecieswas
an ancestor of modern humans.
Ayounger(c.6MYA)species,Orrorintugenensis,isalsoarelativelyrecentdiscovery,foundin2000.Thereare
severalspecimensofOrrorin.SomefeaturesofOrrorinaremoresimilartothoseofmodernhumansthanarethe
australopithicenes, although Orrorin is much older. If Orrorin is a human ancestor, then the australopithicenes
may not be in the direct human lineage. Additional specimens of these species may help to clarify their role.
Early Hominins: GenusAustralopithecus
Australopithecus(“southernape”)isagenusofhomininthatevolvedineasternAfricaapproximatelyfourmillion
years ago and went extinct about two million years ago. This genus is of particular interest to us as it is
thought that our genus, genus Homo, evolved from a common ancestor shared with Australopithecus about
two million years ago (after likely passing through some transitional states). Australopithecus had a number
of characteristics that were more similar to the great apes than to modern humans. For example, sexual
dimorphismwasmoreexaggeratedthaninmodernhumans.Maleswereupto50percentlargerthanfemales,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 902
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 891
a ratio that is similar to that seen in modern gorillas and orangutans. In contrast, modern human males are
approximately15to20percentlargerthanfemales.ThebrainsizeofAustralopithecusrelativetoitsbodymass
was also smaller than in modern humans and more similar to that seen in the great apes. A key feature that
Australopithecushadincommonwithmodernhumanswasbipedalism,althoughitislikelythatAustralopithecus
alsospenttimeintrees.Homininfootprints,similartothoseofmodernhumans,werefoundinLaetoli,Tanzania
and dated to 3.6 million years ago. They showed that hominins at the time of Australopithecus were walking
upright.
TherewereanumberofAustralopithecusspecies,whichareoftenreferredtoasaustralopiths.Australopithecus
anamensis lived about 4.2 million years ago. More is known about another early species, Australopithecus
afarensis, which lived between 3.9 and 2.9 million years ago. This species demonstrates a trend in human
evolution: the reduction of the dentition and jaw in size. A. afarensis (Figure 29.47a) had smaller canines and
molars compared to apes, but these were larger than those of modern humans. Its brain size was 380 to 450
cubic centimeters, approximately the size of a modern chimpanzee brain. It also had prognathic jaws, which is
arelativelylongerjawthanthatofmodernhumans.Inthemid-1970s,thefossilofanadultfemaleA.afarensis
wasfoundintheAfarregionofEthiopiaanddatedto3.24millionyearsago(Figure29.48).Thefossil,whichis
informallycalled“Lucy,”issignificantbecauseitwasthemostcompleteaustralopithfossilfound,with40percent
of the skeleton recovered.
Figure29.47Australopithiceneandmodernhumanskulls.Theskullof(a)Australopithecusafarensis,anearlyhominid
thatlivedbetweentwoandthreemillionyearsago,resembledthatof(b)modernhumansbutwassmallerwithasloped
forehead, larger teeth, and a prominent jaw.
PAGE: 903
892 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.48 Lucy. This adult female Australopithecus afarensis skeleton, nicknamed Lucy, was discovered in the
mid-1970s. (credit: “120”/Wikimedia Commons)
Australopithecusafricanuslivedbetweentwoandthreemillionyearsago.Ithadaslenderbuildandwasbipedal,
buthadrobustarmbonesand,likeotherearlyhominids,mayhavespentsignificanttimeintrees.Itsbrainwas
largerthanthatofA.afarensisat500cubiccentimeters,whichisslightlylessthanone-thirdthesizeofmodern
humanbrains.Twootherspecies,AustralopithecusbahrelghazaliandAustralopithecusgarhi,havebeenadded
to the roster of australopiths in recent years. A. bahrelghazali isunusual in being the only australopith found in
Central Africa.
A Dead End: GenusParanthropus
The australopiths had a relatively slender build and teeth that were suited for soft food. In the past several
years,fossilsofhominidsofadifferentbodytypehavebeenfoundanddatedtoapproximately2.5millionyears
ago. These hominids, of the genus Paranthropus, were muscular, stood 1.3 to 1.4 meters tall, and had large
grindingteeth.Theirmolarsshowedheavywear,suggestingthattheyhadacoarseandfibrousvegetariandiet
asopposedtothepartiallycarnivorousdietoftheaustralopiths.ParanthropusincludesParanthropusrobustusof
SouthAfrica,andParanthropusaethiopicusandParanthropusboiseiofEastAfrica.Thehominidsinthisgenus
wentextinctmorethanonemillionyearsagoandarenotthoughttobeancestraltomodernhumans,butrather
members of an evolutionary branch on the hominin tree that left no descendants.
Early Hominins: GenusHomo
Thehumangenus,Homo,firstappearedbetween2.5andthreemillionyearsago.Formanyyears,fossilsofa
speciescalledH.habilisweretheoldestexamplesinthegenusHomo,butin2010,anewspeciescalledHomo
gautengensiswasdiscoveredandmaybeolder.ComparedtoA.africanus,H.habilishadanumberoffeatures
moresimilartomodernhumans.H.habilishadajawthatwaslessprognathicthantheaustralopithsandalarger
brain, at 600 to 750 cubic centimeters. However, H. habilis retained some features of older hominin species,
such as long arms. The name H. habilis means “handy man,” which is a reference to the stone tools that have
been found with its remains.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 904
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 893
Watch this video about Smithsonian paleontologist Briana Pobiner explaining the link between hominin eating
of meat and evolutionary trends. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/
content/m66594/1.3/#eip-id3050292)
H.erectusappearedapproximately1.8millionyearsago(Figure29.49).ItisbelievedtohaveoriginatedinEast
AfricaandwasthefirsthomininspeciestomigrateoutofAfrica.FossilsofH.erectushavebeenfoundinIndia,
China,Java,andEurope,andwereknowninthepastas“JavaMan”or“PekingMan.”H.erectushadanumber
offeaturesthatweremoresimilartomodernhumansthanthoseofH.habilis.H.erectuswaslargerinsizethan
earlierhominins,reachingheightsupto1.85metersandweighingupto65kilograms,whicharesizessimilarto
thoseofmodernhumans.Itsdegreeofsexualdimorphismwaslessthaninearlierspecies,withmalesbeing20
to30percentlargerthanfemales,whichisclosetothesizedifferenceseeninourownspecies.H.erectushad
alargerbrainthanearlierspeciesat775to1,100cubiccentimeters,whichcomparestothe1,130to1,260cubic
centimeters seen in modern human brains. H. erectus also had a nose with downward-facing nostrils similar
to modern humans, rather than the forward-facing nostrils found in other primates. Longer, downward-facing
nostrils allow for the warming of cold air before it enters the lungs and may have been an adaptation to colder
climates.ArtifactsfoundwithfossilsofH.erectussuggestthatitwasthefirsthominintousefire,hunt,andhave
a home base.H.erectusis generally thought to have lived until about 50,000 years ago.
Figure 29.49 Homo erectus. Homo erectus had a prominent brow and a nose that pointed downward rather than
forward.
Humans:Homo sapiens
A number of species, sometimes called archaic Homo sapiens, apparently evolved from H. erectus starting
about 500,000 years ago. These species include Homo heidelbergensis, Homo rhodesiensis, and Homo
neanderthalensis.ThesearchaicH.sapienshadabrainsizesimilartothatofmodernhumans,averaging1,200
to1,400cubiccentimeters.Theydifferedfrommodernhumansbyhavingathickskull,aprominentbrowridge,
andarecedingchin.Someofthesespeciessurviveduntil30,000to10,000yearsago,overlappingwithmodern
humans (Figure 29.50).
PAGE: 905
894 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Figure 29.50Neanderthal. TheHomo neanderthalensisused tools and may have worn clothing.
ThereisconsiderabledebateabouttheoriginsofanatomicallymodernhumansorHomosapienssapiens.As
discussedearlier,H.erectusmigratedoutofAfricaandintoAsiaandEuropeinthefirstmajorwaveofmigration
about1.5millionyearsago.ItisthoughtthatmodernhumansaroseinAfricafromH.erectusandmigratedoutof
Africa about 100,000 years ago in a second major migration wave. Then, modern humans replaced H. erectus
species that had migrated into Asia and Europe in the first wave.
Thisevolutionarytimelineissupportedbymolecularevidence.Oneapproachtostudyingtheoriginsofmodern
humansistoexaminemitochondrialDNA(mtDNA)frompopulationsaroundtheworld.Becauseafetusdevelops
from an egg containing its mother’s mitochondria (which have their own, non-nuclear DNA), mtDNA is passed
entirely through the maternal line. Mutations in mtDNA can now be used to estimate the timeline of genetic
divergence. The resulting evidence suggests that all modern humans have mtDNA inherited from a common
ancestor that lived in Africa about 160,000 years ago. Another approach to the molecular understanding of
humanevolutionistoexaminetheYchromosome,whichispassedfromfathertoson.Thisevidencesuggests
that all men today inherited a Y chromosome from a male that lived in Africa about 140,000 years ago.
The study of mitochondrial DNA led to the identification of another human species or subspecies, the
Denisovans.DNAfromteethandfingerbonessuggestedtwothings.First,themitochondrialDNAwasdifferent
fromthatofbothmodernhumansandNeanderthals.Second,thegenomicDNAsuggestedthattheDenisovans
shared a common ancestor with the Neanderthals. Genes from both Neanderthals and Denisovans have been
identifiedinmodernhumanpopulations,indicatingthatinterbreedingamongthethreegroupsoccurredoverpart
of their range.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 906
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 895
KEY TERMS
Acanthostega one of the earliest known tetrapods
Actinopterygii ray-finned fishes
allantois membrane of the egg that stores nitrogenous wastes produced by the embryo; also facilitates
respiration
amnion membrane of the egg that protects the embryo from mechanical shock and prevents dehydration
amniote animal that produces a terrestrially adapted egg protected by amniotic membranes
Amphibia frogs, salamanders, and caecilians
ampulla of Lorenzini sensory organ that allows sharks to detect electromagnetic fields produced by living
things
anapsid animal having no temporal fenestrae in the cranium
anthropoid monkeys, apes, and humans
Anura frogs
apocrine gland scent gland that secretes substances that are used for chemical communication
Apoda caecilians
Archaeopteryx transition species from dinosaur to bird from the Jurassic period
archosaur modern crocodilian or bird, or an extinct pterosaur or dinosaur
Australopithecus genus of hominins that evolved in eastern Africa approximately four million years ago
brachiation movement through trees branches via suspension from the arms
brumation period of much reduced metabolism and torpor that occurs in any ectotherm in cold weather
caecilian legless amphibian that belongs to the clade Apoda
Casineria one of the oldest known amniotes; had both amphibian and reptilian characteristics
Catarrhini clade of Old World monkeys
Cephalochordata chordatecladewhosememberspossessanotochord,dorsalhollownervecord,pharyngeal
slits, and a post-anal tail in the adult stage
Chondrichthyes jawed fish with paired fins and a skeleton made of cartilage
Chordata phylum of animals distinguished by their possession of a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord,
pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail at some point during their development
chorion membrane of the egg that surrounds the embryo and yolk sac
contour feather feather that creates an aerodynamic surface for efficient flight
Craniata clade composed of chordates that possess a cranium; includes Vertebrata together with hagfishes
cranium bony, cartilaginous, or fibrous structure surrounding the brain, jaw, and facial bones
Crocodilia crocodiles and alligators
cutaneous respiration gas exchange through the skin
PAGE: 907
896 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
dentary single bone that comprises the lower jaw of mammals
diapsid animal having two temporal fenestrae in the cranium
diphyodont refers to the possession of two sets of teeth in a lifetime
dorsal hollow nerve cord hollow, tubular structure derived from ectoderm, which is located dorsal to the
notochord in chordates
down feather feather specialized for insulation
eccrine gland sweat gland
Enantiornithes dominant bird group during the Cretaceous period
eutherian mammal mammal that possesses a complex placenta, which connects a fetus to the mother;
sometimes called placental mammals
flight feather feather specialized for flight
frog tail-less amphibian that belongs to the clade Anura
furcula wishbone formed by the fusing of the clavicles
gnathostome jawed fish
Gorilla genus of gorillas
hagfish eel-like jawless fish that live on the ocean floor and are scavengers
heterodont tooth different types of teeth that are modified for different purposes
hominin species that are more closely related to humans than chimpanzees
hominoid pertaining to great apes and humans
Homo genus of humans
Homo sapiens sapiens anatomically modern humans
Hylobatidae family of gibbons
Hylonomus one of the earliest reptiles
lamprey jawless fish characterized by a toothed, funnel-like, sucking mouth
lancelet member of Cephalochordata; named for its blade-like shape
lateral line sense organ that runs the length of a fish’s body; used to detect vibration in the water
lepidosaur modern lizards, snakes, and tuataras
mammal one of the groups of endothermic vertebrates that possesses hair and mammary glands
mammary gland in female mammals, a gland that produces milk for newborns
marsupial one of the groups of mammals that includes the kangaroo, koala, bandicoot, Tasmanian devil, and
several other species; young develop within a pouch
monotreme egg-laying mammal
Myxini hagfishes
Neognathae birds other than the Paleognathae
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 908
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 897
Neornithes modern birds
notochord flexible,rod-shapedsupportstructurethatisfoundintheembryonicstageofallchordatesandinthe
adult stage of some chordates
Ornithorhynchidae clade that includes the duck-billed platypus
Osteichthyes bony fish
ostracoderm one of the earliest jawless fish covered in bone
Paleognathae ratites; flightless birds, including ostriches and emus
Pan genus of chimpanzees and bonobos
Petromyzontidae clade of lampreys
pharyngeal slit opening in the pharynx
Platyrrhini clade of New World monkeys
Plesiadapis oldest known primate-like mammal
pneumatic bone air-filled bone
Pongo genus of orangutans
post-anal tail muscular, posterior elongation of the body extending beyond the anus in chordates
primary feather feather located at the tip of the wing that provides thrust
Primates order of lemurs, tarsiers, monkeys, apes, and humans
prognathic jaw long jaw
prosimian division of primates that includes bush babies and pottos of Africa, lemurs of Madagascar, and
lorises of Southeast Asia
salamander tailed amphibian that belongs to the clade Urodela
Sarcopterygii lobe-finned fish
sauropsid reptile or bird
sebaceous gland in mammals, a skin gland that produce a lipid mixture calledsebum
secondary feather feather located at the base of the wing that provides lift
Sphenodontia clade of tuataras
Squamata clade of lizards and snakes
stereoscopic vision two overlapping fields of vision from the eyes that produces depth perception
swim bladder in fishes, a gas filled organ that helps to control the buoyancy of the fish
synapsid mammal having one temporal fenestra
Tachyglossidae clade that includes the echidna or spiny anteater
tadpole larval stage of a frog
temporal fenestra non-orbital opening in the skull that may allow muscles to expand and lengthen
PAGE: 909
898 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
Testudines order of turtles
tetrapod phylogenetic reference to an organism with a four-footed evolutionary history; includes amphibians,
reptiles, birds, and mammals
theropod dinosaur group ancestral to birds
tunicate sessile chordate that is a member of Urochordata
Urochordata clade composed of tunicates
Urodela salamanders
vertebral column series of separate bones joined together as a backbone
Vertebrata members of the phylum Chordata that possess a backbone
CHAPTER SUMMARY
29.1Chordates
The five characteristic features of chordates present during some time of their life cycles are a notochord, a
dorsal hollow tubular nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, endostyle/thyroid gland, and a post-anal tail. Chordata
contains two clades of invertebrates: Urochordata (tunicates) and Cephalochordata (lancelets), together with
the vertebrates in the Vertebrata/Craniata. Lancelets are suspension feeders that feed on phytoplankton and
other microorganisms. Most tunicates live on the ocean floor and are suspension feeders. Which of the two
invertebrate chordate clades is more closely related to the vertebrates continues to be debated. Vertebrata is
named for the vertebral column, which is a feature of almost all members of this clade. The name Craniata
(organisms with a cranium) is considered to be synonymous with Vertebrata.
29.2Fishes
The earliest vertebrates that diverged from the invertebrate chordates were the agnathan jawless fishes, whose
extant members include the hagfishes and lampreys. Hagfishes are eel-like scavengers that feed on dead
invertebrates and other fishes. Lampreys are characterized by a toothed, funnel-like sucking mouth, and most
species are parasitic or predaceous on other fishes. Fishes with jaws (gnathostomes) evolved later. Jaws
allowed early gnathostomes to exploit new food sources.
Gnathostomes include the cartilaginous fishes and the bony fishes, as well as all other tetrapods (amphibians,
reptiles, mammals). Cartilaginous fishes include sharks, rays, skates, and ghost sharks. Most cartilaginous
fishes live in marine habitats, with a few species living in fresh water for part or all of their lives. The vast
majority of present-day fishes belong to the clade Osteichthyes, which consists of approximately 30,000
species. Bony fishes (Osteichthyes) can be divided into two clades: Actinopterygii (ray-finned fishes, virtually all
extant species) and Sarcopterygii (lobe-finned fishes, comprising fewer than 10 extant species, but form the
sister group of the tetrapods).
29.3Amphibians
As tetrapods, most amphibians are characterized by four well-developed limbs, although some species of
salamanders and all caecilians are limbless. The most important characteristic of extant amphibians is a moist,
permeable skin used for cutaneous respiration, although lungs are found in the adults of many species.
All amphibians are carnivores and possess many small teeth. The fossil record provides evidence of amphibian
species, now extinct, that arose over 400 million years ago as the first tetrapods. Living Amphibia can be
divided into three classes: salamanders (Urodela), frogs (Anura), and caecilians (Apoda). In the majority of
amphibians, development occurs in two distinct stages: a gilled aquatic larval stage that metamorphoses into
an adult stage, acquiring lungs and legs, and losing the tail in Anurans. A few species in all three clades bypass
a free-living larval stage. Various levels of parental care are seen in the amphibians.
29.4Reptiles
The amniotes are distinguished from amphibians by the presence of a terrestrially adapted egg protected by
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 910
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 899
four extra-embryonic membranes. The amniotes include reptiles, birds, and mammals. The early amniotes
diverged into two main lines soon after the first amniotes arose. The initial split was into synapsids (mammals)
and sauropsids. Sauropsids can be further divided into anapsids and diapsids (crocodiles, dinosaurs, birds, and
modern reptiles).
Reptiles are tetrapods that ancestrally had four limbs; however, a number of extant species have secondarily
lost them or greatly reduced them over evolutionary time. For example, limbless reptiles (e.g., snakes) are
classified as tetrapods, because they descended from ancestors with four limbs. One of the key adaptations
that permitted reptiles to live on land was the development of scaly skin containing the protein keratin, which
prevented water loss from the skin. Reptilia includes four living clades of nonavian organisms: Crocodilia
(crocodiles and alligators), Sphenodontia (tuataras), Squamata (lizards and snakes), and Testudines (turtles).
Currently, this classification is paraphyletic, leaving out the birds, which are now classified as avian reptiles in
the class Reptilia.
29.5Birds
Birds are the most speciose group of land vertebrates and display a number of adaptations related to their
ability to fly, which were first present in their therapod (maniraptoran) ancestors. Birds are endothermic (and
homeothermic), meaning they have a very high metabolism that produces a considerable amount of heat, as
well as structures such as feathers that allow them to retain their own body heat. These adaptations are used
to regulate their internal temperature, making it largely independent of ambient thermal conditions.
Birds have feathers, which allow for insulation and flight, as well as for mating and warning signals. Flight
feathers have a broad and continuously curved vane that produces lift. Some birds have pneumatic bones
containing air spaces that are sometimes connected to air sacs in the body cavity. Airflow through bird lungs
travels in one direction, creating a counter-current gas exchange with the blood.
Birds are highly modified diapsids and belong to a group called the archosaurs. Within the archosaurs, birds
are most likely evolved from theropod (maniraptoran) dinosaurs. One of the oldest known fossils (and best
known) of a “dinosaur-bird” is that ofArchaeopteryx, which is dated from the Jurassic period. Modern birds are
now classified into three groups: Paleognathae, Galloanserae, and Neoaves.
29.6Mammals
Mammals are vertebrates that possess hair and mammary glands. The mammalian integument includes
various secretory glands, including sebaceous glands, eccrine glands, apocrine glands, and mammary glands.
Mammals are synapsids, meaning that they have a single opening in the skull behind the eye. Mammals
probably evolved from therapsids in the late Triassic period, as the earliest known mammal fossils are from the
early Jurassic period. A key characteristic of synapsids is endothermy, and most mammals are homeothermic.
There are three groups of mammals living today: monotremes, marsupials, and eutherians. Monotremes are
unique among mammals as they lay eggs, rather than giving birth to young. Marsupials give birth to very
immature young, which typically complete their development in a pouch. Eutherian mammals are sometimes
called placental mammals, because all species possess a complex placenta that connects a fetus to the
mother, allowing for gas, fluid, and nutrient exchange. All mammals nourish their young with milk, which is
derived from modified sweat or sebaceous glands.
29.7The Evolution of Primates
All primate species possess adaptations for climbing trees and probably descended from arboreal ancestors,
although not all living species are arboreal. Other characteristics of primates are brains that are larger, relative
to body size, than those of other mammals, claws that have been modified into flattened nails, typically only
one young per pregnancy, stereoscopic vision, and a trend toward holding the body upright. Primates are
divided into two groups: strepsirrhines, which include most prosimians, and haplorhines, which include simians.
Monkeys evolved from prosimians during the Oligocene epoch. The simian line includes both platyrrhine and
catarrhine branches. Apes evolved from catarrhines in Africa during the Miocene epoch. Apes are divided into
the lesser apes and the greater apes. Hominins include those groups that gave rise to our own species, such
asAustralopithecusandH.erectus, and those groups that can be considered “cousins” of humans, such as
Neanderthals and Denisovans. Fossil evidence shows that hominins at the time ofAustralopithecuswere
walking upright, the first evidence of bipedal hominins. A number of species, sometimes called archaicH.
sapiens, evolved fromH.erectusapproximately 500,000 years ago. There is considerable debate about the
origins of anatomically modern humans orH.sapiens sapiens, and the discussion will continue, as new
PAGE: 911
900 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
evidence from fossil finds and genetic analysis emerges.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 29.3Which of the following statements about the parts of an amniotic egg are false?
about common features of chordates is true?
a. The allantois stores nitrogenous waste and
a. The dorsal hollow nerve cord is part of the facilitates respiration.
chordate central nervous system. b. The chorion facilitates gas exchange.
b. In vertebrate fishes, the pharyngeal slits c. The yolk provides food for the growing
become the gills. embryo.
c. Humans are not chordates because humans d. The amniotic cavity is filled with albumen.
do not have a tail.
3.Figure 29.24Members of the order Testudines
d. Vertebrates do not have a notochord at any
have an anapsid-like skull with one opening.
point in their development; instead, they
However, molecular studies indicate that turtles
have a vertebral column.
descended from a diapsid ancestor. Why might this
2.Figure 29.22Which of the following statements be the case?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following isnotcontained in phylum category of fish does the specimen belong?
Chordata? a. Rays
a. Cephalochordata b. Osteichthyes
b. Echinodermata c. Sharks
c. Urochordata d. Hagfish
d. Vertebrata
10.Which of the following isnottrue of
5.Which group of invertebrates is most closely Acanthostega?
related to vertebrates? a. It was aquatic.
a. cephalochordates b. It had gills.
b. echinoderms c. It had four limbs.
c. arthropods d. It laid shelled eggs.
d. urochordates
11.Frogs belong to which order?
6.Hagfish, lampreys, sharks, and tuna are all a. Anura
chordates that can also be classified into which b. Urodela
group? c. Caudata
a. Craniates d. Apoda
b. Vertebrates
12.During the Mesozoic period, diapsids diverged
c. Cartilaginous fish
into_______.
d. Cephalocordata
a. pterosaurs and dinosaurs
7.Members of Chondrichthyes differ from members b. mammals and reptiles
of Osteichthyes by having (a) ________. c. lepidosaurs and archosaurs
a. jaw d. Testudines and Sphenodontia
b. bony skeleton
13.Squamata includes_______.
c. cartilaginous skeleton
a. crocodiles and alligators
d. two sets of paired fins
b. turtles
8.Members of Chondrichthyes are thought to be c. tuataras
descended from fishes that had ________. d. lizards and snakes
a. a cartilaginous skeleton
14.Which of the following reptile groups gave rise to
b. a bony skeleton
modern birds?
c. mucus glands
a. Lepidosaurs
d. slime glands
b. Pterosaurs
9.A marine biologist catches a species of fish she c. Anapsids
has never seen before. Upon examination, she d. Archosaurs
determines that the species has a predominantly
15.A bird or feathered dinosaur is ________.
cartilaginous skeleton and a swim bladder. If its
pectoral fins are not fused with its head, to which
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 912
Chapter 29 | Vertebrates 901
a. Neornithes a. Jaw structure
b. Archaeopteryx b. Mammary glands
c. Enantiornithes c. Middle ear structure
d. Paleognathae d. Development of hair
16.Which of the following feather types helps to 20.Which of the following isnotan anthropoid?
reduce drag produced by wind resistance during
flight? a. Lemurs
a. Flight feathers b. Monkeys
b. Primary feathers c. Apes
c. Secondary feathers d. Humans
d. Contour feathers
21.Which of the following is part of a clade believed
17.Eccrine glands produce ________. to have died out, leaving no descendants?
a. sweat a. Paranthropus robustus
b. lipids b. Australopithecus africanus
c. scents c. Homo erectus
d. milk d. Homo sapiens sapiens
18.Monotremes include: 22.Which of the following human traits is not a
a. kangaroos. shared characteristic of primates?
b. koalas. a. Hip structure supporting bipedalism
c. bandicoots. b. Detection and processing of three-color
d. platypuses. vision
c. Nails at the end of each digit
19.The evolution of which of the following features of
d. Enlarged brain area associated with vision,
mammals is hardest to trace through the fossil
and reduced area associated with smell
record?
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
23.What are the characteristic features of the 32.Based on how reptiles thermoregulate, which
chordates? climates would you predict to have the highest reptile
population density, and why?
24.What is the structural advantage of the notochord
in the human embryo? Be sure to compare the 33.Explain why birds are thought to have evolved
notochord with the corresponding structure in adults. from theropod dinosaurs.
25.What can be inferred about the evolution of the 34.Describe three skeletal adaptations that allow for
cranium and vertebral column from examining flight in birds.
hagfishes and lampreys?
35.How would the chest structure differ between
26.Why did gnathostomes replace most agnathans? ostriches, penguins, and terns?
27.Explain why frogs are restricted to a moist 36.Describe three unique features of the mammalian
environment. skeletal system.
28.Describe the differences between the larval and 37.Describe three characteristics of the mammalian
adult stages of frogs. brain that differ from other vertebrates.
29.Describe how metamorphosis changes the 38.How did the evolution of jaw musculature allow
structures involved in gas exchange over the life mammals to spread?
cycle of animals in the clade Anura, and what
39.How did archaicHomo sapiensdiffer from
evolutionary advantage this change provides.
anatomically modern humans?
30.Describe the functions of the three extra-
40.Why is it so difficult to determine the sequence of
embryonic membranes present in amniotic eggs.
hominin ancestors that have led to modernHomo
31.What characteristics differentiate lizards and sapiens?
snakes?
PAGE: 913
902 Chapter 29 | Vertebrates
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 914
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 903
30 | PLANT FORM AND
PHYSIOLOGY
Figure30.1Alocustleafconsistsofleafletsarrayedalongacentralmidrib.Eachleafletisacomplexphotosynthetic
machine, exquisitely adapted to capture sunlight and carbon dioxide. An intricate vascular system supplies the leaf
with water and minerals, and exports the products of photosynthesis. (credit: modification of work by Todd Petit)
Chapter Outline
30.1:The Plant Body
30.2:Stems
30.3:Roots
30.4:Leaves
30.5:Transport of Water and Solutes in Plants
30.6:Plant Sensory Systems and Responses
Introduction
Plantsareasessentialtohumanexistenceasland,water,andair.Withoutplants,ourday-to-dayliveswouldbe
impossiblebecausewithoutoxygenfromphotosynthesis,aerobiclifecannotbesustained.Fromprovidingfood
andsheltertoservingasasourceofmedicines,oils,perfumes,andindustrialproducts,plantsprovidehumans
with numerous valuable resources.
When you think of plants, most of the organisms that come to mind are vascular plants. These plants have
tissues that conduct food and water, and they have seeds. Seed plants are divided into gymnosperms and
angiosperms.Gymnospermsincludetheneedle-leavedconifers—spruce,fir,andpine—aswellaslessfamiliar
plants, such as ginkgos and cycads. Their seeds are not enclosed by a fleshy fruit. Angiosperms, also called
flowering plants, constitute the majority of seed plants. They include broadleaved trees (such as maple, oak,
andelm),vegetables(suchaspotatoes,lettuce,andcarrots),grasses,andplantsknownforthebeautyoftheir
flowers (roses, irises, and daffodils, for example).
While individual plant species are unique, all share a common structure: a plant body consisting of stems,
roots,andleaves.Theyalltransportwater,minerals,andsugarsproducedthroughphotosynthesisthroughthe
plant body in a similar manner. All plant species also respond to environmental factors, such as light, gravity,
PAGE: 915
904 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
competition, temperature, and predation.
30.1 | The Plant Body
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the shoot organ system and the root organ system
• Distinguish between meristematic tissue and permanent tissue
• Identify and describe the three regions where plant growth occurs
• Summarize the roles of dermal tissue, vascular tissue, and ground tissue
• Compare simple plant tissue with complex plant tissue
Likeanimals,plantscontaincellswithorganellesinwhichspecificmetabolicactivitiestakeplace.Unlikeanimals,
however,plantsuseenergyfromsunlighttoformsugarsduringphotosynthesis.Inaddition,plantcellshavecell
walls, plastids, and a large central vacuole: structures that are not found in animal cells. Each of these cellular
structures plays a specific role in plant structure and function.
WatchBotanyWithoutBorders(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/botany_wo_bord),avideoproducedbythe
Botanical Society of America about the importance of plants.
Plant Organ Systems
In plants, just as in animals, similar cells working together form a tissue. When different types of tissues
work together to perform a unique function, they form an organ; organs working together form organ systems.
Vascularplantshavetwodistinctorgansystems:ashootsystem,andarootsystem.Theshootsystemconsists
of two portions: the vegetative (non-reproductive) parts of the plant, such as the leaves and the stems, and
the reproductive parts of the plant, which include flowers and fruits. The shoot system generally grows above
ground,whereitabsorbsthelightneededforphotosynthesis.Therootsystem,whichsupportstheplantsand
absorbs water and minerals, is usually underground.Figure 30.2shows the organ systems of a typical plant.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 916
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 905
Figure 30.2 The shoot system of a plant consists of leaves, stems, flowers, and fruits. The root system anchors the
plant while absorbing water and minerals from the soil.
Plant Tissues
Plants are multicellular eukaryotes with tissue systems made of various cell types that carry out specific
functions. Plant tissue systems fall into one of two general types: meristematic tissue, and permanent (or
non-meristematic) tissue. Cells of the meristematic tissue are found in meristems, which are plant regions
of continuous cell division and growth. Meristematic tissue cells are either undifferentiated or incompletely
differentiated, and they continue to divide and contribute to the growth of the plant. In contrast, permanent
tissueconsists of plant cells that are no longer actively dividing.
Meristematic tissues consist of three types, based on their location in the plant. Apical meristems contain
meristematic tissue located at the tips of stems and roots, which enable a plant to extend in length. Lateral
meristems facilitate growth in thickness or girth in a maturing plant. Intercalary meristems occur only in
monocots, at the bases of leaf blades and at nodes (the areas where leaves attach to a stem). This tissue
enablesthemonocotleafbladetoincreaseinlengthfromtheleafbase;forexample,itallowslawngrassleaves
to elongate even after repeated mowing.
Meristems produce cells that quickly differentiate, or specialize, and become permanent tissue. Such cells
take on specific roles and lose their ability to divide further. They differentiate into three main types: dermal,
vascular,andgroundtissue.Dermaltissuecoversandprotectstheplant,andvasculartissuetransportswater,
minerals,andsugarstodifferentpartsoftheplant.Groundtissueservesasasiteforphotosynthesis,provides
a supporting matrix for the vascular tissue, and helps to store water and sugars.
Secondary tissues are either simple (composed of similar cell types) or complex (composed of different cell
types). Dermal tissue, for example, is a simple tissue that covers the outer surface of the plant and controls
gas exchange. Vascular tissue is an example of a complex tissue, and is made of two specialized conducting
tissues: xylem and phloem. Xylem tissue transports water and nutrients from the roots to different parts of the
plant,andincludesthreedifferentcelltypes:vesselelementsandtracheids(bothofwhichconductwater),and
xylemparenchyma.Phloemtissue,whichtransportsorganiccompoundsfromthesiteofphotosynthesistoother
parts of the plant, consists of four different cell types: sieve cells (which conduct photosynthates), companion
cells,phloemparenchyma,andphloemfibers.Unlikexylemconductingcells,phloemconductingcellsarealive
at maturity. The xylem and phloem always lie adjacent to each other (Figure 30.3). In stems, the xylem and
the phloem form a structure called a vascular bundle; in roots, this is termed the vascular stele or vascular
cylinder.
PAGE: 917
906 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Figure30.3Thislightmicrographshowsacrosssectionofasquash(Curcurbitamaxima)stem.Eachteardrop-shaped
vascularbundleconsistsoflargexylemvesselstowardtheinsideandsmallerphloemcellstowardtheoutside.Xylem
cells,whichtransportwaterandnutrientsfromtherootstotherestoftheplant,aredeadatfunctionalmaturity.Phloem
cells, which transport sugars and other organic compounds from photosynthetic tissue to the rest of the plant, are
living. The vascular bundles are encased in ground tissue and surrounded by dermal tissue. (credit: modification of
work by "(biophotos)"/Flickr; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
30.2 | Stems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the main function and basic structure of stems
• Compare and contrast the roles of dermal tissue, vascular tissue, and ground tissue
• Distinguish between primary growth and secondary growth in stems
• Summarize the origin of annual rings
• List and describe examples of modified stems
Stems are a part of the shoot system of a plant. They may range in length from a few millimeters to hundreds
of meters, and also vary in diameter, depending on the plant type. Stems are usually above ground, although
the stems of some plants, such as the potato, also grow underground. Stems may be herbaceous (soft) or
woodyinnature.Theirmainfunctionistoprovidesupporttotheplant,holdingleaves,flowersandbuds;insome
cases, stems also store food for the plant. A stem may be unbranched, like that of a palm tree, or it may be
highlybranched,likethatofamagnoliatree.Thestemoftheplantconnectstherootstotheleaves,helpingto
transport absorbed water and minerals to different parts of the plant. It also helps to transport the products of
photosynthesis, namely sugars, from the leaves to the rest of the plant.
Plant stems, whether above or below ground, are characterized by the presence of nodes and internodes
(Figure 30.4). Nodes are points of attachment for leaves, aerial roots, and flowers. The stem region between
twonodesiscalledaninternode.Thestalkthatextendsfromthestemtothebaseoftheleafisthepetiole.An
axillary bud is usually found in the axil—the area between the base of a leaf and the stem—where it can give
rise to a branch or a flower. The apex (tip) of the shoot contains the apical meristem within theapical bud.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 918
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 907
Figure30.4Leavesareattachedtotheplantstematareascallednodes.Aninternodeisthestemregionbetweentwo
nodes. The petiole is the stalk connecting the leaf to the stem. The leaves just above the nodes arose from axillary
buds.
Stem Anatomy
The stem and other plant organs arise from the ground tissue, and are primarily made up of simple tissues
formed from three types of cells: parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma cells.
Parenchyma cells are the most common plant cells (Figure 30.5). They are found in the stem, the root, the
inside of the leaf, and the pulp of the fruit. Parenchyma cells are responsible for metabolic functions, such as
photosynthesis, and they help repair and heal wounds. Some parenchyma cells also store starch.
Figure 30.5 The stem of common St John's Wort (Hypericum perforatum) is shown in cross section in this light
micrograph.Thecentralpith(greenish-blue,inthecenter)andperipheralcortex(narrowzone3–5cellsthickjustinside
theepidermis)arecomposedofparenchymacells.Vasculartissuecomposedofxylem(red)andphloemtissue(green,
between the xylem and cortex) surrounds the pith. (credit: Rolf-Dieter Mueller)
PAGE: 919
908 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Collenchyma cells are elongated cells with unevenly thickened walls (Figure 30.6). They provide structural
support, mainly to the stem and leaves. These cells are alive at maturity and are usually found below the
epidermis. The “strings” of a celery stalk are an example of collenchyma cells.
Figure30.6Collenchymacellwallsareuneveninthickness,asseeninthislightmicrograph.Theyprovidesupportto
plant structures. (credit: modification of work by Carl Szczerski; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Sclerenchyma cellsalsoprovidesupporttotheplant,butunlikecollenchymacells,manyofthemaredeadat
maturity.Therearetwotypesofsclerenchymacells:fibersandsclereids.Bothtypeshavesecondarycellwalls
thatarethickenedwithdepositsoflignin,anorganiccompoundthatisakeycomponentofwood.Fibersarelong,
slender cells; sclereids are smaller-sized. Sclereids give pears their gritty texture. Humans use sclerenchyma
fibers to make linen and rope (Figure 30.7).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 920
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 909
Figure 30.7 The central pith and outer cortex of the (a) flax stem are made up of parenchyma cells. Inside the
cortexisalayerofsclerenchymacells,whichmakeupthefibersinflaxropeandclothing.Humanshavegrown
and harvested flax for thousands of years. In (b) this drawing, fourteenth-century women prepare linen. The (c)
flax plant is grown and harvested for its fibers, which are used to weave linen, and for its seeds, which are the
source of linseed oil. (credit a: modification of work by Emmanuel Boutet based on original work by Ryan R.
MacKenzie; credit c: modification of work by Brian Dearth; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Which layers of the stem are made of parenchyma cells?
a. cortex and pith
b. phloem
c. sclerenchyma
d. xylem
Like the rest of the plant, the stem has three tissue systems: dermal, vascular, and ground tissue. Each is
distinguishedbycharacteristiccelltypesthatperformspecifictasksnecessaryfortheplant’sgrowthandsurvival.
Dermal Tissue
Thedermaltissueofthestemconsistsprimarilyofepidermis,asinglelayerofcellscoveringandprotectingthe
underlying tissue. Woody plants have a tough, waterproof outer layer of cork cells commonly known as bark,
which further protects the plant from damage. Epidermal cells are the most numerous and least differentiated
of the cells in the epidermis. The epidermis of a leaf also contains openings known as stomata, through which
theexchangeofgasestakesplace(Figure30.8).Twocells,knownasguardcells,surroundeachleafstoma,
controlling its opening and closing and thus regulating the uptake of carbon dioxide and the release of oxygen
andwatervapor.Trichomesarehair-likestructuresontheepidermalsurface.Theyhelptoreducetranspiration
(thelossofwaterbyabovegroundplantparts),increasesolarreflectance,andstorecompoundsthatdefendthe
PAGE: 921
910 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
leaves against predation by herbivores.
Figure30.8Openingscalledstomata(singular:stoma)allowaplanttotakeupcarbondioxideandreleaseoxygenand
watervapor.The(a)colorizedscanning-electronmicrographshowsaclosedstomaofadicot.Eachstomaisflanked
bytwoguardcellsthatregulateits(b)openingandclosing.The(c)guardcellssitwithinthelayerofepidermalcells.
(credit a: modification of work by Louisa Howard, Rippel Electron Microscope Facility, Dartmouth College; credit b:
modification of work by June Kwak, University of Maryland; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Vascular Tissue
The xylem and phloem that make up the vascular tissue of the stem are arranged in distinct strands called
vascularbundles,whichrunupanddownthelengthofthestem.Whenthestemisviewedincrosssection,the
vascularbundlesofdicotstemsarearrangedinaring.Inplantswithstemsthatliveformorethanoneyear,the
individual bundles grow together and produce the characteristic growth rings. In monocot stems, the vascular
bundles are randomly scattered throughout the ground tissue (Figure 30.9).
Figure 30.9In(a)dicotstems, vascularbundlesarearrangedaroundtheperipheryofthegroundtissue. Thexylem
tissueislocatedtowardtheinteriorofthevascularbundle,andphloemislocatedtowardtheexterior.Sclerenchyma
fiberscapthevascularbundles.In(b)monocotstems,vascularbundlescomposedofxylemandphloemtissuesare
scattered throughout the ground tissue.
Xylemtissuehasthreetypesofcells:xylemparenchyma,tracheids, andvesselelements. Thelatter twotypes
conduct water and are dead at maturity. Tracheids are xylem cells with thick secondary cell walls that are
lignified. Water moves from one tracheid to another through regions on the side walls known as pits, where
secondarywallsareabsent.Vesselelementsarexylemcellswiththinnerwalls;theyareshorterthantracheids.
Each vessel element is connected to the next by means of a perforation plate at the end walls of the element.
Water moves through the perforation plates to travel up the plant.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 922
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 911
Phloem tissue is composed of sieve-tube cells, companion cells, phloem parenchyma, and phloem fibers.
A series of sieve-tube cells (also called sieve-tube elements) are arranged end to end to make up a long
sieve tube, which transports organic substances such as sugars and amino acids. The sugars flow from one
sieve-tube cell to the next through perforated sieve plates, which are found at the end junctions between
two cells. Although still alive at maturity, the nucleus and other cell components of the sieve-tube cells have
disintegrated.Companioncellsarefoundalongsidethesieve-tubecells,providingthemwithmetabolicsupport.
The companion cells contain more ribosomes and mitochondria than the sieve-tube cells, which lack some
cellular organelles.
Ground Tissue
Ground tissue is mostly made up of parenchyma cells, but may also contain collenchyma and sclerenchyma
cellsthathelpsupportthestem.Thegroundtissuetowardstheinteriorofthevasculartissueinastemorrootis
known aspith, while the layer of tissue between the vascular tissue and the epidermis is known as thecortex.
Growth in Stems
Growth in plants occurs as the stems and roots lengthen. Some plants, especially those that are woody, also
increase in thickness during their life span. The increase in length of the shoot and the root is referred to
as primary growth, and is the result of cell division in the shoot apical meristem. Secondary growth is
characterized by an increase in thickness or girth of the plant, and is caused by cell division in the lateral
meristem.Figure30.10showstheareasofprimaryandsecondarygrowthinaplant.Herbaceousplantsmostly
undergoprimarygrowth,withhardlyanysecondarygrowthorincreaseinthickness.Secondarygrowthor“wood”
is noticeable in woody plants; it occurs in some dicots, but occurs very rarely in monocots.
Figure30.10Inwoodyplants,primarygrowthisfollowedbysecondarygrowth,whichallowstheplantstemtoincrease
inthicknessorgirth.Secondaryvasculartissueisaddedastheplantgrows,aswellasacorklayer.Thebarkofatree
extends from the vascular cambium to the epidermis.
Some plant parts, such as stems and roots, continue to grow throughout a plant’s life: a phenomenon called
indeterminate growth. Other plant parts, suchasleavesandflowers, exhibit determinate growth, whichceases
when a plant part reaches a particular size.
Primary Growth
Mostprimarygrowthoccursattheapices,ortips,ofstemsandroots.Primarygrowthisaresultofrapidlydividing
cellsintheapicalmeristemsattheshoottipandroottip.Subsequentcellelongationalsocontributestoprimary
growth.Thegrowthofshootsandrootsduringprimarygrowthenablesplantstocontinuouslyseekwater(roots)
or sunlight (shoots).
The influence of the apical bud on overall plant growth is known as apical dominance, which diminishes the
PAGE: 923
912 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
growth of axillary buds that form along the sides of branches and stems. Most coniferous trees exhibit strong
apical dominance, thus producing the typical conical Christmas tree shape. If the apical bud is removed, then
theaxillarybudswillstartforminglateralbranches.Gardenersmakeuseofthisfactwhentheypruneplantsby
cutting off the tops of branches, thus encouraging the axillary buds to grow out, giving the plant a bushy shape.
Watch this BBC Nature video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/motion_plants) showing how time-lapse
photography captures plant growth at high speed.
Secondary Growth
Theincreaseinstemthicknessthatresultsfromsecondarygrowthisduetotheactivityofthelateralmeristems,
whicharelackinginherbaceousplants.Lateralmeristemsincludethevascularcambiumand,inwoodyplants,
thecorkcambium(seeFigure30.10).Thevascularcambiumislocatedjustoutsidetheprimaryxylemandtothe
interior of the primary phloem. The cells of the vascular cambium divide and form secondary xylem (tracheids
andvesselelements)totheinside,andsecondaryphloem(sieveelementsandcompanioncells)totheoutside.
The thickening of the stem that occurs in secondary growth is due to the formation of secondary phloem and
secondary xylem by the vascular cambium, plus the action of cork cambium, which forms the tough outermost
layer of the stem. The cells of the secondary xylem contain lignin, which provides hardiness and strength.
Inwoodyplants,corkcambiumistheoutermostlateralmeristem.Itproducescorkcells(bark)containingawaxy
substanceknownassuberinthatcanrepelwater.Thebarkprotectstheplantagainstphysicaldamageandhelps
reducewaterloss.Thecorkcambiumalsoproducesalayerofcellsknownasphelloderm,whichgrowsinward
from the cambium. The cork cambium, cork cells, and phelloderm are collectively termed the periderm. The
peridermsubstitutesfortheepidermisinmatureplants.Insomeplants,theperidermhasmanyopenings,known
aslenticels,whichallowtheinteriorcellstoexchangegaseswiththeoutsideatmosphere(Figure30.11).This
supplies oxygen to the living and metabolically active cells of the cortex, xylem, and phloem.
Figure30.11Lenticelsonthebarkofthischerrytreeenablethewoodystemtoexchangegaseswiththesurrounding
atmosphere. (credit: Roger Griffith)
Annual Rings
Theactivityofthevascularcambiumgivesrisetoannualgrowthrings.Duringthespringgrowingseason,cells
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 924
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 913
ofthesecondaryxylemhavealargeinternaldiameterandtheirprimarycellwallsarenotextensivelythickened.
This is known as early wood, or spring wood. During the fall season, the secondary xylem develops thickened
cell walls, forming late wood, or autumn wood, which is denser than early wood. This alternation of early and
late wood is due largely to a seasonal decrease in the number of vessel elements and a seasonal increase in
thenumberoftracheids.Itresultsintheformationofanannualring,whichcanbeseenasacircularringinthe
cross section of the stem (Figure 30.12). An examination of the number of annual rings and their nature (such
astheirsizeandcellwallthickness)canrevealtheageofthetreeandtheprevailingclimaticconditionsduring
each season.
Figure 30.12 Therateofwoodgrowth increasesinsummeranddecreasesinwinter,producingacharacteristic ring
for each year of growth. Seasonal changes in weather patterns can also affect the growth rate—note how the rings
vary in thickness. (credit: Adrian Pingstone)
Stem Modifications
Some plant species have modified stems that are especially suited to a particular habitat and environment
(Figure 30.13). A rhizome is a modified stem that grows horizontally underground and has nodes and
internodes. Vertical shoots may arise from the buds on the rhizome of some plants, such as ginger and ferns.
Cormsaresimilartorhizomes,excepttheyaremoreroundedandfleshy(suchasingladiolus).Cormscontain
stored food that enables some plants to survive the winter. Stolons are stems that run almost parallel to the
ground, or just below the surface, and can give rise to new plants at the nodes. Runners are a type of stolon
that runs above the ground and produces new clone plants at nodes at varying intervals: strawberries are an
example. Tubers are modified stems that may store starch, as seen in the potato (Solanum sp.). Tubers arise
as swollen ends of stolons, and contain many adventitious or unusual buds (familiar to us as the “eyes” on
potatoes). A bulb, which functions as an underground storage unit, is a modification of a stem that has the
appearanceofenlargedfleshyleavesemergingfromthestemorsurroundingthebaseofthestem,asseenin
the iris.
PAGE: 925
914 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Figure30.13Stemmodificationsenableplantstothriveinavarietyofenvironments.Shownare(a)ginger(Zingiber
officinale)rhizomes, (b)acarrionflower (Amorphophallus titanum)corm,(c)Rhodesgrass(Chlorisgayana)stolons,
(d)strawberry(Fragariaananassa)runners,(e)potato(Solanumtuberosum)tubers,and(f)redonion(Allium)bulbs.
(credit a: modification of work by Maja Dumat; credit c: modification of work by Harry Rose; credit d: modification of
work by Rebecca Siegel; credit e: modification of work by Scott Bauer, USDA ARS; credit f: modification of work by
Stephen Ausmus, USDA ARS)
Watch botanist Wendy Hodgson, of Desert Botanical Garden in Phoenix, Arizona, explain how agave plants
were cultivated for food hundreds of years ago in the Arizona desert in this video:
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ancient_crop)Finding the Roots of an Ancient Crop.
Someaerialmodificationsofstemsaretendrilsandthorns(Figure30.14).Tendrilsareslender,twiningstrands
thatenableaplant(likeavineorpumpkin)toseeksupportbyclimbingonothersurfaces.Thornsaremodified
branchesappearingassharpoutgrowthsthatprotecttheplant;commonexamplesincluderoses,Osageorange,
and devil’s walking stick.
Figure30.14FoundinsoutheasternUnitedStates,(a)buckwheatvine(Brunnichiaovata)isaweedyplantthatclimbs
with the aid of tendrils. This one is shown climbing up a wooden stake. (b) Thorns are modified branches. (credit a:
modification of work by Christopher Meloche, USDA ARS; credit b: modification of work by “macrophile”/Flickr)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 926
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 915
30.3 | Roots
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the two types of root systems
• Describe the three zones of the root tip and summarize the role of each zone in root growth
• Describe the structure of the root
• List and describe examples of modified roots
Therootsofseedplantshavethreemajorfunctions:anchoringtheplanttothesoil,absorbingwaterandminerals
andtransportingthemupwards,andstoringtheproductsofphotosynthesis.Somerootsaremodifiedtoabsorb
moisture and exchange gases. Most roots are underground. Some plants, however, also have adventitious
roots, which emerge above the ground from the shoot.
Types of Root Systems
Root systems are mainly of two types (Figure 30.15). Dicots have a tap root system, while monocots have a
fibrousrootsystem.Ataprootsystemhasamainrootthatgrowsdownvertically,andfromwhichmanysmaller
lateral roots arise. Dandelions are a good example; their tap roots usually break off when trying to pull these
weeds,andtheycanregrowanothershootfromtheremainingroot.Ataprootsystempenetratesdeepintothe
soil.Incontrast,afibrousrootsystemislocatedclosertothesoilsurface,andformsadensenetworkofroots
that also helps prevent soil erosion (lawn grasses are a good example, as are wheat, rice, and corn). Some
plants have a combination of tap roots and fibrous roots. Plants that grow in dry areas often have deep root
systems, whereas plants growing in areas with abundant water are likely to have shallower root systems.
Figure30.15(a)Taprootsystemshaveamainrootthatgrowsdown,while(b)fibrousrootsystemsconsistofmany
small roots. (credit b: modification of work by “Austen Squarepants”/Flickr)
Root Growth and Anatomy
Root growth begins with seed germination. When the plant embryo emerges from the seed, the radicle of the
embryo forms the root system. The tip of the root is protected by the root cap, a structure exclusive to roots
and unlike any other plant structure. The root cap is continuously replaced because it gets damaged easily as
the root pushes through soil. The root tip can be divided into three zones: a zone of cell division, a zone of
PAGE: 927
916 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
elongation, and a zone of maturation and differentiation (Figure 30.16). The zone of cell division is closest to
theroottip;itismadeupoftheactivelydividingcellsoftherootmeristem.Thezoneofelongationiswherethe
newly formed cells increase in length, thereby lengthening the root. Beginning at the first root hair is the zone
ofcellmaturationwheretherootcellsbegintodifferentiateintospecialcelltypes.Allthreezonesareinthefirst
centimeter or so of the root tip.
Figure30.16Alongitudinalviewoftherootrevealsthezonesofcelldivision,elongation,andmaturation.Celldivision
occurs in the apical meristem.
The root has an outer layer of cells called the epidermis, which surrounds areas of ground tissue and vascular
tissue. The epidermis provides protection and helps in absorption. Root hairs, which are extensions of root
epidermal cells, increase the surface area of the root, greatly contributing to the absorption of water and
minerals.
Insidetheroot,thegroundtissueformstworegions:thecortexandthepith(Figure30.17).Comparedtostems,
rootshavelotsofcortexandlittlepith.Bothregionsincludecellsthatstorephotosyntheticproducts.Thecortex
is between the epidermis and the vascular tissue, whereas the pith lies between the vascular tissue and the
center of the root.
Figure 30.17 Staining reveals different cell types in this light micrograph of a wheat (Triticum) root cross section.
Sclerenchyma cells of the exodermis and xylem cells stain red, and phloem cells stain blue. Other cell types stain
black. The stele, or vascular tissue, is the area inside endodermis (indicated by a green ring). Root hairs are visible
outside the epidermis. (credit: scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The vascular tissue in the root is arranged in the inner portion of the root, which is called the stele (Figure
30.18).Alayerofcellsknownastheendodermisseparatesthestelefromthegroundtissueintheouterportion
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 928
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 917
of the root. The endodermis is exclusive to roots, and serves as a checkpoint for materials entering the root’s
vascular system. A waxy substance called suberin is present on the walls of the endodermal cells. This waxy
region,knownastheCasparianstrip,forceswaterandsolutestocrosstheplasmamembranesofendodermal
cellsinsteadofslippingbetweenthecells.Thisensuresthatonlymaterialsrequiredbytherootpassthroughthe
endodermis,whiletoxicsubstancesandpathogensaregenerallyexcluded.Theoutermostcelllayeroftheroot’s
vasculartissueisthepericycle,anareathatcangiverisetolateralroots.Indicotroots,thexylemandphloem
ofthestelearearrangedalternatelyinanXshape,whereasinmonocotroots,thevasculartissueisarrangedin
a ring around the pith.
Figure 30.18 In (left) typical dicots, the vascular tissue forms an X shape in the center of the root. In (right) typical
monocots, the phloem cells and the larger xylem cells form a characteristic ring around the central pith.
Root Modifications
Rootstructures maybemodifiedforspecificpurposes.Forexample,somerootsarebulbousandstorestarch.
Aerial roots and prop roots are two forms of aboveground roots that provide additional support to anchor the
plant. Tap roots, such as carrots, turnips, and beets, are examples of roots that are modified for food storage
(Figure 30.19).
Figure 30.19Many vegetables are modified roots.
Epiphytic roots enable a plant to grow on another plant. For example, the epiphytic roots of orchids develop
a spongy tissue to absorb moisture. The banyan tree (Ficus sp.) begins as an epiphyte, germinating in the
branches of a host tree; aerial roots develop from the branches and eventually reach the ground, providing
additional support (Figure 30.20). In screwpine (Pandanus sp.), a palm-like tree that grows in sandy tropical
soils, aboveground prop roots develop from the nodes to provide additional support.
PAGE: 929
918 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Figure 30.20 The (a) banyan tree, also known as the strangler fig, begins life as an epiphyte in a host tree.
Aerial roots extend to the ground and support the growing plant, which eventually strangles the host tree. The (b)
screwpine develops aboveground roots that help support the plant in sandy soils. (credit a: modification of work by
"psyberartist"/Flickr; credit b: modification of work by David Eikhoff)
30.4 | Leaves
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the parts of a typical leaf
• Describe the internal structure and function of a leaf
• Compare and contrast simple leaves and compound leaves
• List and describe examples of modified leaves
Leaves are the main sites for photosynthesis: the process by which plants synthesize food. Most leaves are
usually green, due to the presence of chlorophyll in the leaf cells. However, some leaves may have different
colors, caused by other plant pigments that mask the green chlorophyll.
Thethickness,shape,andsizeofleavesareadaptedtotheenvironment.Eachvariationhelpsaplantspecies
maximize its chances of survival in a particular habitat. Usually, the leaves of plants growing in tropical
rainforestshavelargersurfaceareasthanthoseofplantsgrowingindesertsorverycoldconditions,whichare
likely to have a smaller surface area to minimize water loss.
Structure of a Typical Leaf
Eachleaftypicallyhasaleafbladecalledthelamina,whichisalsothewidestpartoftheleaf.Someleavesare
attachedtotheplantstembyapetiole.Leavesthatdonothaveapetioleandaredirectlyattachedtotheplant
stemarecalledsessileleaves.Smallgreenappendagesusuallyfoundatthebaseofthepetioleareknownas
stipules.Mostleaveshaveamidrib,whichtravelsthelengthoftheleafandbranchestoeachsidetoproduce
veinsofvasculartissue.Theedgeoftheleafiscalledthemargin.Figure30.21showsthestructureofatypical
eudicot leaf.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 930
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 919
Figure 30.21Deceptively simple in appearance, a leaf is a highly efficient structure.
Within each leaf, the vascular tissue forms veins. The arrangement of veins in a leaf is called the venation
pattern.Monocotsanddicotsdifferintheirpatternsofvenation(Figure30.22).Monocotshaveparallelvenation;
theveinsruninstraightlinesacrossthelengthoftheleafwithoutconvergingatapoint.Indicots,however,the
veins of the leaf have a net-like appearance, forming a pattern known as reticulate venation. One extant plant,
theGinkgo biloba, has dichotomous venation where the veins fork.
Figure 30.22 (a) Tulip (Tulipa), a monocot, has leaves with parallel venation. The netlike venation in this (b) linden
(Tilia cordata) leaf distinguishes it as a dicot. The (c) Ginkgo biloba tree has dichotomous venation. (credit a photo:
modification of work by “Drewboy64”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b photo: modification of work by Roger Griffith;
creditcphoto:modificationofworkby"geishaboy500"/Flickr;creditabcillustrations:modificationofworkbyAgnieszka
Kwiecień)
Leaf Arrangement
The arrangement of leaves on a stem is known as phyllotaxy. The number and placement of a plant’s leaves
will vary depending on the species, with each species exhibiting a characteristic leaf arrangement. Leaves are
PAGE: 931
920 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
classified as either alternate, spiral, or opposite. Plants that have only one leaf per node have leaves that are
said to be either alternate—meaning the leaves alternate on each side of the stem in a flat plane—or spiral,
meaning the leaves are arrayed in a spiral along the stem. In an opposite leaf arrangement, two leaves arise
at the same point, with the leaves connecting opposite each other along the branch. If there are three or more
leaves connected at a node, the leaf arrangement is classified aswhorled.
Leaf Form
Leaves may be simple or compound (Figure 30.23). In a simple leaf, the blade is either completely
undivided—asinthebananaleaf—orithaslobes,buttheseparationdoesnotreachthemidrib,asinthemaple
leaf.Inacompoundleaf,theleafbladeiscompletelydivided,formingleaflets,asinthelocusttree.Eachleaflet
may have its own stalk, but is attached to the rachis. A palmately compound leaf resembles the palm of a
hand, with leaflets radiating outwards from one point. Examples include the leaves of poison ivy, the buckeye
tree, or the familiar houseplant Schefflera sp. (common name “umbrella plant”). Pinnately compound leaves
taketheirnamefromtheirfeather-likeappearance;theleafletsarearrangedalongthemidrib,asinroseleaves
(Rosasp.), or the leaves of hickory, pecan, ash, or walnut trees.
Figure 30.23 Leavesmaybesimpleorcompound. Insimpleleaves,thelaminaiscontinuous. The(a)bananaplant
(Musa sp.) has simple leaves. In compound leaves, the lamina is separated into leaflets. Compound leaves may be
palmateorpinnate.In(b)palmatelycompoundleaves,suchasthoseofthehorsechestnut(Aesculushippocastanum),
theleafletsbranchfromthepetiole.In(c)pinnatelycompoundleaves,theleafletsbranchfromthemidrib,asonascrub
hickory(Caryafloridana).The(d)honeylocusthasdoublecompoundleaves,inwhichleafletsbranchfromtheveins.
(credit a: modification of workby"BazzaDaRambler"/Flickr; credit b: modification of workbyRoberto Verzo; credit c:
modification of work by Eric Dion; credit d: modification of work by Valerie Lykes)
Leaf Structure and Function
The outermost layer of the leaf is the epidermis; it is present on both sides of the leaf and is called the upper
and lower epidermis, respectively. Botanists call the upper side the adaxial surface (or adaxis) and the lower
sidetheabaxialsurface(orabaxis).Theepidermishelpsintheregulationofgasexchange.Itcontainsstomata
(Figure 30.24): openings through which the exchange of gases takes place. Two guard cells surround each
stoma, regulating its opening and closing.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 932
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 921
Figure 30.24 Visualized at 500x with a scanning electron microscope, several stomata are clearly visible on (a) the
surfaceofthissumac(Rhusglabra)leaf.At5,000xmagnification,theguardcellsof(b)asinglestomafromlyre-leaved
sand cress (Arabidopsis lyrata) have the appearance of lips that surround the opening. In this (c) light micrograph
cross-sectionofanA.lyrataleaf,theguardcellpairisvisiblealongwiththelarge,sub-stomatalairspaceintheleaf.
(credit: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; part c scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The epidermis is usually one cell layer thick; however, in plants that grow in very hot or very cold conditions,
the epidermis may be several layers thick to protect against excessive water loss from transpiration. A waxy
layerknownasthecuticlecoverstheleavesofallplantspecies.Thecuticlereducestherateofwaterlossfrom
the leaf surface. Other leaves may have small hairs (trichomes) on the leaf surface. Trichomes help to deter
herbivory by restricting insect movements, or by storing toxic or bad-tasting compounds; they can also reduce
the rate of transpiration by blocking air flow across the leaf surface (Figure 30.25).
Figure30.25Trichomesgiveleavesafuzzyappearanceasinthis(a)sundew(Droserasp.).Leaftrichomesinclude(b)
branchedtrichomesontheleafofArabidopsislyrataand(c)multibranchedtrichomesonamatureQuercusmarilandica
leaf. (credit a: John Freeland; credit b, c: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Belowtheepidermisofdicotleavesarelayersofcellsknownasthemesophyll,or“middleleaf.”Themesophyll
ofmostleavestypicallycontainstwoarrangementsofparenchymacells:thepalisadeparenchymaandspongy
parenchyma(Figure30.26).Thepalisadeparenchyma(alsocalledthepalisademesophyll)hascolumn-shaped,
tightlypackedcells,andmaybepresentinone,two,orthreelayers.Belowthepalisadeparenchymaareloosely
arranged cells of an irregular shape. These are the cells of the spongy parenchyma (or spongy mesophyll).
Theairspacefoundbetweenthespongyparenchymacellsallowsgaseousexchangebetweentheleafandthe
outside atmosphere through the stomata. In aquatic plants, the intercellular spaces in the spongy parenchyma
help the leaf float. Both layers of the mesophyll contain many chloroplasts. Guard cells are the only epidermal
cells to contain chloroplasts.
PAGE: 933
922 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Figure30.26Inthe(a)leafdrawing,thecentralmesophyllissandwichedbetweenanupperandlowerepidermis.The
mesophyll has two layers: an upper palisade layer comprised of tightly packed, columnar cells, and a lower spongy
layer, comprised of loosely packed, irregularly shaped cells. Stomata on the leaf underside allow gas exchange. A
waxy cuticle covers all aerial surfaces of land plants to minimize water loss. These leaf layers are clearly visible in
the(b)scanningelectronmicrograph.Thenumeroussmallbumpsinthepalisadeparenchymacellsarechloroplasts.
Chloroplastsarealsopresentinthespongyparenchyma,butarenotasobvious.Thebumpsprotrudingfromthelower
surfaceoftheleaveareglandulartrichomes,whichdifferinstructurefromthestalkedtrichomesinFigure30.25.(credit
b: modification of work by Robert R. Wise)
Like the stem, the leaf contains vascular bundles composed of xylem and phloem (Figure 30.27). The xylem
consistsoftracheidsandvessels,whichtransportwaterandmineralstotheleaves.Thephloemtransportsthe
photosynthetic products from the leaf to the other parts of the plant. A single vascular bundle, no matter how
large or small, always contains both xylem and phloem tissues.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 934
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 923
Figure 30.27 This scanning electron micrograph shows xylem and phloem in the leaf vascular bundle from the lyre-
leaved sand cress (Arabidopsis lyrata). (credit: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
Leaf Adaptations
Coniferousplantspeciesthatthriveincoldenvironments,likespruce,fir,andpine,haveleavesthatarereduced
in size and needle-like in appearance. These needle-like leaves have sunken stomata and a smaller surface
area: two attributes that aid in reducing water loss. In hot climates, plants such as cacti have leaves that are
reducedtospines,whichincombinationwiththeirsucculentstems,helptoconservewater.Manyaquaticplants
have leaves with wide lamina that can float on the surface of the water, and a thick waxy cuticle on the leaf
surface that repels water.
Watch “The Pale Pitcher Plant” episodeofthevideo (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/plants_cool_too) series
Plants Are Cool, Too, a Botanical Society of America video about a carnivorous plant species found in
Louisiana.
PAGE: 935
924 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Plant Adaptations in Resource-Deficient Environments
Roots, stems, and leaves are structured to ensure that a plant can obtain the required sunlight, water, soil
nutrients, and oxygen resources. Some remarkable adaptations have evolved to enable plant species to
thrive in less than ideal habitats, where one or more of these resources is in short supply.
Intropicalrainforests,lightisoftenscarce,sincemanytreesandplantsgrowclosetogetherandblockmuch
ofthesunlightfromreachingtheforestfloor.Manytropicalplantspecieshaveexceptionallybroadleavesto
maximize the capture of sunlight. Other species are epiphytes: plants that grow on other plants that serve
asaphysicalsupport.Suchplantsareabletogrowhighupinthecanopyatopthebranchesofothertrees,
where sunlight is more plentiful. Epiphytes live on rain and minerals collected in the branches and leaves
ofthesupportingplant.Bromeliads(membersofthepineapplefamily),ferns,andorchidsareexamplesof
tropical epiphytes (Figure 30.28). Many epiphytes have specialized tissues that enable them to efficiently
capture and store water.
Figure 30.28 One of the most well known bromeliads is Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides), seen here in an
oak tree. (credit: Kristine Paulus)
Someplantshavespecialadaptationsthathelpthemtosurviveinnutrient-poorenvironments.Carnivorous
plants, such as the Venus flytrap and the pitcher plant (Figure 30.29), grow in bogs where the soil is low
in nitrogen. In these plants, leaves are modified to capture insects. The insect-capturing leaves may have
evolved to provide these plants with a supplementary source of much-needed nitrogen.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 936
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 925
Figure30.29The(a)Venusflytraphasmodifiedleavesthatcancaptureinsects.Whenanunluckyinsecttouches
the trigger hairs inside the leaf, the trap suddenly closes. The opening of the (b) pitcher plant is lined with a
slipperywax.Insectscrawlingonthelipslipandfallintoapoolofwaterinthebottomofthepitcher,wherethey
aredigested bybacteria. Theplant thenabsorbsthesmallermolecules. (credita:modification ofworkbyPeter
Shanks; credit b: modification of work by Tim Mansfield)
Many swamp plants have adaptations that enable them to thrive in wet areas, where their roots grow
submerged underwater. In these aquatic areas, the soil is unstable and little oxygen is available to reach
the roots. Trees such as mangroves (Rhizophora sp.) growing in coastal waters produce aboveground
roots that help support the tree (Figure 30.30). Some species of mangroves, as well as cypress trees,
have pneumatophores: upward-growing roots containing pores and pockets of tissue specialized for gas
exchange.Wildriceisanaquaticplantwithlargeairspacesintherootcortex.Theair-filledtissue—called
aerenchyma—provides a path for oxygen to diffuse down to the root tips, which are embedded in oxygen-
poor bottom sediments.
Figure 30.30 The branches of (a) mangrove trees develop aerial roots, which descend to the ground and
help to anchor the trees. (b) Cypress trees and some mangrove species have upward-growing roots called
pneumatophoresthatareinvolvedingasexchange.Aquaticplantssuchas(c)wildricehavelargespacesinthe
rootcortexcalledaerenchyma,visualizedhereusingscanningelectronmicroscopy.(credita:modificationofwork
by Roberto Verzo; credit b: modification of work by Duane Burdick; credit c: modification of work by Robert R.
Wise)
Watch Venus Flytraps: Jaws of Death, an extraordinary BBC close-up of the Venus flytrap in action. (This
multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66599/1.3/#eip-
id1168018040099)
PAGE: 937
926 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
30.5 | Transport of Water and Solutes in Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define water potential and explain how it is influenced by solutes, pressure, gravity, and the matric
potential
• Describe how water potential, evapotranspiration, and stomatal regulation influence how water is
transported in plants
• Explain how photosynthates are transported in plants
The structure of plant roots, stems, and leaves facilitates the transport of water, nutrients, and photosynthates
throughouttheplant.Thephloemandxylemarethemaintissuesresponsibleforthismovement.Waterpotential,
evapotranspiration, and stomatal regulation influence how water and nutrients are transported in plants. To
understand how these processes work, we must first understand the energetics of water potential.
Water Potential
Plants are phenomenal hydraulic engineers. Using only the basic laws of physics and the simple manipulation
of potential energy, plants can move water to the top of a 116-meter-tall tree (Figure 30.31a). Plants can also
usehydraulicstogenerateenoughforcetosplitrocksandbucklesidewalks(Figure30.31b).Plantsachievethis
because of water potential.
Figure30.31Withheightsnearing116meters,(a)coastalredwoods(Sequoiasempervirens)arethetallesttreesinthe
world.Plantrootscaneasilygenerateenoughforceto(b)buckleandbreakconcretesidewalks,muchtothedismayof
homeownersandcitymaintenancedepartments.(credita:modificationofworkbyBerntRostad;creditb:modification
of work by Pedestrians Educating Drivers on Safety, Inc.)
Waterpotentialisameasureofthepotentialenergyinwater.Plantphysiologistsarenotinterestedintheenergy
in any one particular aqueous system, but are very interested in water movement between two systems. In
practicalterms,therefore,waterpotentialisthedifferenceinpotentialenergybetweenagivenwatersampleand
pure water (at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature). Water potential is denoted by the Greek letter
ψ (psi) and is expressed in units of pressure (pressure is a form of energy) called megapascals (MPa). The
pureH2O
potential of pure water (Ψw ) is, by convenience of definition, designated a value of zero (even though
purewatercontainsplentyofpotentialenergy,thatenergyisignored).Waterpotentialvaluesforthewaterina
pure H2O
plant root, stem, or leaf are therefore expressed relative to Ψw .
Thewaterpotentialinplantsolutionsisinfluencedbysoluteconcentration,pressure,gravity,andfactorscalled
matrix effects. Water potential can be broken down into its individual components using the following equation:
Ψ
system
= Ψ
total
= Ψs+ Ψp+ Ψg+ Ψm
where Ψs, Ψp, Ψg, and Ψm refer to the solute, pressure, gravity, and matric potentials, respectively. “System”
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 938
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 927
soil root stem
can refer to the water potential of the soil water (Ψ ), root water (Ψ ), stem water (Ψ ), leaf water
leaf atmosphere
(Ψ )orthewaterintheatmosphere(Ψ ):whicheveraqueoussystemisunderconsideration.Asthe
individual components change, they raise or lower the total water potential of a system. When this happens,
watermovestoequilibrate,movingfromthesystemorcompartmentwithahigherwaterpotentialtothesystem
or compartment with a lower water potential. This brings the difference in water potential between the two
systems (ΔΨ) back to zero (ΔΨ = 0). Therefore, for water to move through the plant from the soil to the air (a
soil root stem leaf atmosphere
process called transpiration), Ψ must be > Ψ > Ψ > Ψ > Ψ .
Water only moves in response to ΔΨ, not in response to the individual components. However, because the
individualcomponentsinfluencethetotalΨsystem,bymanipulatingtheindividualcomponents(especiallyΨs),a
plant can control water movement.
Solute Potential
Solutepotential(Ψs),alsocalledosmoticpotential,isnegativeinaplantcellandzeroindistilledwater.Typical
values for cell cytoplasm are –0.5 to –1.0 MPa. Solutes reduce water potential (resulting in a negative Ψw) by
consumingsomeofthepotentialenergyavailableinthewater.Solutemoleculescandissolveinwaterbecause
water molecules can bind to them via hydrogen bonds; a hydrophobic molecule like oil, which cannot bind to
water, cannot go into solution. The energy in the hydrogen bonds between solute molecules and water is no
longeravailabletodoworkinthesystembecauseitistiedupinthebond.Inotherwords,theamountofavailable
potentialenergyisreducedwhensolutesareaddedtoanaqueoussystem.Thus,Ψsdecreaseswithincreasing
soluteconcentration.BecauseΨsisoneofthefourcomponentsofΨsystemorΨtotal,adecreaseinΨswillcause
a decrease in Ψtotal. The internal water potential of a plant cell is more negative than pure water because of
thecytoplasm’shighsolutecontent(Figure30.32).Becauseofthisdifferenceinwaterpotentialwaterwillmove
fromthesoilintoaplant’srootcellsviatheprocessofosmosis.Thisiswhysolutepotentialissometimescalled
osmotic potential.
PlantcellscanmetabolicallymanipulateΨs(andbyextension,Ψtotal)byaddingorremovingsolutemolecules.
Therefore, plants have control over Ψtotalvia their ability to exert metabolic control over Ψs.
PAGE: 939
928 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Figure30.32Inthisexamplewithasemipermeablemembranebetweentwoaqueoussystems,waterwillmove
from a region of higher to lower water potential until equilibrium is reached. Solutes (Ψs), pressure (Ψp), and
gravity(Ψg)influencetotalwaterpotentialforeachsideofthetube(Ψtotal rightorleft),andtherefore,thedifference
betweenΨtotaloneachside(ΔΨ).(Ψm,thepotentialduetointeractionofwaterwithsolidsubstrates,isignored
inthisexamplebecauseglassisnotespeciallyhydrophilic).Watermovesinresponsetothedifferenceinwater
potential between two systems (the left and right sides of the tube).
PositivewaterpotentialisplacedontheleftsideofthetubebyincreasingΨpsuchthatthewaterlevelrises
on the right side. Could you equalize the water level on each side of the tube by adding solute, and if so,
how?
Pressure Potential
Pressure potential (Ψp), also called turgor potential, may be positive or negative (Figure 30.32). Because
pressure is an expression of energy, the higher the pressure, the more potential energy in a system, and vice
versa. Therefore, a positive Ψp (compression) increases Ψtotal, and a negative Ψp (tension) decreases Ψtotal.
Positive pressure inside cells is contained by the cell wall, producing turgor pressure. Pressure potentials are
typically around 0.6–0.8 MPa, but can reach as high as 1.5 MPa in a well-watered plant. A Ψp of 1.5 MPa
-2 -1 -2
equates to 210 pounds per square inch (1.5 MPa x 140 lb in MPa = 210 lb/in ). As a comparison, most
automobiletiresarekeptatapressureof30–34psi.Anexampleoftheeffectofturgorpressureisthewiltingof
leaves and their restoration after the plant has been watered (Figure 30.33). Water is lost from the leaves via
transpiration (approaching Ψp= 0 MPa at the wilting point) and restored by uptake via the roots.
A plant can manipulate Ψp via its ability to manipulate Ψs and by the process of osmosis. If a plant cell
increasesthecytoplasmicsoluteconcentration,Ψswilldecline,Ψtotalwilldecline,theΔΨbetweenthecelland
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 940
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 929
the surrounding tissue will decline, water will move into the cell by osmosis, and Ψp will increase. Ψp is also
underindirectplantcontrolviatheopeningandclosingofstomata.Stomatalopeningsallowwatertoevaporate
fromtheleaf,reducingΨpandΨtotaloftheleafandincreasingΨbetweenthewaterintheleafandthepetiole,
thereby allowing water to flow from the petiole into the leaf.
Figure30.33When(a)totalwaterpotential(Ψtotal)isloweroutsidethecellsthaninside,watermovesoutofthecells
andtheplantwilts.When(b)thetotalwaterpotentialishigheroutsidetheplantcellsthaninside,watermovesintothe
cells, resulting in turgor pressure (Ψp) and keeping the plant erect. (credit: modification of work by Victor M. Vicente
Selvas)
Gravity Potential
Gravity potential (Ψg) is always negative to zero in a plant with no height. It always removes or consumes
potential energy from the system. The force of gravity pulls water downwards to the soil, reducing the total
amount of potential energy in the water in the plant (Ψtotal). The taller the plant, the taller the water column,
andthemoreinfluentialΨgbecomes.Onacellularscaleandinshortplants,thiseffectisnegligibleandeasily
ignored. However, over the height of a tall tree like a giant coastal redwood, the gravitational pull of –0.1 MPa
-1
m is equivalent to an extra 1 MPa of resistance that must be overcome for water to reach the leaves of the
tallest trees. Plants are unable to manipulate Ψg.
Matric Potential
Matricpotential(Ψm)isalwaysnegativetozero.Inadrysystem,itcanbeaslowas–2MPainadryseed,and
it is zero in a water-saturated system. The binding of water to a matrix always removes or consumes potential
energyfromthesystem.Ψmissimilartosolutepotentialbecauseitinvolvestyinguptheenergyinanaqueous
systembyforminghydrogenbondsbetweenthewaterandsomeothercomponent.However,insolutepotential,
the other components are soluble, hydrophilic solute molecules, whereas in Ψm, the other components are
insoluble,hydrophilicmoleculesoftheplantcellwall.Everyplantcellhasacellulosiccellwallandthecellulose
inthecellwallsishydrophilic,producingamatrixforadhesionofwater:hencethenamematricpotential.Ψmis
verylarge(negative)indrytissuessuchasseedsordrought-affectedsoils.However,itquicklygoestozeroas
theseedtakesupwaterorthesoilhydrates.Ψmcannotbemanipulatedbytheplantandistypicallyignoredin
well-watered roots, stems, and leaves.
Movement of Water and Minerals in the Xylem
Solutes,pressure,gravity,andmatricpotentialareallimportantforthetransportofwaterinplants.Watermoves
from an area of higher total water potential (higher Gibbs free energy) to an area of lower total water potential.
Gibbs free energy is the energy associated with a chemical reaction that can be used to do work. This is
expressed as ΔΨ.
Transpiration is the loss of water from the plant through evaporation at the leaf surface. It is the main driver
of water movement in the xylem. Transpiration is caused by the evaporation of water at the leaf–atmosphere
interface; it creates negative pressure (tension) equivalent to –2 MPa at the leaf surface. This value varies
greatly depending on the vapor pressure deficit, which can be negligible at high relative humidity (RH) and
substantial at low RH. Water from the roots is pulled up by this tension. At night, when stomata shut and
transpirationstops,thewaterisheldinthestemandleafbytheadhesionofwatertothecellwallsofthexylem
vessels and tracheids, and the cohesion of water molecules to each other. This is called the cohesion–tension
theory of sap ascent.
PAGE: 941
930 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Insidetheleafatthecellularlevel,wateronthesurfaceofmesophyllcellssaturatesthecellulosemicrofibrilsof
theprimarycellwall.Theleafcontainsmanylargeintercellularairspacesfortheexchangeofoxygenforcarbon
dioxide, which is required for photosynthesis. The wet cell wall is exposed to this leaf internal air space, and
the water on the surface of the cells evaporates into the air spaces, decreasing the thin film on the surface of
themesophyllcells.Thisdecreasecreatesagreatertensiononthewaterinthemesophyllcells(Figure30.34),
thereby increasing the pull on the water in the xylem vessels. The xylem vessels and tracheids are structurally
adapted to cope with large changes in pressure. Rings in the vessels maintain their tubular shape, much like
theringsonavacuumcleanerhosekeepthehoseopenwhileitisunderpressure.Smallperforationsbetween
vessel elements reduce the number and size of gas bubbles that can form via a process called cavitation. The
formationofgasbubblesinxyleminterruptsthecontinuousstreamofwaterfromthebasetothetopoftheplant,
causingabreaktermedanembolismintheflowofxylemsap.Thetallerthetree,thegreaterthetensionforces
needed to pull water, and the more cavitation events. In larger trees, the resulting embolisms can plug xylem
vessels, making them nonfunctional.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 942
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 931
Figure 30.34 The cohesion–tension theory of sap ascent is shown. Evaporation from the mesophyll cells
producesanegativewaterpotentialgradientthatcauseswatertomoveupwardsfromtherootsthroughthexylem.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. Negative water potential draws water into the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw water up the
xylem. Transpiration draws water from the leaf.
b. Negative water potential draws water into the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw water up the
phloem. Transpiration draws water from the leaf.
c. Water potential decreases from the roots to the top of the plant.
d. Water enters the plants through root hairs and exits through stoma.
Transpiration—thelossofwatervaportotheatmospherethroughstomata—isapassiveprocess,meaningthat
metabolicenergyintheformofATPisnotrequiredforwatermovement.Theenergydrivingtranspirationisthe
difference in energy between the water in the soil and the water in the atmosphere. However, transpiration is
tightly controlled.
PAGE: 943
932 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Control of Transpiration
Theatmospheretowhichtheleafisexposeddrivestranspiration,butalsocausesmassivewaterlossfromthe
plant. Up to 90 percent of the water taken up by roots may be lost through transpiration.
Leaves are covered by a waxy cuticle on the outer surface that prevents the loss of water. Regulation of
transpiration, therefore, is achieved primarily through the opening and closing of stomata on the leaf surface.
Stomata are surrounded by two specialized cells called guard cells, which open and close in response to
environmental cues such as light intensity and quality, leaf water status, and carbon dioxide concentrations.
Stomatamustopentoallowaircontainingcarbondioxideandoxygentodiffuseintotheleafforphotosynthesis
and respiration. When stomata are open, however, water vapor is lost to the external environment, increasing
therateoftranspiration.Therefore,plantsmustmaintainabalancebetweenefficientphotosynthesisandwater
loss.
Plants have evolved over time to adapt to their local environment and reduce transpiration (Figure 30.35).
Desert plant (xerophytes) and plants that grow on other plants (epiphytes) have limited access to water.
Such plants usually have a much thicker waxy cuticle than those growing in more moderate, well-watered
environments (mesophytes). Aquatic plants (hydrophytes) also have their own set of anatomical and
morphological leaf adaptations.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 944
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 933
Figure 30.35 Plants are suited to their local environment. (a) Xerophytes, like this prickly pear cactus (Opuntia
sp.) and (b) epiphytes such as this tropical Aeschynanthus perrottetii have adapted to very limited water resources.
The leaves of a prickly pear are modified into spines, which lowers the surface-to-volume ratio and reduces water
loss. Photosynthesis takes place in the stem, which also stores water. (b) A. perottetii leaves have a waxy cuticle
that prevents water loss. (c) Goldenrod (Solidago sp.) is a mesophyte, well suited for moderate environments. (d)
Hydrophytes, like this fragrant water lily (Nymphaea odorata), are adapted to thrive in aquatic environments. (credit
a: modification of work by Jon Sullivan; credit b: modification of work by L. Shyamal/Wikimedia Commons; credit c:
modification of work by Huw Williams; credit d: modification of work by Jason Hollinger)
Xerophytesandepiphytesoftenhaveathickcoveringoftrichomesorofstomatathataresunkenbelowtheleaf’s
surface.Trichomesarespecializedhair-likeepidermalcellsthatsecreteoilsandsubstances.Theseadaptations
impedeairflowacrossthestomatalporeandreducetranspiration.Multipleepidermallayersarealsocommonly
found in these types of plants.
Transportation of Photosynthates in the Phloem
Plantsneedanenergysourcetogrow.Inseedsandbulbs,foodisstoredinpolymers(suchasstarch)thatare
convertedbymetabolicprocessesintosucrosefornewlydevelopingplants.Oncegreenshootsandleavesare
growing, plants are able to produce their own food by photosynthesizing. The products of photosynthesis are
called photosynthates, which are usually in the form of simple sugars such as sucrose.
Structures that produce photosynthates for the growing plant are referred to as sources. Sugars produced in
sources, such as leaves, need to be delivered to growing parts of the plant via the phloem in a process called
translocation. The points of sugar delivery, such as roots, young shoots, and developing seeds, are called
sinks.Seeds,tubers,andbulbscanbeeitherasourceorasink,dependingontheplant’sstageofdevelopment
and the season.
PAGE: 945
934 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
The products from the source are usually translocated to the nearest sink through the phloem. For example,
the highest leaves will send photosynthates upward to the growing shoot tip, whereas lower leaves will direct
photosynthates downward to the roots. Intermediate leaves will send products in both directions, unlike the
flow in the xylem, which is always unidirectional (soil to leaf to atmosphere). The pattern of photosynthate flow
changesastheplantgrowsanddevelops.Photosynthatesaredirectedprimarilytotherootsearlyon,toshoots
and leaves during vegetative growth, and to seeds and fruits during reproductive development. They are also
directed to tubers for storage.
Translocation: Transport from Source to Sink
Photosynthates,suchassucrose,areproducedinthemesophyllcellsofphotosynthesizingleaves.Fromthere
they are translocated through the phloem to where they are used or stored. Mesophyll cells are connected by
cytoplasmic channels called plasmodesmata. Photosynthates move through these channels to reach phloem
sieve-tube elements (STEs) in the vascular bundles. From the mesophyll cells, the photosynthates are loaded
intothephloemSTEs.Thesucroseisactivelytransportedagainstitsconcentrationgradient(aprocessrequiring
ATP) into the phloem cells using the electrochemical potential of the proton gradient. This is coupled to the
+
uptake of sucrose with a carrier protein called the sucrose-H symporter.
Phloem STEs have reduced cytoplasmic contents, and are connected by a sieve plate with pores that allow
forpressure-drivenbulkflow,ortranslocation,ofphloemsap.CompanioncellsareassociatedwithSTEs.They
assist with metabolic activities and produce energy for the STEs (Figure 30.36).
Figure30.36Phloemiscomprisedofcellscalledsieve-tubeelements.Phloemsaptravelsthroughperforationscalled
sievetubeplates.Neighboringcompanioncellscarryoutmetabolicfunctionsforthesieve-tubeelementsandprovide
them with energy. Lateral sieve areas connect the sieve-tube elements to the companion cells.
Onceinthephloem,thephotosynthatesaretranslocatedtotheclosestsink.Phloemsapisanaqueoussolution
thatcontainsupto30percentsugar,minerals,aminoacids,andplantgrowthregulators.Thehighpercentageof
sugardecreasesΨs,whichdecreasesthetotalwaterpotentialandcauseswatertomovebyosmosisfromthe
adjacentxylemintothephloemtubes,therebyincreasingpressure.Thisincreaseintotalwaterpotentialcauses
the bulk flow of phloem from source to sink (Figure 30.37). Sucrose concentration in the sink cells is lower
thaninthephloemSTEsbecausethesinksucrosehasbeenmetabolizedforgrowth,orconvertedtostarchfor
storageorotherpolymers,suchascellulose,forstructuralintegrity.Unloadingatthesinkendofthephloemtube
occursbyeitherdiffusionoractivetransportofsucrosemoleculesfromanareaofhighconcentrationtooneof
lowconcentration. Water diffuses from the phloembyosmosisandisthen transpired orrecycledviathe xylem
back into the phloem sap.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 946
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 935
Figure 30.37 Sucrose is actively transported from source cells into companion cells and then into the sieve-tube
elements. This reduces the water potential, which causes water to enter the phloem from the xylem. The resulting
positivepressureforcesthesucrose-watermixturedowntowardtheroots,wheresucroseisunloaded.Transpiration
causes water to return to the leaves through the xylem vessels.
30.6 | Plant Sensory Systems and Responses
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how red and blue light affect plant growth and metabolic activities
• Discuss gravitropism
• Understand how hormones affect plant growth and development
• Describe thigmotropism, thigmonastism, and thigmogenesis
• Explain how plants defend themselves from predators and respond to wounds
Animalscanrespondtoenvironmentalfactorsbymovingtoanewlocation.Plants,however,arerootedinplace
and must respond to the surrounding environmental factors. Plants have sophisticated systems to detect and
respond to light, gravity, temperature, and physical touch. Receptors sense environmental factors and relay
the information to effector systems—often through intermediate chemical messengers—to bring about plant
responses.
Plant Responses to Light
Plants have a number of sophisticated uses for light that go far beyond their ability to photosynthesize low-
molecular-weight sugars using only carbon dioxide, light, and water. Photomorphogenesis is the growth
and development of plants in response to light. It allows plants to optimize their use of light and space.
Photoperiodismistheabilitytouselighttotracktime.Plantscantellthetimeofdayandtimeofyearbysensing
and using various wavelengths of sunlight. Phototropism is a directional response that allows plants to grow
towards, or even away from, light.
Thesensingoflightintheenvironmentisimportanttoplants;itcanbecrucialforcompetitionandsurvival.The
responseofplants tolight ismediated bydifferent photoreceptors, whicharecomprisedofaprotein covalently
bonded to a light-absorbing pigment called achromophore. Together, the two are called a chromoprotein.
The red/far-red and violet-blue regions of the visible light spectrum trigger structural development in plants.
PAGE: 947
936 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Sensory photoreceptors absorb light in these particular regions of the visible light spectrum because of the
qualityoflightavailableinthedaylightspectrum.Interrestrialhabitats,lightabsorptionbychlorophyllspeaksin
theblueandredregionsofthespectrum.Aslightfiltersthroughthecanopyandtheblueandredwavelengths
areabsorbed,thespectrumshiftstothefar-redend,shiftingtheplantcommunitytothoseplantsbetteradapted
to respond to far-red light. Blue-light receptors allow plants to gauge the direction and abundance of sunlight,
whichisrichinblue–greenemissions.Waterabsorbsredlight,whichmakesthedetectionofbluelightessential
for algae and aquatic plants.
The Phytochrome System and the Red/Far-Red Response
Thephytochromesareafamilyofchromoproteinswithalineartetrapyrrolechromophore,similartotheringed
tetrapyrrole light-absorbing headgroupofchlorophyll. Phytochromes havetwophoto-interconvertible forms: Pr
andPfr.Prabsorbsredlight(~667nm)andisimmediatelyconvertedtoPfr.Pfrabsorbsfar-redlight(~730nm)
andisquicklyconvertedbacktoPr.Absorptionofredorfar-redlightcausesamassivechangetotheshapeof
thechromophore,alteringtheconformationandactivityofthephytochromeproteintowhichitisbound.Pfristhe
physiologicallyactiveformoftheprotein;therefore,exposuretoredlightyieldsphysiologicalactivity.Exposure
tofar-redlightinhibitsphytochromeactivity.Together,thetwoformsrepresentthephytochromesystem(Figure
30.38).
The phytochrome system acts as a biological light switch. It monitors the level, intensity, duration, and color of
environmentallight.Theeffectofredlightisreversiblebyimmediatelyshiningfar-redlightonthesample,which
convertsthechromoproteintotheinactivePrform.Additionally,PfrcanslowlyreverttoPrinthedark,orbreak
downovertime.Inallinstances,thephysiologicalresponseinducedbyredlightisreversed.Theactiveformof
phytochrome (Pfr) can directly activate other molecules in the cytoplasm, or it can be trafficked to the nucleus,
where it directly activates or represses specific gene expression.
Once the phytochrome system evolved, plants adapted it to serve a variety of needs. Unfiltered, full sunlight
contains much more red light than far-red light. Because chlorophyll absorbs strongly in the red region of the
visible spectrum, but not in the far-red region, anyplant in the shade of another plant onthe forest floor will be
exposedtored-depleted,far-red-enrichedlight.Thepreponderanceoffar-redlightconvertsphytochromeinthe
shaded leaves to the Pr (inactive) form, slowing growth. The nearest non-shaded (or even less-shaded) areas
on the forest floor have more red light; leaves exposed to these areas sense the red light, which activates the
Pfrformandinducesgrowth.Inshort,plantshootsusethephytochromesystemtogrowawayfromshadeand
towardslight.Becausecompetitionforlightissofierceinadenseplantcommunity,theevolutionaryadvantages
of the phytochrome system are obvious.
In seeds, the phytochrome system is not used to determine direction and quality of light (shaded versus
unshaded). Instead, is it used merely to determine if there is any light at all. This is especially important in
species with very small seeds, such as lettuce. Because of their size, lettuce seeds have few food reserves.
Theirseedlingscannotgrowforlongbeforetheyrunoutoffuel.Iftheygerminatedevenacentimeterunderthe
soilsurface,theseedlingwouldnevermakeitintothesunlightandwoulddie.Inthedark,phytochromeisinthe
Pr (inactive form) and the seed will not germinate; it will only germinate if exposed to light at the surface of the
soil. Upon exposure to light, Pr is converted to Pfr and germination proceeds.
Figure30.38Thebiologicallyinactiveformofphytochrome(Pr)isconvertedtothebiologicallyactiveformPfrunder
illumination with red light. Far-red light and darkness convert the molecule back to the inactive form.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 948
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 937
Plants also use the phytochrome system to sense the change of season. Photoperiodism is a biological
responsetothetiminganddurationofdayandnight.Itcontrolsflowering,settingofwinterbuds,andvegetative
growth. Detection of seasonal changes is crucial to plant survival. Although temperature and light intensity
influence plant growth, they are not reliable indicators of season because they may vary from one year to the
next. Day length is a better indicator of the time of year.
As stated above, unfiltered sunlight is rich in red light but deficient in far-red light. Therefore, at dawn, all the
phytochrome molecules in a leaf quickly convert to the active Pfr form, and remain in that form until sunset. In
the dark, the Pfr form takes hours to slowly revert back to the Pr form. If the night is long (as in winter), all of
the Pfr form reverts. If the night is short (as in summer), a considerable amount of Pfr may remain at sunrise.
By sensing the Pr/Pfr ratio at dawn, a plant can determine the length of the day/night cycle. In addition, leaves
retain that information for several days, allowing a comparison between the length of the previous night and
the preceding several nights. Shorter nights indicate springtime to the plant; when the nights become longer,
autumn is approaching. This information, along with sensing temperature and water availability, allows plants
todetermine thetime oftheyearandadjust their physiologyaccordingly.Short-day (long-night) plants usethis
informationtoflowerinthelatesummerandearlyfall,whennightsexceedacriticallength(ofteneightorfewer
hours).Long-day(short-night)plantsflowerduringthespring,whendarknessislessthanacriticallength(often
eightto15hours).Notallplantsusethephytochromesysteminthisway.Floweringinday-neutralplantsisnot
regulated by daylength.
Horticulturalist
The word “horticulturist” comes from the Latin words for garden (hortus) and culture (cultura). This career
hasbeenrevolutionizedbyprogressmadeintheunderstandingofplantresponsestoenvironmentalstimuli.
Growersofcrops,fruit,vegetables,andflowerswerepreviouslyconstrainedbyhavingtotimetheirsowing
andharvestingaccordingtotheseason.Now,horticulturistscanmanipulateplantstoincreaseleaf,flower,
or fruit production by understanding how environmental factors affect plant growth and development.
Greenhouse management is an essential component of a horticulturist’s education. To lengthen the night,
plants are covered with a blackout shade cloth. Long-day plants are irradiated with red light in winter to
promote early flowering. For example, fluorescent (cool white) light high in blue wavelengths encourages
leafy growth and is excellent for starting seedlings. Incandescent lamps (standard light bulbs) are rich in
red light, and promote flowering in some plants. The timing of fruit ripening can be increased or delayed
by applying plant hormones. Recently, considerable progress has been made in the development of plant
breeds that are suited to different climates and resistant to pests and transportation damage. Both crop
yieldandqualityhaveincreasedasaresultofpracticalapplicationsoftheknowledgeofplantresponsesto
external stimuli and hormones.
Horticulturists find employment in private and governmental laboratories, greenhouses, botanical gardens,
and in the production or research fields. They improve crops by applying their knowledge of genetics and
plantphysiology.Toprepareforahorticulturecareer,studentstakeclassesinbotany,plantphysiology,plant
pathology, landscape design, and plant breeding. To complement these traditional courses, horticulture
majors add studies in economics, business, computer science, and communications.
The Blue Light Responses
Phototropism—the directional bending of a plant toward or away from a light source—is a response to blue
wavelengths of light. Positive phototropism is growth towards a light source (Figure 30.39), while negative
phototropism (also called skototropism) is growth away from light.
Theaptly-namedphototropinsareprotein-basedreceptorsresponsibleformediatingthephototropicresponse.
Like all plant photoreceptors, phototropins consist of a protein portion and a light-absorbing portion, called the
chromophore. In phototropins, the chromophore is a covalently-bound molecule of flavin; hence, phototropins
belong to a class of proteins called flavoproteins.
Otherresponsesunderthecontrolofphototropinsareleafopeningandclosing,chloroplastmovement,andthe
opening of stomata. However, of all responses controlled by phototropins, phototropism has been studied the
longest and is the best understood.
PAGE: 949
938 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
In their 1880 treatise The Power of Movements in Plants, Charles Darwin and his son Francis first described
phototropism as the bending of seedlings toward light. Darwin observed that light was perceived by the tip of
the plant (the apical meristem), but that the response (bending) took place in a different part of the plant. They
concluded that the signal had to travel from the apical meristem to the base of the plant.
Figure 30.39 Azure bluets (Houstonia caerulea) display a phototropic response by bending toward the light. (credit:
Cory Zanker)
In 1913, Peter Boysen-Jensen demonstrated that a chemical signal produced in the plant tip was responsible
for the bending at the base. Hecut off the tip of aseedling, covered the cut section with alayerof gelatin, and
then replaced the tip. The seedling bent toward the light when illuminated. However, when impermeable mica
flakeswereinsertedbetweenthetipandthecutbase,theseedlingdidnotbend.Arefinementoftheexperiment
showed that the signal traveled on the shaded side of the seedling. When the mica plate was inserted on the
illuminated side, the plant did bend towards the light. Therefore, the chemical signal was a growth stimulant
because the phototropic response involved faster cell elongation on the shaded side than on the illuminated
side.Wenowknowthataslightpassesthroughaplantstem,itisdiffractedandgeneratesphototropinactivation
across the stem. Most activation occurs on the lit side, causing the plant hormone indole acetic acid (IAA) to
accumulate on the shaded side. Stem cells elongate under influence of IAA.
Cryptochromes are another class of blue-light absorbing photoreceptors that also contain a flavin-based
chromophore. Cryptochromes set the plants' 24-hour activity cycle, also know as its circadian rhythem, using
blue light cues. There is some evidence that cryptochromes work together with phototropins to mediate the
phototropic response.
Use the navigation menu in the left panel of this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/plnts_n_motion) to
view images of plants in motion.
Plant Responses to Gravity
Whether or not they germinate in the light or in total darkness, shoots usually sprout up from the ground, and
roots grow downward into the ground. A plant laid on its side in the dark will send shoots upward when given
enough time. Gravitropism ensures that roots grow into the soil and that shoots grow toward sunlight. Growth
oftheshootapicaltipupwardiscallednegativegravitropism,whereasgrowthoftherootsdownwardiscalled
positive gravitropism.
Amyloplasts (also known as statoliths) are specialized plastids that contain starch granules and settle
downwardinresponsetogravity.Amyloplastsarefoundinshootsandinspecializedcellsoftherootcap.When
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 950
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 939
a plant is tilted, the statoliths drop to the new bottom cell wall. A few hours later, the shoot or root will show
growth in the new vertical direction.
The mechanism that mediates gravitropism is reasonably well understood. When amyloplasts settle to the
bottomofthegravity-sensingcellsintherootorshoot,theyphysicallycontacttheendoplasmicreticulum(ER),
causingthereleaseofcalciumionsfrominsidetheER.Thiscalciumsignalinginthecellscausespolartransport
oftheplant hormoneIAA tothebottom ofthecell. Inroots, ahighconcentration ofIAA inhibits cellelongation.
Theeffectslowsgrowthonthelowersideoftheroot,whilecellsdevelopnormallyontheupperside.IAAhasthe
oppositeeffectinshoots,whereahigherconcentrationatthelowersideoftheshootstimulatescellexpansion,
causing the shoot to grow up. After the shoot or root begin to grow vertically, the amyloplasts return to their
normal position. Other hypotheses—involving the entire cell in the gravitropism effect—have been proposed to
explain why some mutants that lack amyloplasts may still exhibit a weak gravitropic response.
Growth Responses
A plant’s sensory response to external stimuli relies on chemical messengers (hormones). Plant hormones
affect all aspects of plant life, from flowering to fruit setting and maturation, and from phototropism to leaf fall.
Potentiallyeverycellinaplantcanproduceplanthormones.Theycanactintheircelloforiginorbetransported
tootherportionsoftheplantbody,withmanyplantresponsesinvolvingthesynergisticorantagonisticinteraction
of two or more hormones. In contrast, animal hormones are produced in specific glands and transported to a
distant site for action, and they act alone.
Planthormonesareagroupofunrelatedchemicalsubstancesthataffectplantmorphogenesis.Fivemajorplant
hormones are traditionally described: auxins (particularly IAA), cytokinins, gibberellins, ethylene, and abscisic
acid. In addition, other nutrients and environmental conditions can be characterized as growth factors.
Auxins
ThetermauxinisderivedfromtheGreekwordauxein,whichmeans"togrow."Auxinsarethemainhormones
responsibleforcellelongationinphototropismandgravitropism.Theyalsocontrolthedifferentiationofmeristem
into vascular tissue, and promote leaf development and arrangement. While many synthetic auxins are used
asherbicides,IAAistheonlynaturallyoccurringauxinthatshowsphysiologicalactivity.Apicaldominance—the
inhibitionoflateralbudformation—istriggeredbyauxinsproducedintheapicalmeristem.Flowering,fruitsetting
and ripening, and inhibition of abscission (leaf falling) are other plant responses under the direct or indirect
control of auxins. Auxins also act as a relay for the effects of the blue light and red/far-red responses.
Commercial use of auxins is widespread in plant nurseries and for crop production. IAA is used as a rooting
hormone to promote growth of adventitious roots on cuttings and detached leaves. Applying synthetic auxins
to tomato plants in greenhouses promotes normal fruit development. Outdoor application of auxin promotes
synchronization of fruit setting and dropping to coordinate the harvesting season. Fruits such as seedless
cucumbers can be induced to set fruit by treating unfertilized plant flowers with auxins.
Cytokinins
The effect of cytokinins was first reported when it was found that adding the liquid endosperm of coconuts
to developing plant embryos in culture stimulated their growth. The stimulating growth factor was found to
be cytokinin, a hormone that promotes cytokinesis (cell division). Almost 200 naturally occurring or synthetic
cytokinins are known to date. Cytokinins are most abundant in growing tissues, such as roots, embryos, and
fruits,wherecelldivisionisoccurring.Cytokininsareknowntodelaysenescenceinleaftissues,promotemitosis,
andstimulatedifferentiation ofthemeristeminshootsandroots.Manyeffectsonplantdevelopmentareunder
theinfluenceofcytokinins,eitherinconjunctionwithauxinoranotherhormone.Forexample,apicaldominance
seems to result from a balance between auxins that inhibit lateral buds, and cytokinins that promote bushier
growth.
Gibberellins
Gibberellins (GAs) are a group of about 125 closely related plant hormones that stimulate shoot elongation,
seedgermination, andfruitandflowermaturation. GAsaresynthesizedintherootandstemapicalmeristems,
youngleaves,andseedembryos.Inurbanareas,GAantagonistsaresometimesappliedtotreesunderpower
lines to control growth and reduce the frequency of pruning.
GAsbreakdormancy(astateofinhibitedgrowthanddevelopment)intheseedsofplantsthatrequireexposure
to cold or light to germinate. Abscisic acid is a strong antagonist of GA action. Other effects of GAs include
gender expression, seedless fruit development, and the delay of senescence in leaves and fruit. Seedless
grapes are obtained through standard breeding methods and contain inconspicuous seeds that fail to develop.
PAGE: 951
940 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
Because GAs are produced by the seeds, and because fruit development and stem elongation are under GA
control, these varieties of grapes would normally produce small fruit in compact clusters. Maturing grapes are
routinely treated with GA to promote larger fruit size, as well as looser bunches (longer stems), which reduces
the instance of mildew infection (Figure 30.40).
Figure 30.40 In grapes, application of gibberellic acid increases the size of fruit and loosens clustering. (credit: Bob
Nichols, USDA)
Abscisic Acid
Theplanthormoneabscisicacid(ABA)wasfirstdiscoveredastheagentthatcausestheabscissionordropping
ofcottonbolls.However,morerecentstudiesindicatethatABAplaysonlyaminorroleintheabscissionprocess.
ABAaccumulatesasaresponsetostressfulenvironmentalconditions,suchasdehydration,coldtemperatures,
or shortened day lengths. Its activity counters many of the growth-promoting effects of GAs and auxins. ABA
inhibits stem elongation and induces dormancy in lateral buds.
ABA induces dormancy in seeds by blocking germination and promoting the synthesis of storage proteins.
Plants adapted to temperate climates require a long period of cold temperature before seeds germinate. This
mechanism protects young plants from sprouting too early during unseasonably warm weather in winter. As
the hormone gradually breaks down over winter, the seed is released from dormancy and germinates when
conditions are favorable in spring. Another effect of ABA is to promote the development of winter buds; it
mediates the conversion of the apical meristem into a dormant bud. Low soil moisture causes an increase in
ABA, which causes stomata to close, reducing water loss in winter buds.
Ethylene
Ethyleneisassociatedwithfruitripening,flowerwilting,andleaffall.Ethyleneisunusualbecauseitisavolatile
gas(C2H4).Hundredsofyearsago,whengasstreetlampswereinstalledincitystreets,treesthatgrewcloseto
lamppostsdevelopedtwisted,thickenedtrunksandshedtheirleavesearlierthanexpected.Theseeffectswere
caused by ethylene volatilizing from the lamps.
Agingtissues(especiallysenescingleaves)andnodesofstemsproduceethylene.Thebest-knowneffectofthe
hormone, however, is the promotion of fruit ripening. Ethylene stimulates the conversion of starch and acids to
sugars. Some people store unripe fruit, such as avocadoes, in a sealed paper bag to accelerate ripening; the
gasreleasedbythefirstfruittomaturewillspeedupthematurationoftheremainingfruit.Ethylenealsotriggers
leaf and fruit abscission, flower fading and dropping, and promotes germination in some cereals and sprouting
of bulbs and potatoes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 952
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 941
Ethyleneiswidelyusedinagriculture.Commercialfruitgrowerscontrolthetimingoffruitripeningwithapplication
of the gas. Horticulturalists inhibit leaf dropping in ornamental plants by removing ethylene from greenhouses
using fans and ventilation.
Nontraditional Hormones
Recentresearchhasdiscoveredanumberofcompoundsthatalsoinfluenceplantdevelopment.Theirrolesare
less understood than the effects of the major hormones described so far.
Jasmonatesplayamajorroleindefenseresponsestoherbivory.Theirlevelsincreasewhenaplantiswounded
byapredator,resultinginanincreaseintoxicsecondarymetabolites.Theycontributetotheproductionofvolatile
compounds that attract natural enemies of predators. For example, chewing of tomato plants by caterpillars
leadstoanincreaseinjasmonicacidlevels,whichinturntriggersthereleaseofvolatilecompoundsthatattract
predators of the pest.
Oligosaccharinsalsoplayaroleinplantdefenseagainstbacterialandfungalinfections.Theyactlocallyatthe
site of injury, and can also be transported to other tissues. Strigolactones promote seed germination in some
species and inhibit lateral apical development in the absence of auxins. Strigolactones also play a role in the
establishmentofmycorrhizae,amutualisticassociationofplantrootsandfungi.Brassinosteroidsareimportant
to many developmental and physiological processes. Signals between these compounds and other hormones,
notably auxin and GAs, amplifies their physiological effect. Apical dominance, seed germination, gravitropism,
andresistancetofreezingareallpositivelyinfluencedbyhormones.Rootgrowthandfruitdroppingareinhibited
by steroids.
Plant Responses to Wind and Touch
Theshootofapeaplantwindsaroundatrellis,whileatreegrowsonanangleinresponsetostrongprevailing
winds. These are examples of how plants respond to touch or wind.
The movement of a plant subjected to constant directional pressure is called thigmotropism, from the Greek
words thigma meaning “touch,” and tropism implying “direction.” Tendrils are one example of this. The
meristematic region of tendrils is very touch sensitive; light touch will evoke a quick coiling response. Cells in
contactwithasupportsurfacecontract,whereascellsontheoppositesideofthesupportexpand(Figure30.14).
Application of jasmonic acid is sufficient to trigger tendril coiling without a mechanical stimulus.
A thigmonastic response is a touch response independent of the direction of stimulus Figure 30.24. In the
Venusflytrap,twomodifiedleavesarejoinedatahingeandlinedwiththinfork-liketinesalongtheouteredges.
Tinyhairsarelocatedinsidethetrap.Whenaninsectbrushesagainstthesetriggerhairs,touchingtwoormore
oftheminsuccession,theleavesclosequickly,trappingtheprey.Glandsontheleafsurfacesecreteenzymes
thatslowlydigesttheinsect.Thereleasednutrientsareabsorbedbytheleaves,whichreopenforthenextmeal.
Thigmomorphogenesis is a slow developmental change in the shape of a plant subjected to continuous
mechanicalstress.Whentreesbendinthewind,forexample,growthisusuallystuntedandthetrunkthickens.
Strengthening tissue, especially xylem, is produced to add stiffness to resist the wind’s force. Researchers
hypothesize that mechanical strain induces growth and differentiation to strengthen the tissues. Ethylene and
jasmonate are likely involved in thigmomorphogenesis.
Use the menu at the left to navigate to three short movies: (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nastic_mvmt) a
Venus fly trap capturing prey, the progressive closing of sensitive plant leaflets, and the twining of tendrils.
Defense Responses against Herbivores and Pathogens
Plants face two types of enemies: herbivores and pathogens. Herbivores both large and small use plants as
food, and actively chew them. Pathogens are agents of disease. These infectious microorganisms, such as
fungi,bacteria,andnematodes,liveoffoftheplantanddamageitstissues.Plantshavedevelopedavarietyof
strategies to discourage or kill attackers.
PAGE: 953
942 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
The first line of defense in plants is an intact and impenetrable barrier. Bark and the waxy cuticle can protect
againstpredators.Otheradaptationsagainstherbivoryincludethorns,whicharemodifiedbranches,andspines,
which are modified leaves. They discourage animals by causing physical damage and inducing rashes and
allergicreactions.Aplant’sexteriorprotectioncanbecompromisedbymechanicaldamage,whichmayprovide
an entry point for pathogens. If the first line of defense is breached, the plant must resort to a different set of
defense mechanisms, such as toxins and enzymes.
Secondarymetabolitesarecompoundsthatarenotdirectlyderivedfromphotosynthesisandarenotnecessary
forrespirationorplantgrowthanddevelopment.Manymetabolitesaretoxic,andcanevenbelethaltoanimals
that ingest them. Some metabolites are alkaloids, which discourage predators with noxious odors (such as the
volatileoilsofmintandsage)orrepellenttastes(likethebitternessofquinine).Otheralkaloidsaffectherbivores
bycausingeitherexcessivestimulation(caffeineisoneexample)orthelethargyassociatedwithopioids.Some
compoundsbecometoxicafteringestion.Forinstance,glycolcyanideinthecassavarootreleasescyanideonly
uponingestion;thenearly500millionhumanswhorelyoncassavafornutritionmustbecertaintoprocessthe
root properly before eating.
Mechanical wounding and predator attacks activate defense and protection mechanisms both in the damaged
tissue and at sites farther from the injury location. Some defense reactions occur within minutes: others over
several hours. The infected and surrounding cells may die, thereby stopping the spread of infection.
Long-distance signaling elicits a systemic response aimed at deterring the predator. As tissue is damaged,
jasmonates may promote the synthesis of compounds that are toxic to predators. Jasmonates also elicit the
synthesis of volatile compounds that attract parasitoids, which are insects that spend their developing stages
in or on another insect, and eventually kill their host. The plant may activate abscission of injured tissue if it is
damaged beyond repair.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 954
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 943
KEY TERMS
abscisic acid (ABA) plant hormone that induces dormancy in seeds and other organs
abscission physiological process that leads to the fall of a plant organ (such as leaf or petal drop)
adventitious root aboveground root that arises from a plant part other than the radicle of the plant embryo
apical bud bud formed at the tip of the shoot
apical meristem meristematic tissue located at the tips of stems and roots; enables a plant to extend in length
auxin planthormonethatinfluencescellelongation(inphototropism),gravitropism,apicaldominance,androot
growth
axillary bud bud located in the axil: the stem area where the petiole connects to the stem
bark tough, waterproof, outer epidermal layer of cork cells
bulb modified underground stem that consists of a large bud surrounded by numerous leaf scales
Casparian strip waxy coating that forces water to cross endodermal plasma membranes before entering the
vascular cylinder, instead of moving between endodermal cells
chromophore molecule that absorbs light
collenchyma cell elongated plant cell with unevenly thickened walls; provides structural support to the stem
and leaves
companion cell phloem cell that is connected to sieve-tube cells; has large amounts of ribosomes and
mitochondria
compound leaf leaf in which the leaf blade is subdivided to form leaflets, all attached to the midrib
corm rounded, fleshy underground stem that contains stored food
cortex ground tissue found between the vascular tissue and the epidermis in a stem or root
cryptochrome protein that absorbs light in the blue and ultraviolet regions of the light spectrum
cuticle waxy protective layer on the leaf surface
cuticle waxy covering on the outside of the leaf and stem that prevents the loss of water
cytokinin plant hormone that promotes cell division
dermal tissue protective plant tissue covering the outermost part of the plant; controls gas exchange
endodermis layerofcellsintherootthatformsaselectivebarrierbetweenthegroundtissueandthevascular
tissue, allowing water and minerals to enter the root while excluding toxins and pathogens
epidermis single layer of cells found in plant dermal tissue; covers and protects underlying tissue
ethylene volatile plant hormone that is associated with fruit ripening, flower wilting, and leaf fall
fibrous root system typeofrootsysteminwhichtherootsarisefromthebaseofthesteminacluster,forming
a dense network of roots; found in monocots
gibberellin (GA) plant hormone that stimulates shoot elongation, seed germination, and the maturation and
dropping of fruit and flowers
ground tissue plant tissue involved in photosynthesis; provides support, and stores water and sugars
PAGE: 955
944 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
guard cells paired cells on either side of a stoma that control stomatal opening and thereby regulate the
movement of gases and water vapor
intercalary meristem meristematic tissue located at nodes and the bases of leaf blades; found only in
monocots
internode region between nodes on the stem
jasmonates small family of compounds derived from the fatty acid linoleic acid
lamina leaf blade
lateral meristem meristematic tissue that enables a plant to increase in thickness or girth
lenticel opening on the surface of mature woody stems that facilitates gas exchange
megapascal (MPa) pressure units that measure water potential
meristem plant region of continuous growth
meristematic tissue tissue containing cells that constantly divide; contributes to plant growth
negative gravitropism growth away from Earth’s gravity
node point along the stem at which leaves, flowers, or aerial roots originate
oligosaccharin hormone important in plant defenses against bacterial and fungal infections
palmately compound leaf leaf type with leaflets that emerge from a point, resembling the palm of a hand
parenchyma cell most common type of plant cell; found in the stem, root, leaf, and in fruit pulp; site of
photosynthesis and starch storage
pericycle outer boundary of the stele from which lateral roots can arise
periderm outermost covering of woody stems; consists of the cork cambium, cork cells, and the phelloderm
permanent tissue plant tissue composed of cells that are no longer actively dividing
petiole stalk of the leaf
photomorphogenesis growth and development of plants in response to light
photoperiodism occurrence of plant processes, such as germination and flowering, according to the time of
year
phototropin blue-lightreceptorthatpromotesphototropism,stomatalopeningandclosing,andotherresponses
that promote photosynthesis
phototropism directional bending of a plant toward a light source
phyllotaxy arrangement of leaves on a stem
phytochrome plant pigment protein that exists in two reversible forms (Pr and Pfr) and mediates morphologic
changes in response to red light
pinnately compound leaf leaftypewithadividedleafbladeconsistingofleafletsarrangedonbothsidesofthe
midrib
pith ground tissue found towards the interior of the vascular tissue in a stem or root
positive gravitropism growth toward Earth’s gravitational center
primary growth growthresultinginanincreaseinlengthofthestemandtheroot;causedbycelldivisioninthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 956
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 945
shoot or root apical meristem
rhizome modified underground stem that grows horizontally to the soil surface and has nodes and internodes
root cap protective cells covering the tip of the growing root
root hair hair-like structure that is an extension of epidermal cells; increases the root surface area and aids in
absorption of water and minerals
root system belowground portion of the plant that supports the plant and absorbs water and minerals
runner stolon that runs above the ground and produces new clone plants at nodes
sclerenchyma cell plant cell that has thick secondary walls and provides structural support; usually dead at
maturity
secondary growth growthresultinginanincreaseinthicknessorgirth;causedbythelateralmeristemandcork
cambium
sessile leaf without a petiole that is attached directly to the plant stem
shoot system aboveground portion of the plant; consists of nonreproductive plant parts, such as leaves and
stems, and reproductive parts, such as flowers and fruits
sieve-tube cell phloemcellarrangedendtoendtoformasievetubethattransportsorganicsubstancessuch
as sugars and amino acids
simple leaf leaf type in which the lamina is completely undivided or merely lobed
sink growing parts of a plant, such as roots and young leaves, which require photosynthate
source organ that produces photosynthate for a plant
statolith (also,amyloplast) plant organelle that contains heavy starch granules
stele inner portion of the root containing the vascular tissue; surrounded by the endodermis
stipule small green structure found on either side of the leaf stalk or petiole
stolon modified stem that runs parallel to the ground and can give rise to new plants at the nodes
strigolactone hormonethatpromotesseedgerminationinsomespeciesandinhibitslateralapicaldevelopment
in the absence of auxins
tap root system type of root system with a main root that grows vertically with few lateral roots; found in dicots
tendril modified stem consisting of slender, twining strands used for support or climbing
thigmomorphogenesis developmental response to touch
thigmonastic directional growth of a plant independent of the direction in which contact is applied
thigmotropism directional growth of a plant in response to constant contact
thorn modified stem branch appearing as a sharp outgrowth that protects the plant
tracheid xylem cell with thick secondary walls that helps transport water
translocation mass transport of photosynthates from source to sink in vascular plants
transpiration loss of water vapor to the atmosphere through stomata
trichome hair-like structure on the epidermal surface
PAGE: 957
946 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
tuber modified underground stem adapted for starch storage; has many adventitious buds
vascular bundle strands of stem tissue made up of xylem and phloem
vascular stele strands of root tissue made up of xylem and phloem
vascular tissue tissue made up of xylem and phloem that transports food and water throughout the plant
venation patternofveinsinaleaf;maybeparallel(asinmonocots),reticulate(asindicots),ordichotomous(as
inGingko biloba)
vessel element xylem cell that is shorter than a tracheid and has thinner walls
water potential (Ψw) the potential energy of a water solution per unit volume in relation to pure water at
atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature
whorled pattern of leaf arrangement in which three or more leaves are connected at a node
CHAPTER SUMMARY
30.1The Plant Body
A vascular plant consists of two organ systems: the shoot system and the root system. The shoot system
includes the aboveground vegetative portions (stems and leaves) and reproductive parts (flowers and fruits).
The root system supports the plant and is usually underground. A plant is composed of two main types of
tissue: meristematic tissue and permanent tissue. Meristematic tissue consists of actively dividing cells found in
root and shoot tips. As growth occurs, meristematic tissue differentiates into permanent tissue, which is
categorized as either simple or complex. Simple tissues are made up of similar cell types; examples include
dermal tissue and ground tissue. Dermal tissue provides the outer covering of the plant. Ground tissue is
responsible for photosynthesis; it also supports vascular tissue and may store water and sugars. Complex
tissues are made up of different cell types. Vascular tissue, for example, is made up of xylem and phloem cells.
30.2Stems
The stem of a plant bears the leaves, flowers, and fruits. Stems are characterized by the presence of nodes
(the points of attachment for leaves or branches) and internodes (regions between nodes).
Plant organs are made up of simple and complex tissues. The stem has three tissue systems: dermal, vascular,
and ground tissue. Dermal tissue is the outer covering of the plant. It contains epidermal cells, stomata, guard
cells, and trichomes. Vascular tissue is made up of xylem and phloem tissues and conducts water, minerals,
and photosynthetic products. Ground tissue is responsible for photosynthesis and support and is composed of
parenchyma, collenchyma, and sclerenchyma cells.
Primary growth occurs at the tips of roots and shoots, causing an increase in length. Woody plants may also
exhibit secondary growth, or increase in thickness. In woody plants, especially trees, annual rings may form as
growth slows at the end of each season. Some plant species have modified stems that help to store food,
propagate new plants, or discourage predators. Rhizomes, corms, stolons, runners, tubers, bulbs, tendrils, and
thorns are examples of modified stems.
30.3Roots
Roots help to anchor a plant, absorb water and minerals, and serve as storage sites for food. Taproots and
fibrous roots are the two main types of root systems. In a taproot system, a main root grows vertically
downward with a few lateral roots. Fibrous root systems arise at the base of the stem, where a cluster of roots
forms a dense network that is shallower than a taproot. The growing root tip is protected by a root cap. The root
tip has three main zones: a zone of cell division (cells are actively dividing), a zone of elongation (cells increase
in length), and a zone of maturation (cells differentiate to form different kinds of cells). Root vascular tissue
conducts water, minerals, and sugars. In some habitats, the roots of certain plants may be modified to form
aerial roots or epiphytic roots.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 958
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 947
30.4Leaves
Leaves are the main site of photosynthesis. A typical leaf consists of a lamina (the broad part of the leaf, also
called the blade) and a petiole (the stalk that attaches the leaf to a stem). The arrangement of leaves on a
stem, known as phyllotaxy, enables maximum exposure to sunlight. Each plant species has a characteristic leaf
arrangement and form. The pattern of leaf arrangement may be alternate, opposite, or spiral, while leaf form
may be simple or compound. Leaf tissue consists of the epidermis, which forms the outermost cell layer, and
mesophyll and vascular tissue, which make up the inner portion of the leaf. In some plant species, leaf form is
modified to form structures such as tendrils, spines, bud scales, and needles.
30.5Transport of Water and Solutes in Plants
Water potential (Ψ) is a measure of the difference in potential energy between a water sample and pure water.
The water potential in plant solutions is influenced by solute concentration, pressure, gravity, and matric
potential. Water potential and transpiration influence how water is transported through the xylem in plants.
These processes are regulated by stomatal opening and closing. Photosynthates (mainly sucrose) move from
sources to sinks through the plant’s phloem. Sucrose is actively loaded into the sieve-tube elements of the
phloem. The increased solute concentration causes water to move by osmosis from the xylem into the phloem.
The positive pressure that is produced pushes water and solutes down the pressure gradient. The sucrose is
unloaded into the sink, and the water returns to the xylem vessels.
30.6Plant Sensory Systems and Responses
Plants respond to light by changes in morphology and activity. Irradiation by red light converts the
photoreceptor phytochrome to its far-red light-absorbing form—Pfr. This form controls germination and
flowering in response to length of day, as well as triggers photosynthesis in dormant plants or those that just
emerged from the soil. Blue-light receptors, cryptochromes, and phototropins are responsible for phototropism.
Amyloplasts, which contain heavy starch granules, sense gravity. Shoots exhibit negative gravitropism,
whereas roots exhibit positive gravitropism. Plant hormones—naturally occurring compounds synthesized in
small amounts—can act both in the cells that produce them and in distant tissues and organs. Auxins are
responsible for apical dominance, root growth, directional growth toward light, and many other growth
responses. Cytokinins stimulate cell division and counter apical dominance in shoots. Gibberellins inhibit
dormancy of seeds and promote stem growth. Abscisic acid induces dormancy in seeds and buds, and protects
plants from excessive water loss by promoting stomatal closure. Ethylene gas speeds up fruit ripening and
dropping of leaves. Plants respond to touch by rapid movements (thigmotropy and thigmonasty) and slow
differential growth (thigmomorphogenesis). Plants have evolved defense mechanisms against predators and
pathogens. Physical barriers like bark and spines protect tender tissues. Plants also have chemical defenses,
including toxic secondary metabolites and hormones, which elicit additional defense mechanisms.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 30.7Which layers of the stem are made of a. Negative water potential draws water into
parenchyma cells? the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw
A. cortex and pith water up the xylem. Transpiration draws
B. epidermis water from the leaf.
C. sclerenchyma b. Negative water potential draws water into
D. epidermis and cortex the root hairs. Cohesion and adhesion draw
water up the phloem. Transpiration draws
2.Figure 30.32Positive water potential is placed on
water from the leaf.
the left side of the tube by increasing Ψpsuch that
c. Water potential decreases from the roots to
the water level rises on the right side. Could you
the top of the plant.
equalize the water level on each side of the tube by
d. Water enters the plants through root hairs
adding solute, and if so, how?
and exits through stoma.
3.Figure 30.34Which of the following statements is
false?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Plant regions of continuous growth are made up of ________.
PAGE: 959
948 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
a. dermal tissue a. pericycle
b. vascular tissue b. epidermis
c. meristematic tissue c. endodermis
d. permanent tissue d. root cap
5.Which of the following is the major site of 14.Newly-formed root cells begin to form different
photosynthesis? cell types in the ________.
a. apical meristem a. zone of elongation
b. ground tissue b. zone of maturation
c. xylem cells c. root meristem
d. phloem cells d. zone of cell division
6.Stem regions at which leaves are attached are 15.The stalk of a leaf is known as the ________.
called ________.
a. trichomes a. petiole
b. lenticels b. lamina
c. nodes c. stipule
d. internodes d. rachis
7.Which of the following cell types forms most of the 16.Leaflets are a characteristic of ________ leaves.
inside of a plant?
a. meristem cells a. alternate
b. collenchyma cells b. whorled
c. sclerenchyma cells c. compound
d. parenchyma cells d. opposite
8.Tracheids, vessel elements, sieve-tube cells, and 17.Cells of the ________ contain chloroplasts.
companion cells are components of ________.
a. epidermis
a. vascular tissue b. vascular tissue
b. meristematic tissue c. stomata
c. ground tissue d. mesophyll
d. dermal tissue
18.Which of the following is most likely to be found in
9.The primary growth of a plant is due to the action a desert environment?
of the ________. a. broad leaves to capture sunlight
a. lateral meristem b. spines instead of leaves
b. vascular cambium c. needle-like leaves
c. apical meristem d. wide, flat leaves that can float
d. cork cambium
19.When stomata open, what occurs?
10.Which of the following is an example of a. Water vapor is lost to the external
secondary growth? environment, increasing the rate of
a. increase in length transpiration.
b. increase in thickness or girth b. Water vapor is lost to the external
c. increase in root hairs environment, decreasing the rate of
d. increase in leaf number transpiration.
c. Water vapor enters the spaces in the
11.Secondary growth in stems is usually seen in
mesophyll, increasing the rate of
________.
transpiration.
a. monocots
d. Water vapor enters the spaces in the
b. dicots
mesophyll, decreasing the rate of
c. both monocots and dicots
transpiration.
d. neither monocots nor dicots
20.Which cells are responsible for the movement of
12.Roots that enable a plant to grow on another
photosynthates through a plant?
plant are called ________.
a. tracheids, vessel elements
a. epiphytic roots
b. tracheids, companion cells
b. prop roots
c. vessel elements, companion cells
c. adventitious roots
d. sieve-tube elements, companion cells
d. aerial roots
21.The main photoreceptor that triggers
13.The ________ forces selective uptake of
phototropism is a ________.
minerals in the root.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 960
Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology 949
a. phytochrome hormone released by the fruit and trapped in the bag
b. cryptochrome is probably:
c. phototropin a. abscisic acid
d. carotenoid b. cytokinin
c. ethylene
22.Phytochrome is a plant pigment protein that:
d. gibberellic acid
a. mediates plant infection 25.A decrease in the level of which hormone
b. promotes plant growth releases seeds from dormancy?
c. mediates morphological changes in a. abscisic acid
response to red and far-red light b. cytokinin
d. inhibits plant growth c. ethylene
d. gibberellic acid
23.A mutant plant has roots that grow in all
directions. Which of the following organelles would 26.A seedling germinating under a stone grows at an
you expect to be missing in the cell? angle away from the stone and upward. This
a. mitochondria response to touch is called ________.
b. amyloplast a. gravitropism
c. chloroplast b. thigmonasty
d. nucleus c. thigmotropism
d. skototropism
24.After buying green bananas or unripe avocadoes,
they can be kept in a brown bag to ripen. The
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
27.What type of meristem is found only in monocots, found in monocots? Which type of root system is
such as lawn grasses? Explain how this type of found in dicots?
meristematic tissue is beneficial in lawn grasses that
36.What might happen to a root if the pericycle
are mowed each week.
disappeared?
28.Which plant part is responsible for transporting
37.How do dicots differ from monocots in terms of
water, minerals, and sugars to different parts of the
leaf structure?
plant? Name the two types of tissue that make up
this overall tissue, and explain the role of each. 38.Describe an example of a plant with leaves that
are adapted to cold temperatures.
29.Describe the roles played by stomata and guard
cells. What would happen to a plant if these cells did 39.The process of bulk flow transports fluids in a
not function correctly? plant. Describe the two main bulk flow processes.
30.Compare the structure and function of xylem to 40.Owners and managers of plant nurseries have to
that of phloem. plan lighting schedules for a long-day plant that will
flower in February. What lighting periods will be most
31.Explain the role of the cork cambium in woody
effective? What color of light should be chosen?
plants.
41.What are the major benefits of gravitropism for a
32.What is the function of lenticels?
germinating seedling?
33.Besides the age of a tree, what additional
42.Fruit and vegetable storage facilities are usually
information can annual rings reveal?
refrigerated and well ventilated. Why are these
34.Give two examples of modified stems and explain conditions advantageous?
how each example benefits the plant.
43.Stomata close in response to bacterial infection.
35.Compare a tap root system with a fibrous root Why is this response a mechanism of defense for the
system. For each type, name a plant that provides a plant? Which hormone is most likely to mediate this
food in the human diet. Which type of root system is response?
PAGE: 961
950 Chapter 30 | Plant Form and Physiology
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 962
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 951
31 | SOIL AND PLANT
NUTRITION
Figure 31.1 For this (a) squash seedling (Cucurbita maxima) to develop into a mature plant bearing its (b) fruit,
numerousnutritionalrequirementsmustbemet.(credita:modificationofworkbyJulianColton;creditb:modification
of work by "Wildfeuer"/Wikimedia Commons)
Chapter Outline
31.1:Nutritional Requirements of Plants
31.2:The Soil
31.3:Nutritional Adaptations of Plants
Introduction
CucurbitaceaeisafamilyofplantsfirstcultivatedinMesoamerica,althoughseveralspeciesarenativetoNorth
America.Thefamilyincludesmanyediblespecies,suchassquashandpumpkin,aswellasinediblegourds.In
order to grow and develop into mature, fruit-bearing plants, many requirements must be met and events must
be coordinated. Seeds must germinate under the right conditions in the soil; therefore, temperature, moisture,
andsoilqualityareimportantfactorsthatplayaroleingerminationandseedlingdevelopment.Soilqualityand
climate are significant to plant distribution and growth. The young seedling will eventually grow into a mature
plant, and the roots will absorb nutrients and water from the soil. At the same time, the aboveground parts
of the plant will absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and use energy from sunlight to produce organic
compounds through photosynthesis. This chapter will explore the complex dynamics between plants and soils,
and the adaptations that plants have evolved to make better use of nutritional resources.
31.1 | Nutritional Requirements of Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how plants obtain nutrients
• List the elements and compounds required for proper plant nutrition
• Describe an essential nutrient
Plants are unique organisms that can absorb nutrients and water through their root system, as well as carbon
dioxidefromtheatmosphere.Soilqualityandclimatearethemajordeterminantsofplantdistributionandgrowth.
PAGE: 963
952 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
The combination of soil nutrients, water, and carbon dioxide, along with sunlight, allows plants to grow.
The Chemical Composition of Plants
Since plants require nutrients in the form of elements such as carbon and potassium, it is important to
understand the chemical composition of plants. The majority of volume in a plant cell is water; it typically
comprises 80 to 90 percent of the plant’s total weight. Soil is the water source for land plants, and can be an
abundant source of water, even if it appears dry. Plant roots absorb water from the soil through root hairs and
transportituptotheleavesthroughthexylem.Aswatervaporislostfromtheleaves,theprocessoftranspiration
and the polarity of water molecules (which enables them to form hydrogen bonds) draws more water from the
rootsupthroughtheplanttotheleaves(Figure31.2).Plantsneedwatertosupportcellstructure,formetabolic
functions, to carry nutrients, and for photosynthesis.
Figure 31.2Water is absorbed through the root hairs and moves up the xylem to the leaves.
Plant cells need essential substances, collectively called nutrients, to sustain life. Plant nutrients may be
composed of either organic or inorganic compounds. An organic compound is a chemical compound that
contains carbon, such as carbon dioxide obtained from the atmosphere. Carbon that was obtained from
atmospheric CO2 composes the majority of the dry mass within most plants. An inorganic compound does
not contain carbon and is not part of, or produced by, a living organism. Inorganic substances, which form the
majority of the soil solution, are commonly called minerals: those required by plants include nitrogen (N) and
potassium (K) for structure and regulation.
Essential Nutrients
Plantsrequireonlylight,water,andabout20elementstosupportalltheirbiochemicalneeds:these20elements
are called essential nutrients (Table 31.1). For an element to be regarded as essential, three criteria are
required: 1) a plant cannot complete its life cycle without the element; 2) no other element can perform the
function of the element; and 3) the element is directly involved in plant nutrition.
Essential Elements for Plant Growth
Macronutrients Micronutrients
Carbon (C) Iron (Fe)
Hydrogen (H) Manganese (Mn)
Table 31.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 964
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 953
Essential Elements for Plant Growth
Macronutrients Micronutrients
Oxygen (O) Boron (B)
Nitrogen (N) Molybdenum (Mo)
Phosphorus (P) Copper (Cu)
Potassium (K) Zinc (Zn)
Calcium (Ca) Chlorine (Cl)
Magnesium (Mg) Nickel (Ni)
Sulfur (S) Cobalt (Co)
Sodium (Na)
Silicon (Si)
Table 31.1
Macronutrients and Micronutrients
Theessentialelementscanbedividedintotwogroups:macronutrientsandmicronutrients.Nutrientsthatplants
require in larger amounts are called macronutrients. About half of the essential elements are considered
macronutrients: carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium and sulfur.
The first of these macronutrients, carbon (C), is required to form carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, and
many other compounds; it is therefore present in all macromolecules. On average, the dry weight (excluding
water) of a cell is 50 percent carbon. As shown inFigure 31.3, carbon is a key part of plant biomolecules.
Figure31.3Cellulose,themainstructuralcomponentoftheplantcellwall,makesupoverthirtypercentofplantmatter.
It is the most abundant organic compound on earth.
The next most abundant element in plant cells is nitrogen (N); it is part of proteins and nucleic acids. Nitrogen
isalsousedinthesynthesisofsomevitamins.Hydrogenandoxygenaremacronutrientsthatarepartofmany
organic compounds, and also form water. Oxygen is necessary for cellular respiration; plants use oxygen to
store energy in the form of ATP. Phosphorus (P), another macromolecule, is necessary to synthesize nucleic
acids and phospholipids. As part of ATP, phosphorus enables food energy to be converted into chemical
energy through oxidative phosphorylation. Likewise, light energy is converted into chemical energy during
photophosphorylation in photosynthesis, and into chemical energy to be extracted during respiration.Sulfur is
partofcertainaminoacids,suchascysteineandmethionine,andispresentinseveralcoenzymes.Sulfuralso
playsaroleinphotosynthesisaspartoftheelectrontransportchain,wherehydrogengradientsplayakeyrole
in the conversion of light energy into ATP. Potassium (K) is important because of its role in regulating stomatal
PAGE: 965
954 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
opening and closing. As the openings for gas exchange, stomata help maintain a healthy water balance; a
potassium ion pump supports this process.
Magnesium(Mg)andcalcium(Ca)arealsoimportantmacronutrients.Theroleofcalciumistwofold:toregulate
nutrient transport, and to support many enzyme functions. Magnesium is important to the photosynthetic
process.Theseminerals,alongwiththemicronutrients,whicharedescribedbelow,alsocontributetotheplant’s
ionic balance.
Inadditiontomacronutrients,organismsrequirevariouselementsinsmallamounts.Thesemicronutrients,or
traceelements,arepresentinverysmallquantities.Theyincludeboron(B),chlorine(Cl),manganese(Mn),iron
(Fe), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), silicon (Si), and sodium (Na).
Deficiencies in any of these nutrients—particularly the macronutrients—can adversely affect plant growth
(Figure 31.4). Depending on the specific nutrient, a lack can cause stunted growth, slow growth, or chlorosis
(yellowing of the leaves). Extreme deficiencies may result in leaves showing signs of cell death.
Visitthiswebsite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/plant_mineral)toparticipateinaninteractiveexperimenton
plantnutrientdeficiencies.YoucanadjusttheamountsofN,P,K,Ca,Mg,andFethatplantsreceive...and
see what happens.
Figure 31.4 Nutrient deficiency is evident in the symptoms these plants show. This (a) grape tomato suffers from
blossom end rot caused by calcium deficiency. The yellowing in this (b) Frangula alnus results from magnesium
deficiency.Inadequatemagnesiumalsoleadsto(c)intervenalchlorosis,seenhereinasweetgumleaf.This(d)palm
is affected by potassium deficiency. (credit c: modification of work by Jim Conrad; credit d: modification of work by
Malcolm Manners)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 966
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 955
Figure31.5PlantphysiologistRayWheelerchecksonionsbeinggrownusinghydroponictechniques.Theother
plants are Bibb lettuce (left) and radishes (right). Credit: NASA
Hydroponics
Hydroponics is a method of growing plants in a water-nutrient solution instead of soil. Since its advent,
hydroponicshasdevelopedintoagrowingprocessthatresearchersoftenuse.Scientistswhoareinterested
in studying plant nutrient deficiencies can use hydroponics to study the effects of different nutrient
combinationsunderstrictlycontrolledconditions.Hydroponicshasalsodevelopedasawaytogrowflowers,
vegetables, and other crops in greenhouse environments. You might find hydroponically grown produce
at your local grocery store. Today, many lettuces and tomatoes in your market have been hydroponically
grown.
31.2 | The Soil
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how soils are formed
• Explain soil composition
• Describe a soil profile
Plants obtain inorganic elements from the soil, which serves as a natural medium for land plants. Soil is the
outer loose layer that covers the surface of Earth. Soil quality is a major determinant, along with climate, of
plantdistributionandgrowth.Soilqualitydependsnotonlyonthechemicalcompositionofthesoil,butalsothe
topography (regional surface features) and the presence of living organisms. In agriculture, the history of the
soil, such as the cultivating practices and previous crops, modify the characteristics and fertility of that soil.
Soil develops very slowly over long periods of time, and its formation results from natural and environmental
forcesactingonmineral,rock,andorganiccompounds.Soilscanbedividedintotwogroups:organicsoilsare
thosethatareformedfromsedimentationandprimarilycomposedoforganicmatter,whilethosethatareformed
PAGE: 967
956 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
fromtheweatheringofrocksandareprimarilycomposedofinorganicmaterialarecalledmineralsoils.Mineral
soils are predominant in terrestrial ecosystems, where soils may be covered by water for part of the year or
exposed to the atmosphere.
Soil Composition
Soil consists of these major components (Figure 31.6):
• inorganic mineral matter, about 40 to 45 percent of the soil volume
• organic matter, about 5 percent of the soil volume
• water and air, about 50 percent of the soil volume
Theamountofeachofthefourmajorcomponentsofsoildependsontheamountofvegetation,soilcompaction,
and water present in the soil. A good healthy soil has sufficient air, water, minerals, and organic material to
promote and sustain plant life.
Figure 31.6The four major components of soil are shown: inorganic minerals, organic matter, water, and air.
Soilcompactioncanresultwhensoiliscompressedbyheavymachineryorevenfoottraffic.Howmightthis
compaction change the soil composition?
The organic material of soil, called humus, is made up of microorganisms (dead and alive), and dead animals
and plants in varying stages of decay. Humus improves soil structure and provides plants with water and
minerals. The inorganic material of soil consists of rock, slowly broken down into smaller particles that vary in
size.Soilparticlesthatare0.1to2mmindiameteraresand.Soilparticlesbetween0.002and0.1mmarecalled
silt,andevensmallerparticles,lessthan0.002mmindiameter,arecalledclay.Somesoilshavenodominant
particle size and contain a mixture of sand, silt, and humus; these soils are calledloams.
Explore this interactive map (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/soil_survey_map) from the USDA’s National
Cooperative Soil Survey to access soil data for almost any region in the United States.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 968
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 957
Soil Formation
Soilformationistheconsequenceofacombinationofbiological,physical,andchemicalprocesses.Soilshould
ideally contain 50 percent solid material and 50 percent pore space. About one-half of the pore space should
containwater,andtheotherhalfshouldcontainair.Theorganiccomponentofsoilservesasacementingagent,
returnsnutrientstotheplant,allowssoiltostoremoisture,makessoiltillableforfarming,andprovidesenergyfor
soilmicroorganisms.Mostsoilmicroorganisms—bacteria, algae,orfungi—aredormantindrysoil,butbecome
active once moisture is available.
Soildistributionisnothomogenousbecauseitsformationresultsintheproductionoflayers;together,thevertical
section of a soil is called the soil profile. Within the soil profile, soil scientists define zones called horizons. A
horizon is a soil layer with distinct physical and chemical properties that differ from those of other layers. Five
factors account for soil formation: parent material, climate, topography, biological factors, and time.
Parent Material
Theorganicandinorganicmaterialinwhichsoilsformistheparentmaterial.Mineralsoilsformdirectlyfromthe
weatheringofbedrock,thesolidrockthatliesbeneaththesoil,andtherefore,theyhaveasimilarcompositionto
theoriginalrock.Othersoilsforminmaterialsthatcamefromelsewhere,suchassandandglacialdrift.Materials
located in the depth of the soil are relatively unchanged compared with the deposited material. Sediments in
rivers may have different characteristics, depending on whether the stream moves quickly or slowly. A fast-
moving river could have sediments of rocks and sand, whereas a slow-moving river could have fine-textured
material, such as clay.
Climate
Temperature,moisture,andwindcausedifferentpatternsofweatheringandthereforeaffectsoilcharacteristics.
The presence of moisture and nutrients from weathering will also promote biological activity: a key component
of a quality soil.
Topography
Regionalsurfacefeatures(familiarlycalled“thelayoftheland”)canhaveamajorinfluenceonthecharacteristics
andfertilityofasoil.Topographyaffectswaterrunoff,whichstripsawayparentmaterialandaffectsplantgrowth.
Steeps soils are more prone to erosion and may be thinner than soils that are relatively flat or level.
Biological factors
Thepresenceoflivingorganismsgreatlyaffectssoilformationandstructure.Animalsandmicroorganismscan
produce pores and crevices, and plant roots can penetrate into crevices to produce more fragmentation. Plant
secretionspromotethedevelopmentofmicroorganismsaroundtheroot,inanareaknownastherhizosphere.
Additionally, leaves and other material that fall from plants decompose and contribute to soil composition.
Time
Timeisanimportantfactorinsoilformationbecausesoilsdevelopoverlongperiods.Soilformationisadynamic
process.Materialsaredepositedovertime,decompose,andtransformintoothermaterialsthatcanbeusedby
living organisms or deposited onto the surface of the soil.
Physical Properties of the Soil
Soils are named and classified based on their horizons. The soil profile has four distinct layers: 1) O horizon;
2) A horizon; 3) B horizon, or subsoil; and 4) C horizon, or soil base (Figure 31.7). The O horizon has freshly
decomposingorganicmatter—humus—atitssurface,withdecomposedvegetationatitsbase.Humusenriches
the soil with nutrients and enhances soil moisture retention. Topsoil—the top layer of soil—is usually two to
three inches deep, but this depth can vary considerably. For instance, river deltas like the Mississippi River
delta have deep layers of topsoil. Topsoil is rich in organic material; microbial processes occur there, and it
is the “workhorse” of plant production. The A horizon consists of a mixture of organic material with inorganic
products of weathering, and it is therefore the beginning of true mineral soil. This horizon is typically darkly
coloredbecauseofthepresenceoforganicmatter.Inthisarea,rainwaterpercolatesthroughthesoilandcarries
materialsfromthesurface.TheBhorizonisanaccumulationofmostlyfinematerialthathasmoveddownward,
resulting in a dense layer in the soil. In some soils, the B horizon contains nodules or a layer of calcium
carbonate. The C horizon, or soil base, includes the parent material, plus the organic and inorganic material
that is broken down to form soil. The parent material may be either created in its natural place, or transported
from elsewhere to its present location. Beneath the C horizon lies bedrock.
PAGE: 969
958 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
Figure31.7Thissoilprofileshowsthedifferentsoillayers(Ohorizon,Ahorizon,Bhorizon,andChorizon)found
in typical soils. (credit: modification of work by USDA)
Which horizon is considered the topsoil, and which is considered the subsoil?
Somesoilsmayhaveadditionallayers,orlackoneoftheselayers.Thethicknessofthelayersisalsovariable,
and depends on the factors that influence soil formation. In general, immature soils may have O, A, and C
horizons, whereas mature soils may display all of these, plus additional layers (Figure 31.8).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 970
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 959
Figure31.8TheSanJoaquinsoilprofilehasanOhorizon,Ahorizon,Bhorizon,andChorizon.(credit:modification
of work by USDA)
PAGE: 971
960 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
Soil Scientist
Asoilscientiststudiesthebiologicalcomponents,physicalandchemicalproperties,distribution,formation,
and morphology of soils. Soil scientists need to have a strong background in physical and life sciences,
plus a foundation in mathematics. They may work for federal or state agencies, academia, or the private
sector. Their work may involve collecting data, carrying out research, interpreting results, inspecting soils,
conducting soil surveys, and recommending soil management programs.
Figure 31.9This soil scientist is studying the horizons and composition of soil at a research site. (credit: USDA)
Many soil scientists work both in an office and in the field. According to the United States Department
of Agriculture (USDA): “a soil scientist needs good observation skills to analyze and determine the
characteristicsofdifferenttypesofsoils.Soiltypesarecomplexandthegeographicalareasasoilscientist
may survey are varied. Aerial photos or various satellite images are often used to research the areas.
Computer skillsandgeographic information systems (GIS) helpthe scientist to analyzethe multiple facets
[1]
of geomorphology, topography, vegetation, and climate to discover the patterns left on the landscape.”
Soil scientists play a key role in understanding the soil’s past, analyzing present conditions, and making
recommendations for future soil-related practices.
31.3 | Nutritional Adaptations of Plants
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Understand the nutritional adaptations of plants
• Describe mycorrhizae
• Explain nitrogen fixation
1. National Resources Conservation Service / United States Department of Agriculture. “Careers in Soil Science.”http://soils.usda.gov/
education/facts/careers.html (http://openstax.org/l/NRCS)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 972
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 961
Plants obtain food in two different ways. Autotrophic plants can make their own food from inorganic raw
materials, such as carbon dioxide and water, through photosynthesis in the presence of sunlight. Green plants
are included in this group. Some plants, however, are heterotrophic: they are totally parasitic and lacking in
chlorophyll.Theseplants,referredtoasholo-parasiticplants,areunabletosynthesizeorganiccarbonanddraw
all of their nutrients from the host plant.
Plants may also enlist the help of microbial partners in nutrient acquisition. Particular species of bacteria and
fungi have evolved along with certain plants to create a mutualistic symbiotic relationship with roots. This
improves the nutrition of both the plant and the microbe. The formation of nodules in legume plants and
mycorrhization can be considered among the nutritional adaptations of plants. However, these are not the only
typeofadaptationsthatwemayfind;manyplantshaveotheradaptationsthatallowthemtothriveunderspecific
conditions.
Thisvideo(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/basic_photosyn)reviewsbasicconceptsaboutphotosynthesis.In
the left panel, click each tab to select a topic for review.
Nitrogen Fixation: Root and Bacteria Interactions
Nitrogen is an important macronutrient because it is part of nucleic acids and proteins. Atmospheric nitrogen,
which is the diatomic molecule N2, or dinitrogen, is the largest pool of nitrogen in terrestrial ecosystems.
However, plants cannot take advantage of this nitrogen because they do not have the necessary enzymes to
convertitintobiologicallyusefulforms.However,nitrogencanbe“fixed,”whichmeansthatitcanbeconverted
toammonia(NH3)throughbiological,physical,orchemicalprocesses.Asyouhavelearned,biologicalnitrogen
fixation (BNF) is the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen (N2) into ammonia (NH3), exclusively carried out by
prokaryotes such as soil bacteria or cyanobacteria. Biological processes contribute 65 percent of the nitrogen
used in agriculture. The following equation represents the process:
N +16 ATP + 8 e− + 8 H + → 2NH + 16 ADP + 16 Pi + H
2 3 2
ThemostimportantsourceofBNFisthesymbioticinteractionbetweensoilbacteriaandlegumeplants,including
many crops important to humans (Figure 31.10). The NH3 resulting from fixation can be transported into plant
tissueandincorporatedintoaminoacids,whicharethenmadeintoplantproteins.Somelegumeseeds,suchas
soybeansandpeanuts,containhighlevelsofprotein,andserveamongthemostimportantagriculturalsources
of protein in the world.
PAGE: 973
962 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
Figure 31.10 Some common edible legumes—like (a) peanuts, (b) beans, and (c) chickpeas—are able to
interact symbiotically with soilbacteria that fixnitrogen. (credit a:modification ofworkbyJulesClancy; credit b:
modification of work by USDA)
Farmers often rotate corn (a cereal crop) and soy beans (a legume), planting a field with each crop in
alternate seasons. What advantage might this crop rotation confer?
Soilbacteria,collectivelycalledrhizobia,symbioticallyinteractwithlegumerootstoformspecializedstructures
called nodules, in which nitrogen fixation takes place. This process entails the reduction of atmospheric
nitrogen to ammonia, by means of the enzyme nitrogenase. Therefore, using rhizobia is a natural and
environmentally friendly way to fertilize plants, as opposed to chemical fertilization that uses a nonrenewable
resource, such as natural gas. Through symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the plant benefits from using an endless
source of nitrogen from the atmosphere. The process simultaneously contributes to soil fertility because the
plantrootsystemleavesbehindsomeofthebiologicallyavailablenitrogen.Asinanysymbiosis,bothorganisms
benefit from the interaction: the plant obtains ammonia, and bacteria obtain carbon compounds generated
through photosynthesis, as well as a protected niche in which to grow (Figure 31.11).
Figure 31.11 Soybean roots contain (a) nitrogen-fixing nodules. Cells within the nodules are infected with
Bradyrhyzobium japonicum, a rhizobia or “root-loving” bacterium. The bacteria are encased in (b) vesicles inside
the cell, as can be seen in this transmission electron micrograph. (credit a: modification of work by USDA; credit b:
modification of work by Louisa Howard, Dartmouth Electron Microscope Facility; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Mycorrhizae: The Symbiotic Relationship between Fungi and Roots
A nutrient depletion zone can develop when there is rapid soil solution uptake, low nutrient concentration, low
diffusion rate, or low soil moisture. These conditions are very common; therefore, most plants rely on fungi to
facilitate the uptake of minerals from the soil. Fungi form symbiotic associations called mycorrhizae with plant
roots,inwhichthefungiactuallyareintegratedintothephysicalstructureoftheroot.Thefungicolonizetheliving
root tissue during active plant growth.
Throughmycorrhization,theplantobtainsmainlyphosphateandotherminerals,suchaszincandcopper,from
the soil. The fungus obtains nutrients, such as sugars, from the plant root (Figure 31.12). Mycorrhizae help
increase the surface area of the plant root system because hyphae, which are narrow, can spread beyond the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 974
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 963
nutrient depletion zone. Hyphae can grow into small soil pores that allow access to phosphorus that would
otherwisebeunavailabletotheplant.Thebeneficialeffectontheplantisbestobservedinpoorsoils.Thebenefit
to fungi is that they can obtain up to 20 percent of the total carbon accessed by plants. Mycorrhizae functions
as a physical barrier to pathogens. It also provides an induction of generalized host defense mechanisms, and
sometimes involves production of antibiotic compounds by the fungi.
Figure 31.12 Root tips proliferate in the presence of mycorrhizal infection, which appears as off-white fuzz in this
image. (credit: modification of work by Nilsson et al., BMC Bioinformatics 2005)
Therearetwotypesofmycorrhizae:ectomycorrhizaeandendomycorrhizae.Ectomycorrhizaeformanextensive
dense sheath around the roots, called a mantle. Hyphae from the fungi extend from the mantle into the soil,
which increases the surface area for water and mineral absorption. This type of mycorrhizae is found in forest
trees,especiallyconifers,birches,andoaks.Endomycorrhizae,alsocalledarbuscularmycorrhizae,donotform
adensesheathovertheroot.Instead,thefungalmyceliumisembeddedwithintheroottissue.Endomycorrhizae
are found in the roots of more than 80 percent of terrestrial plants.
Nutrients from Other Sources
Someplantscannotproducetheirownfoodandmustobtaintheirnutritionfromoutsidesources.Thismayoccur
with plants that are parasitic or saprophytic. Some plants are mutualistic symbionts, epiphytes, or insectivorous.
Plant Parasites
A parasitic plant depends on its host for survival. Some parasitic plants have no leaves. An example of this
is the dodder (Figure 31.13), which has a weak, cylindrical stem that coils around the host and forms suckers.
From these suckers, cells invade the host stem and grow to connect with the vascular bundles of the host.
The parasitic plant obtains water and nutrients through these connections. The plant is a total parasite (a
holoparasite) because it is completely dependent on its host. Other parasitic plants (hemiparasites) are fully
photosynthetic and only use the host for water and minerals. There are about 4,100 species of parasitic plants.
PAGE: 975
964 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
Figure31.13Thedodderisaholoparasitethatpenetratesthehost’svasculartissueanddivertsnutrientsforitsown
growth. Note that the vines of the dodder, which has white flowers, are beige. The dodder has no chlorophyll and
cannot produce its own food. (credit: "Lalithamba"/Flickr)
Saprophytes
Asaprophyteisaplantthatdoesnothavechlorophyllandgetsitsfoodfromdeadmatter,similartobacteriaand
fungi(notethatfungiareoftencalledsaprophytes,whichisincorrect,becausefungiarenotplants).Plantslike
these use enzymes to convert organic food materials into simpler forms from which they can absorb nutrients
(Figure 31.14). Most saprophytes do not directly digest dead matter: instead, they parasitize fungi that digest
dead matter, or are mycorrhizal, ultimately obtaining photosynthate from a fungus that derived photosynthate
from its host. Saprophytic plants are uncommon; only a few species are described.
Figure 31.14 Saprophytes, like this Dutchmen’s pipe (Monotropa hypopitys), obtain their food from dead matter and
do not have chlorophyll. (credit: modification of work by Iwona Erskine-Kellie)
Symbionts
A symbiont is a plant in a symbiotic relationship, with special adaptations such as mycorrhizae or nodule
formation.Fungialsoformsymbioticassociationswithcyanobacteriaandgreenalgae(calledlichens).Lichens
cansometimesbeseenascolorfulgrowthsonthesurfaceofrocksandtrees(Figure31.15).Thealgalpartner
(phycobiont)makesfoodautotrophically,someofwhichitshareswiththefungus;thefungalpartner(mycobiont)
absorbs water and minerals from the environment, which are made available to the green alga. If one partner
was separated from the other, they would both die.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 976
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 965
Figure31.15Lichens,whichoftenhavesymbioticrelationshipswithotherplants,cansometimesbefoundgrowingon
trees. (credit: "benketaro"/Flickr)
Epiphytes
An epiphyte is a plant that grows on other plants, but is not dependent upon the other plant for nutrition
(Figure31.16).Epiphyteshavetwotypesofroots:clingingaerialroots,whichabsorbnutrientsfromhumusthat
accumulates in the crevices of trees; and aerial roots, which absorb moisture from the atmosphere.
Figure 31.16These epiphyte plants grow in the main greenhouse of theJardin des Plantesin Paris.
Insectivorous Plants
An insectivorous plant has specialized leaves to attract and digest insects. The Venus flytrap is popularly
knownforitsinsectivorousmodeofnutrition,andhasleavesthatworkastraps(Figure31.17).Themineralsit
obtains from prey compensate for those lacking in the boggy (low pH) soil of its native North Carolina coastal
PAGE: 977
966 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
plains.Therearethreesensitivehairsinthecenterofeachhalfofeachleaf.Theedgesofeachleafarecovered
withlongspines.Nectarsecretedbytheplantattractsfliestotheleaf.Whenaflytouchesthesensoryhairs,the
leafimmediatelycloses.Next,fluidsandenzymesbreakdownthepreyandmineralsareabsorbedbytheleaf.
Since this plant is popular in the horticultural trade, it is threatened in its original habitat.
Figure 31.17A Venus flytrap has specialized leaves to trap insects. (credit: "Selena N. B. H."/Flickr)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 978
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 967
KEY TERMS
A horizon consists of a mixture of organic material with inorganic products of weathering
B horizon soil layer that is an accumulation of mostly fine material that has moved downward
bedrock solid rock that lies beneath the soil
C horizon layer of soil that contains the parent material, and the organic and inorganic material that is broken
down to form soil; also known as the soil base
clay soil particles that are less than 0.002 mm in diameter
epiphyte plant that grows on other plants but is not dependent upon other plants for nutrition
horizon soil layer with distinct physical and chemical properties, which differs from other layers depending on
how and when it was formed
humus organic material of soil; made up of microorganisms, dead animals, and plants in varying stages of
decay
inorganic compound chemicalcompoundthatdoesnotcontaincarbon;itisnotpartoforproducedbyaliving
organism
insectivorous plant plant that has specialized leaves to attract and digest insects
loam soil that has no dominant particle size
macronutrient nutrientthatisrequiredinlargeamountsforplantgrowth;carbon,hydrogen,oxygen,nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfur
micronutrient nutrient required in small amounts; also called trace element
mineral soil typeofsoilthatisformedfromtheweatheringofrocksandinorganicmaterial;composedprimarily
of sand, silt, and clay
nitrogenase enzyme that is responsible for the reduction of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia
nodules specialized structures that containRhizobiabacteria where nitrogen fixation takes place
O horizon layer of soil with humus at the surface and decomposed vegetation at the base
organic compound chemical compound that contains carbon
organic soil type of soil that is formed from sedimentation; composed primarily of organic material
parasitic plant plant that is dependent on its host for survival
parent material organic and inorganic material in which soils form
rhizobia soil bacteria that symbiotically interact with legume roots to form nodules and fix nitrogen
rhizosphere area of soil affected by root secretions and microorganisms
sand soil particles between 0.1–2 mm in diameter
saprophyte plant that does not have chlorophyll and gets its food from dead matter
silt soil particles between 0.002 and 0.1 mm in diameter
soil outer loose layer that covers the surface of Earth
soil profile vertical section of a soil
PAGE: 979
968 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
symbiont plant in a symbiotic relationship with bacteria or fungi
CHAPTER SUMMARY
31.1Nutritional Requirements of Plants
Plants can absorb inorganic nutrients and water through their root system, and carbon dioxide from the
environment. The combination of organic compounds, along with water, carbon dioxide, and sunlight, produce
the energy that allows plants to grow. Inorganic compounds form the majority of the soil solution. Plants access
water though the soil. Water is absorbed by the plant root, transports nutrients throughout the plant, and
maintains the structure of the plant. Essential elements are indispensable elements for plant growth. They are
divided into macronutrients and micronutrients. The macronutrients plants require are carbon, nitrogen,
hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. Important micronutrients include
iron, manganese, boron, molybdenum, copper, zinc, chlorine, nickel, cobalt, silicon, and sodium.
31.2The Soil
Plants obtain mineral nutrients from the soil. Soil is the outer loose layer that covers the surface of Earth. Soil
quality depends on the chemical composition of the soil, the topography, the presence of living organisms, the
climate, and time. Agricultural practice and history may also modify the characteristics and fertility of soil. Soil
consists of four major components: 1) inorganic mineral matter, 2) organic matter, 3) water and air, and 4) living
matter. The organic material of soil is made of humus, which improves soil structure and provides water and
minerals. Soil inorganic material consists of rock slowly broken down into smaller particles that vary in size,
such as sand, silt, and loam.
Soil formation results from a combination of biological, physical, and chemical processes. Soil is not
homogenous because its formation results in the production of layers called a soil profile. Factors that affect
soil formation include: parent material, climate, topography, biological factors, and time. Soils are classified
based on their horizons, soil particle size, and proportions. Most soils have four distinct horizons: O, A, B, and
C.
31.3Nutritional Adaptations of Plants
Atmospheric nitrogen is the largest pool of available nitrogen in terrestrial ecosystems. However, plants cannot
use this nitrogen because they do not have the necessary enzymes. Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF) is the
conversion of atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia. The most important source of BNF is the symbiotic interaction
between soil bacteria and legumes. The bacteria form nodules on the legume’s roots in which nitrogen fixation
takes place. Fungi form symbiotic associations (mycorrhizae) with plants, becoming integrated into the physical
structure of the root. Through mycorrhization, the plant obtains minerals from the soil and the fungus obtains
photosynthate from the plant root. Ectomycorrhizae form an extensive dense sheath around the root, while
endomycorrhizae are embedded within the root tissue. Some plants—parasites, saprophytes, symbionts,
epiphytes, and insectivores—have evolved adaptations to obtain their organic or mineral nutrition from various
sources.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 31.6Soil compaction can result when soil topsoil, and which is considered the subsoil?
is compressed by heavy machinery or even foot
3.Figure 31.10Farmers often rotate corn (a cereal
traffic. How might this compaction change the soil
crop) and soy beans (a legume) planting a field with
composition?
each crop in alternate seasons. What advantage
2.Figure 31.7Which horizon is considered the might this crop rotation confer?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.For an element to be regarded as essential, all of
the following criteria must be met, except:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 980
Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition 969
a. No other element can perform the function. 10.A soil consists of layers called ________ that
b. The element is directly involved in plant taken together are called a ________.
nutrition. a. soil profiles : horizon
c. The element is inorganic. b. horizons : soil profile
d. The plant cannot complete its lifecycle c. horizons : humus
without the element. d. humus : soil profile
5.The nutrient that is part of carbohydrates, proteins, 11.What is the term used to describe the solid rock
and nucleic acids, and that forms biomolecules, is that lies beneath the soil?
________. a. sand
a. nitrogen b. bedrock
b. carbon c. clay
c. magnesium d. loam
d. iron
12.Which process produces an inorganic compound
6.Most ________ are necessary for enzyme that plants can easily use?
function. a. photosynthesis
a. micronutrients b. nitrogen fixation
b. macronutrients c. mycorrhization
c. biomolecules d. Calvin cycle
d. essential nutrients
13.Through mycorrhization, a plant obtains important
7.What is the main water source for land plants? nutrients such as ________.
a. phosphorus, zinc, and copper
a. rain b. phosphorus, zinc, and calcium
b. soil c. nickel, calcium, and zinc
c. biomolecules d. all of the above
d. essential nutrients
14.What term describes a plant that requires
8.Which factors affect soil quality? nutrition from a living host plant?
a. chemical composition a. parasite
b. history of the soil b. saprophyte
c. presence of living organisms and c. epiphyte
topography d. insectivorous
d. all of the above
15.What is the term for the symbiotic association
9.Soil particles that are 0.1 to 2 mm in diameter are between fungi and cyanobacteria?
called ________. a. lichen
a. sand b. mycorrhizae
b. silt c. epiphyte
c. clay d. nitrogen-fixing nodule
d. loam
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.What type of plant problems result from nitrogen 21.Describe how topography influences the
and calcium deficiencies? characteristics and fertility of a soil.
17.Research the life of Jan Babtista van Helmont. 22.Why is biological nitrogen fixation an
What did the van Helmont experiment show? environmentally friendly way of fertilizing plants?
18.List two essential macronutrients and two 23.What is the main difference, from an energy point
essential micro nutrients. of view, between photosynthesis and biological
nitrogen fixation?
19.Describe the main differences between a mineral
soil and an organic soil. 24.Why is a root nodule a nutritional adaptation of a
plant?
20.Name and briefly explain the factors that affect
soil formation.
PAGE: 981
970 Chapter 31 | Soil and Plant Nutrition
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 982
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 971
32 | PLANT
REPRODUCTION
Figure32.1Plantsthatreproducesexuallyoftenachievefertilizationwiththehelpofpollinatorssuchas(a)bees,(b)
birds,and(c)butterflies.(credita:modificationofworkbyJohnSeverns;creditb:modificationofworkbyCharlesJ.
Sharp; credit c: modification of work by "Galawebdesign"/Flickr)
Chapter Outline
32.1:Reproductive Development and Structure
32.2:Pollination and Fertilization
32.3:Asexual Reproduction
Introduction
Plantshaveevolveddifferentreproductivestrategiesforthecontinuationoftheirspecies.Someplantsreproduce
sexually, and others asexually, in contrast to animal species, which rely almost exclusively on sexual
reproduction. Plant sexual reproduction usually depends on pollinating agents, while asexual reproduction is
independentoftheseagents.Flowersareoftentheshowiestormoststronglyscentedpartofplants.Withtheir
bright colors, fragrances, and interesting shapes and sizes, flowers attract insects, birds, and animals to serve
their pollination needs. Other plants pollinate via wind or water; still others self-pollinate.
32.1 | Reproductive Development and Structure
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the two stages of a plant’s lifecycle
• Compare and contrast male and female gametophytes and explain how they form in angiosperms
• Describe the reproductive structures of a plant
• Describe the components of a complete flower
• Describe the development of microsporangium and megasporangium in gymnosperms
Sexual reproduction takes place with slight variations in different groups of plants. Plants have two distinct
stagesintheirlifecycle:thegametophytestageandthesporophytestage.Thehaploidgametophyteproduces
the male and female gametes by mitosis in distinct multicellular structures. Fusion of the male and females
gametes forms the diploid zygote, which develops into the sporophyte. After reaching maturity, the diploid
sporophyte produces spores by meiosis, which in turn divide by mitosis to produce the haploid gametophyte.
Thenewgametophyteproducesgametes,andthecyclecontinues.Thisisthealternationofgenerations,andis
PAGE: 983
972 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
typical of plant reproduction (Figure 32.2).
Figure32.2Thealternationofgenerationsinangiospermsisdepictedinthisdiagram.(credit:modificationofworkby
Peter Coxhead)
The life cycle of higher plants is dominated by the sporophyte stage, with the gametophyte borne on the
sporophyte.Inferns,thegametophyteisfree-livingandverydistinctinstructurefromthediploidsporophyte.In
bryophytes, such as mosses, the haploid gametophyte is more developed than the sporophyte.
During the vegetative phase of growth, plants increase in size and produce a shoot system and a root system.
Astheyenterthereproductivephase,someofthebranchesstarttobearflowers.Manyflowersarebornesingly,
whereassomeareborneinclusters.Theflowerisborneonastalkknownasareceptacle.Flowershape,color,
and size are unique to each species, and are often used by taxonomists to classify plants.
Sexual Reproduction in Angiosperms
The lifecycle of angiosperms follows the alternation of generations explained previously. The haploid
gametophyte alternates with the diploid sporophyte during the sexual reproduction process of angiosperms.
Flowers contain the plant’s reproductive structures.
Flower Structure
A typical flower has four main parts—or whorls—known as the calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoecium
(Figure 32.3). The outermost whorl of the flower has green, leafy structures known as sepals. The sepals,
collectivelycalledthecalyx,helptoprotecttheunopenedbud.Thesecondwhorliscomprisedofpetals—usually,
brightly colored—collectively called the corolla. The number of sepals and petals varies depending on whether
the plant is a monocot or dicot. In monocots, petals usually number three or multiples of three; in dicots, the
number of petals is four or five, or multiples of four and five. Together, the calyx and corolla are known as
the perianth. The third whorl contains the male reproductive structures and is known as the androecium. The
androecium has stamens with anthers that contain the microsporangia. The innermost group of structures in
the flower is the gynoecium, or the female reproductive component(s). The carpel is the individual unit of the
gynoecium and has a stigma, style, and ovary. A flower may have one or multiple carpels.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 984
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 973
Figure32.3Thefourmainpartsoftheflowerarethecalyx,corolla,androecium,andgynoecium.Theandroecium
isthesumofallthemalereproductiveorgans,andthegynoeciumisthesumofthefemalereproductiveorgans.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Iftheantherismissing,whattypeofreproductivestructurewilltheflowerbeunabletoproduce?Whatterm
isusedtodescribeanincompleteflowerlackingtheandroecium?Whattermdescribesanincompleteflower
lacking a gynoecium?
If all four whorls (the calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoecium) are present, the flower is described as
complete. If any of the four parts is missing, the flower is known as incomplete. Flowers that contain both
an androecium and a gynoecium are called perfect, androgynous or hermaphrodites. There are two types
of incomplete flowers: staminate flowers contain only an androecium, and carpellate flowers have only a
gynoecium (Figure 32.4).
PAGE: 985
974 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Figure 32.4 The corn plant has both staminate (male) and carpellate (female) flowers. Staminate flowers, which are
clustered in the tassel at the tip of the stem, produce pollen grains. Carpellate flowers are clustered in the immature
ears.Eachstrandofsilkisastigma.Thecornkernelsareseedsthatdevelopontheearafterfertilization.Alsoshown
is the lower stem and root.
If both male and female flowers are borne on the same plant, the species iscalled monoecious (meaning “one
home”):examplesarecornandpea.Specieswithmaleandfemaleflowersborneonseparateplantsaretermed
dioecious,or“twohomes,”examplesofwhichareC.papayaandCannabis.Theovary,whichmaycontainone
ormultipleovules,maybeplacedaboveotherflowerparts,whichisreferredtoassuperior;or,itmaybeplaced
below the other flower parts, referred to as inferior (Figure 32.5).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 986
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 975
Figure32.5The(a)lilyisasuperiorflower,whichhastheovaryabovetheotherflowerparts.(b)Fuchsiaisaninferior
flower, which has the ovary beneath other flower parts. (credit a photo: modification of work by Benjamin Zwittnig;
credit b photo: modification of work by "Koshy Koshy"/Flickr)
Male Gametophyte (The Pollen Grain)
The male gametophyte develops and reaches maturity in an immature anther. In a plant’s male reproductive
organs, development of pollen takes place in a structure known as the microsporangium (Figure 32.6). The
microsporangia,whichareusuallybilobed,arepollensacsinwhichthemicrosporesdevelopintopollengrains.
These are found in the anther, which is at the end of the stamen—the long filament that supports the anther.
PAGE: 987
976 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Figure32.6Shownis(a)acrosssectionofanantherattwodevelopmentalstages.Theimmatureanther(top)contains
four microsporangia, or pollen sacs. Each microsporangium contains hundreds of microspore mother cells that will
eachgiverisetofourpollengrains.Thetapetumsupportsthedevelopmentandmaturationofthepollengrains.Upon
maturation of the pollen (bottom), the pollen sac walls split open and the pollen grains (male gametophytes) are
released, as shown in the (b) micrograph of an immature lily anther. In these scanning electron micrographs, pollen
sacsarereadytoburst,releasingtheirgrains.(credita:modificationofworkbyLibreTexts;b:modificationofworkby
Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Withinthemicrosporangium,themicrosporemothercelldividesbymeiosistogiverisetofourmicrospores,each
ofwhichwillultimatelyformapollengrain(Figure32.7).Aninnerlayerofcells,knownasthetapetum,provides
nutritiontothedevelopingmicrosporesandcontributeskeycomponentstothepollenwall.Maturepollengrains
containtwocells:agenerativecellandapollentubecell.Thegenerativecelliscontainedwithinthelargerpollen
tube cell. Upon germination, the tube cell forms the pollen tube through which the generative cell migrates to
enter the ovary. During its transit inside the pollen tube, the generative cell divides to form two male gametes
(sperm cells). Upon maturity, the microsporangia burst, releasing the pollen grains from the anther.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 988
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 977
Figure32.7Pollendevelopsfromthemicrosporemothercells.Thematurepollengrainiscomposedoftwocells:the
pollentubecellandthegenerativecell,whichisinsidethetubecell.Thepollengrainhastwocoverings:aninnerlayer
(intine) and an outer layer (exine). The inset scanning electron micrograph shows Arabidopsis lyrata pollen grains.
(credit “pollen micrograph”: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Each pollen grain has two coverings: the exine (thicker, outer layer) and the intine (Figure 32.7). The exine
contains sporopollenin, a complex waterproofing substance supplied by the tapetal cells. Sporopollenin allows
thepollentosurviveunderunfavorableconditionsandtobecarriedbywind,water,orbiologicalagentswithout
undergoing damage.
Female Gametophyte (The Embryo Sac)
Whilethedetailsmayvarybetweenspecies,theoveralldevelopmentofthefemalegametophytehastwodistinct
phases. First, in the process of megasporogenesis, a single cell in the diploid megasporangium—an area
of tissue in the ovules—undergoes meiosis to produce four megaspores, only one of which survives. During
the second phase, megagametogenesis, the surviving haploid megaspore undergoes mitosis to produce an
eight-nucleate, seven-cell female gametophyte, also known as the megagametophyte or embryo sac. Two of
the nuclei—the polar nuclei—move to the equator and fuse, forming a single, diploid central cell. This central
celllaterfuseswithaspermtoformthetriploidendosperm.Threenucleipositionthemselvesontheendofthe
embryo sac opposite the micropyle and develop into the antipodal cells, which later degenerate. The nucleus
closest to the micropyle becomes the female gamete, or egg cell, and the two adjacent nuclei develop into
synergid cells (Figure 32.8). The synergids help guide the pollen tube for successful fertilization, after which
they disintegrate. Once fertilization is complete, the resulting diploid zygote develops into the embryo, and the
PAGE: 989
978 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
fertilized ovule forms the other tissues of the seed.
A double-layered integument protects the megasporangium and, later, the embryo sac. The integument will
develop into the seed coat after fertilization and protect the entire seed. The ovule wall will become part of the
fruit.Theinteguments,whileprotectingthemegasporangium,donotencloseitcompletely,butleaveanopening
called themicropyle. The micropyle allows the pollen tube to enter the female gametophyte for fertilization.
Figure 32.8 As shown in this diagram of the embryo sac in angiosperms, the ovule is covered by integuments
andhasanopeningcalledamicropyle.Insidetheembryosacarethreeantipodalcells,twosynergids,acentral
cell, and the egg cell.
Anembryosacismissingthesynergids.Whatspecificimpactwouldyouexpectthistohaveonfertilization?
a. The pollen tube will be unable to form.
b. The pollen tube will form but will not be guided toward the egg.
c. Fertilization will not occur because the synergid is the egg.
d. Fertilization will occur but the embryo will not be able to grow.
Sexual Reproduction in Gymnosperms
As with angiosperms, the lifecycle of a gymnosperm is also characterized by alternation of generations. In
conifers such as pines, the green leafy part of the plant is the sporophyte, and the cones contain the male
and female gametophytes (Figure 32.9). The female cones are larger than the male cones and are positioned
towardsthetopofthetree;thesmall,maleconesarelocatedinthelowerregionofthetree.Becausethepollen
is shed and blown by the wind, this arrangement makes it difficult for a gymnosperm to self-pollinate.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 990
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 979
Figure32.9Thisimageshowsthelifecycleofaconifer.Pollenfrommaleconesblowsupintoupperbranches,where
it fertilizes female cones. Examples are shown of female and male cones. (credit “female”: modification of work by
“Geographer”/Wikimedia Commons; credit “male”: modification of work by Roger Griffith)
Male Gametophyte
Amaleconehasacentralaxisonwhichbracts,atypeofmodifiedleaf,areattached.Thebractsareknownas
microsporophylls (Figure 32.10)andarethesiteswheremicrosporeswilldevelop.Themicrosporesdevelop
inside the microsporangium. Within the microsporangium, cells known as microsporocytes divide by meiosis
to produce four haploid microspores. Further mitosis of the microspore produces two nuclei: the generative
nucleus, and the tube nucleus. Upon maturity, the male gametophyte (pollen) is released from the male cones
and is carried by the wind to land on the female cone.
Watch this video to see a cedar releasing its pollen in the wind. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66607/1.3/#eip-id1168023726478)
Female Gametophyte
The female cone also has a central axis on which bracts known as megasporophylls (Figure 32.10) are
present. In the female cone, megaspore mother cells are present in the megasporangium. The megaspore
mother cell divides by meiosis to produce four haploid megaspores. One of the megaspores divides to form
the multicellular female gametophyte, while the others divide to form the rest of the structure. The female
gametophyte is contained within a structure called the archegonium.
PAGE: 991
980 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Figure 32.10 This series of micrographs shows male and female gymnosperm gametophytes. (a) This male cone,
shown in cross section, has approximately 20 microsporophylls, each of which produces hundreds of male
gametophytes(pollengrains).(b)Pollengrainsarevisibleinthissinglemicrosporophyll.(c)Thismicrographshowsan
individualpollengrain.(d)Thiscrosssectionofafemaleconeshowsportionsofabout15megasporophylls.(e)The
ovule can be seen in this single megasporophyll. (f) Within this single ovule are the megaspore mother cell (MMC),
micropyle, and a pollen grain. (credit: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Reproductive Process
Uponlandingonthefemalecone,thetubecellofthepollenformsthepollentube,throughwhichthegenerative
cell migrates towards the female gametophyte through the micropyle. It takes approximately one year for
the pollen tube to grow and migrate towards the female gametophyte. The male gametophyte containing the
generativecellsplitsintotwospermnuclei,oneofwhichfuseswiththeegg,whiletheotherdegenerates.After
fertilizationoftheegg,thediploidzygoteisformed,whichdividesbymitosistoformtheembryo.Thescalesof
the cones are closed during development of the seed. The seed is covered by a seed coat, which is derived
from the female sporophyte. Seed development takes another one to two years. Once the seed is ready to be
dispersed, the bracts of the female cones open to allow the dispersal of seed; no fruit formation takes place
because gymnosperm seeds have no covering.
Angiosperms versus Gymnosperms
Gymnospermreproductiondiffersfromthatofangiospermsinseveralways(Figure32.11).Inangiosperms,the
female gametophyte exists in an enclosed structure—the ovule—which is within the ovary; in gymnosperms,
the female gametophyte is present on exposed bracts of the female cone. Double fertilization is a key event
in the lifecycle of angiosperms, but is completely absent in gymnosperms. The male and female gametophyte
structuresarepresentonseparatemaleandfemaleconesingymnosperms,whereasinangiosperms,theyare
apartoftheflower.Lastly,windplaysanimportantroleinpollinationingymnospermsbecausepollenisblownby
the wind to land on the female cones. Although many angiosperms are also wind-pollinated, animal pollination
is more common.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 992
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 981
Figure 32.11 (a) Angiosperms are flowering plants, and include grasses, herbs, shrubs and most deciduous trees,
while (b) gymnosperms are conifers. Both produce seeds but have different reproductive strategies. (credit a:
modification of work by Wendy Cutler; credit b: modification of work by Lews Castle UHI)
View an animation of the double fertilization process of angiosperms. (This multimedia resource will open
in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66607/1.3/#eip-id4418315)
32.2 | Pollination and Fertilization
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe what must occur for plant fertilization
• Explain cross-pollination and the ways in which it takes place
• Describe the process that leads to the development of a seed
• Define double fertilization
Inangiosperms,pollinationisdefinedastheplacementortransferofpollenfromtheanthertothestigmaofthe
same flower or another flower. In gymnosperms, pollination involves pollen transfer from the male cone to the
female cone. Upon transfer, the pollen germinates to form the pollen tube and the sperm for fertilizing the egg.
PollinationhasbeenwellstudiedsincethetimeofGregorMendel.Mendelsuccessfullycarriedoutself-aswell
as cross-pollination in garden peas while studying how characteristics were passed on from one generation to
thenext.Today’scropsarearesultofplantbreeding,whichemploysartificialselectiontoproducethepresent-
daycultivars.Acaseinpointistoday'scorn,whichisaresultofyearsofbreedingthatstartedwithitsancestor,
teosinte.TheteosintethattheancientMayansoriginallybegancultivatinghadtinyseeds—vastlydifferentfrom
today’s relatively giant ears of corn. Interestingly, though these two plants appear to be entirely different, the
genetic difference between them is miniscule.
Pollinationtakestwoforms:self-pollinationandcross-pollination.Self-pollination occurswhenthepollenfrom
theantherisdepositedonthestigmaofthesameflower,oranotherfloweronthesameplant.Cross-pollination
isthetransferofpollenfromtheantherofoneflowertothestigmaofanotherfloweronadifferentindividualof
thesamespecies.Self-pollinationoccursinflowerswherethestamenandcarpelmatureatthesametime,and
arepositionedsothatthepollencanlandontheflower’sstigma.Thismethodofpollinationdoesnotrequirean
PAGE: 993
982 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
investment from the plant to provide nectar and pollen as food for pollinators.
Explore this interactive website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/pollination) to review self-pollination and
cross-pollination.
Livingspeciesaredesignedtoensuresurvivaloftheirprogeny;thosethatfailbecomeextinct.Geneticdiversity
is therefore required so that in changing environmental or stress conditions, some of the progeny can survive.
Self-pollinationleadstotheproductionofplantswithlessgeneticdiversity,sincegeneticmaterialfromthesame
plantisusedtoformgametes,andeventually,thezygote.Incontrast,cross-pollination—orout-crossing—leads
to greater genetic diversity because the microgametophyte and megagametophyte are derived from different
plants.
Because cross-pollination allows for more genetic diversity, plants have developed many ways to avoid self-
pollination. In some species, the pollen and the ovary mature at different times. These flowers make self-
pollinationnearlyimpossible.Bythetimepollenmaturesandhasbeenshed,thestigmaofthisflowerismature
and can only be pollinated by pollen from another flower. Some flowers have developed physical features
that prevent self-pollination. The primrose is one such flower. Primroses have evolved two flower types with
differencesinantherandstigmalength:thepin-eyedflowerhasantherspositionedatthepollentube’shalfway
point,andthethrum-eyedflower’sstigmaislikewiselocatedatthehalfwaypoint.Insectseasilycross-pollinate
whileseekingthenectaratthebottomofthepollentube.Thisphenomenonisalsoknownasheterostyly.Many
plants,suchascucumber,havemaleandfemaleflowerslocatedondifferentpartsoftheplant,thusmakingself-
pollinationdifficult.Inyetotherspecies,themaleandfemaleflowersareborneondifferentplants(dioecious).All
ofthesearebarrierstoself-pollination;therefore,theplantsdependonpollinatorstotransferpollen.Themajority
of pollinators are biotic agents such as insects (like bees, flies, and butterflies), bats, birds, and other animals.
Other plant species are pollinated by abiotic agents, such as wind and water.
Incompatibility Genes in Flowers
Inrecentdecades,incompatibilitygenes—whichpreventpollenfromgerminatingorgrowingintothestigma
of a flower—have been discovered in many angiosperm species. If plants do not have compatible genes,
the pollen tube stops growing. Self-incompatibility is controlled by the S(sterility) locus. Pollen tubes have
to grow through the tissue of the stigma and style before they can enter the ovule. The carpel is selective
inthetypeofpollenitallowstogrowinside.Theinteractionisprimarilybetweenthepollenandthestigma
epidermal cells. In some plants, like cabbage, the pollen is rejected at the surface of the stigma, and the
unwanted pollen does not germinate. In other plants, pollen tube germination is arrested after growing
one-third the length of the style, leading to pollen tube death. Pollen tube death is due either to apoptosis
(programmed cell death) or to degradation of pollen tube RNA. The degradation results from the activity
of a ribonuclease encoded by the S locus. The ribonuclease is secreted from the cells of the style in the
extracellular matrix, which lies alongside the growing pollen tube.
In summary, self-incompatibility is a mechanism that prevents self-fertilization in many flowering plant
species.Theworkingofthisself-incompatibilitymechanismhasimportantconsequencesforplantbreeders
because it inhibits the production of inbred and hybrid plants.
Pollination by Insects
Beesareperhapsthemostimportantpollinatorofmanygardenplantsandmostcommercialfruittrees(Figure
32.12). The most common species of bees are bumblebees and honeybees. Since bees cannot see the color
red,bee-pollinatedflowersusuallyhaveshadesofblue,yellow,orothercolors.Beescollectenergy-richpollen
ornectarfortheirsurvivalandenergyneeds.Theyvisitflowersthatareopenduringtheday,arebrightlycolored,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 994
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 983
have a strong aroma or scent, and have a tubular shape, typically with the presence of a nectar guide. A
nectar guide includes regions on the flower petals that are visible only to bees, and not to humans; it helps
to guide bees to the center of the flower, thus making the pollination process more efficient. The pollen sticks
to the bees’ fuzzy hair, and when the bee visits another flower, some of the pollen is transferred to the second
flower.Recently,therehavebeenmanyreportsaboutthedecliningpopulationofhoneybees.Manyflowerswill
remain unpollinated and not bear seed if honeybees disappear. The impact on commercial fruit growers could
be devastating.
Figure 32.12Insects, such as bees, are important agents of pollination. (credit: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Many flies are attracted to flowers that have a decaying smell or an odor of rotting flesh. These flowers, which
producenectar,usuallyhavedullcolors,suchasbrownorpurple.Theyarefoundonthecorpseflowerorvoodoo
lily(Amorphophallus),dragonarum(Dracunculus),andcarrionflower(Stapleia,Rafflesia).Thenectarprovides
energy, whereas the pollen provides protein. Wasps are also important insect pollinators, and pollinate many
species of figs.
Butterflies,suchasthemonarch,pollinatemanygardenflowersandwildflowers,whichusuallyoccurinclusters.
Theseflowersarebrightlycolored,haveastrongfragrance,areopenduringtheday,andhavenectarguidesto
make access to nectar easier. The pollen is picked up and carried on the butterfly’s limbs. Moths, on the other
hand, pollinate flowers during the late afternoon and night. The flowers pollinated by moths are pale or white
andareflat,enablingthemothstoland.Onewell-studiedexampleofamoth-pollinatedplantistheyuccaplant,
whichispollinatedbytheyuccamoth.Theshapeoftheflowerandmothhaveadaptedinsuchawayastoallow
successful pollination. The moth deposits pollen on the sticky stigma for fertilization to occur later. The female
moth also deposits eggs into the ovary. As the eggs develop into larvae, they obtain food from the flower and
developing seeds. Thus, both the insect and flower benefit from each other in this symbiotic relationship. The
corn earworm moth and Gaura plant have a similar relationship (Figure 32.13).
Figure 32.13A corn earworm sips nectar from a night-blooming Gaura plant. (credit: Juan Lopez, USDA ARS)
PAGE: 995
984 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Pollination by Bats
Inthetropicsanddeserts,batsareoftenthepollinatorsofnocturnalflowerssuchasagave,guava,andmorning
glory. The flowers are usually large and white or pale-colored; thus, they can be distinguished from the dark
surroundingsatnight.Theflowershaveastrong,fruity,ormuskyfragranceandproducelargeamountsofnectar.
They are naturally large and wide-mouthed to accommodate the head of the bat. As the bats seek the nectar,
their faces and heads become covered with pollen, which is then transferred to the next flower.
Pollination by Birds
Many species of small birds, such as the hummingbird (Figure 32.14) and sun birds, are pollinators for plants
suchasorchidsandotherwildflowers.Flowersvisitedbybirdsareusuallysturdyandareorientedinsuchaway
astoallowthebirdstostayneartheflowerwithoutgettingtheirwingsentangledinthenearbyflowers.Theflower
typicallyhasacurved,tubularshape,whichallowsaccessforthebird’sbeak.Brightlycolored,odorlessflowers
that are open during the day are pollinated by birds. As a bird seeks energy-rich nectar, pollen is deposited
on the bird’s head and neck and is then transferred to the next flower it visits. Botanists have been known to
determinetherangeofextinctplantsbycollectingandidentifyingpollenfrom200-year-oldbirdspecimensfrom
the same site.
Figure 32.14 Hummingbirds have adaptations that allow them to reach the nectar of certain tubular flowers. (credit:
Lori Branham)
Pollination by Wind
Most species of conifers, and many angiosperms, such as grasses, maples and oaks, are pollinated by wind.
Pineconesarebrownandunscented,whiletheflowersofwind-pollinatedangiospermspeciesareusuallygreen,
small, may have small or no petals, and produce large amounts of pollen. Unlike the typical insect-pollinated
flowers, flowers adapted to pollination by wind do not produce nectar or scent. In wind-pollinated species, the
microsporangia hang out of the flower, and, as the wind blows, the lightweight pollen is carried with it (Figure
32.15). The flowers usually emerge early in the spring, before the leaves, so that the leaves do not block the
movement of the wind. The pollen is deposited on the exposed feathery stigma of the flower (Figure 32.16).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 996
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 985
Figure 32.15A person knocks pollen from a pine tree.
Figure 32.16 These male (a) and female (b) catkins are from the goat willow tree (Salix caprea). Note how both
structures are light and feathery to better disperse and catch the wind-blown pollen.
Pollination by Water
Someweeds,suchasAustralianseagrassandpondweeds,arepollinatedbywater.Thepollenfloatsonwater,
and when it comes into contact with the flower, it is deposited inside the flower.
PAGE: 997
986 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Pollination by Deception
Orchidsarehighlyvaluedflowers,withmanyrarevarieties(Figure32.17).Theygrowinarangeofspecific
habitats, mainly in the tropics of Asia, South America, and Central America. At least 25,000 species of
orchids have been identified.
Figure32.17Certainorchidsusefooddeceptionorsexualdeceptiontoattractpollinators.Shownhereisabee
orchid (Ophrys apifera). (credit: David Evans)
Flowers often attract pollinators with food rewards, in the form of nectar. However, some species of orchid
are an exception to this standard: they have evolved different ways to attract the desired pollinators.
They use a method known as food deception, in which bright colors and perfumes are offered, but no
food. Anacamptis morio, commonly known as the green-winged orchid, bears bright purple flowers and
emits a strong scent. The bumblebee, its main pollinator, is attracted to the flower because of the strong
scent—whichusuallyindicatesfoodforabee—andintheprocess,picksupthepollentobetransportedto
another flower.
Other orchids use sexual deception. Chiloglottis trapeziformis emits a compound that smells the same as
the pheromone emitted by a female wasp to attract male wasps. The male wasp is attracted to the scent,
lands on the orchid flower, and in the process, transfers pollen. Some orchids, like the Australian hammer
orchid, use scent as well as visual trickery in yet another sexual deception strategy to attract wasps. The
flowerofthisorchidmimicstheappearanceofafemalewaspandemitsapheromone.Themalewasptries
tomatewithwhatappearstobeafemalewasp,andintheprocess,picksuppollen,whichitthentransfers
to the next counterfeit mate.
Double Fertilization
After pollen is deposited on the stigma, it must germinate and grow through the style to reach the ovule. The
microspores, or the pollen, contain two cells: the pollen tube cell and the generative cell. The pollen tube cell
grows into a pollen tube through which the generative cell travels. The germination of the pollen tube requires
water, oxygen, and certain chemical signals. As it travels through the style to reach the embryo sac, the pollen
tube’sgrowthissupportedbythetissuesofthestyle.Inthemeantime,ifthegenerativecellhasnotalreadysplit
into two cells, it now divides to form two sperm cells. The pollen tube is guided by the chemicals secreted by
the synergids present in the embryo sac, and it enters the ovule sac through the micropyle. Of the two sperm
cells,onespermfertilizestheeggcell,formingadiploidzygote;theotherspermfuseswiththetwopolarnuclei,
formingatriploidcellthatdevelopsintotheendosperm.Together,thesetwofertilizationeventsinangiosperms
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 998
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 987
areknownasdoublefertilization(Figure32.18).Afterfertilizationiscomplete,nootherspermcanenter.The
fertilized ovule forms the seed, whereas the tissues of the ovary become the fruit, usually enveloping the seed.
Figure 32.18 In angiosperms, one sperm fertilizes the egg to form the 2n zygote, and the other sperm fertilizes the
central cell to form the 3nendosperm. This is called a double fertilization.
Afterfertilization,thezygotedividestoformtwocells:theuppercell,orterminalcell,andthelower,orbasal,cell.
Thedivisionofthebasalcellgivesrisetothesuspensor,whicheventuallymakesconnectionwiththematernal
tissue. The suspensor provides a route for nutrition to be transported from the mother plant to the growing
embryo. The terminal cell also divides, giving rise to a globular-shaped proembryo (Figure 32.19a). In dicots
(eudicots), the developing embryo has a heart shape, due to the presence of the two rudimentary cotyledons
(Figure 32.19b). In non-endospermic dicots, such as Capsella bursa, the endosperm develops initially, but is
thendigested,andthefoodreservesaremovedintothetwocotyledons.Astheembryoandcotyledonsenlarge,
theyrunoutofroominsidethedevelopingseed,andareforcedtobend(Figure32.19c).Ultimately,theembryo
and cotyledons fill the seed (Figure 32.19d), and the seed is ready for dispersal. Embryonic development is
suspended after some time, and growth is resumed only when the seed germinates. The developing seedling
will rely on the food reserves stored in the cotyledons until the first set of leaves begin photosynthesis.
PAGE: 999
988 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Figure 32.19 Shown are the stages of embryo development in the ovule of a shepherd’s purse (Capsella bursa).
After fertilization, the zygote divides to form an upper terminal cell and a lower basal cell. (a) In the first stage of
development, the terminal cell divides, forming a globular pro-embryo. The basal cell also divides, giving rise to the
suspensor.(b)Inthesecondstage,thedevelopingembryohasaheartshapeduetothepresenceofcotyledons.(c)
Inthethirdstage,thegrowingembryorunsoutofroomandstartstobend.(d)Eventually,itcompletelyfillstheseed.
(credit: modification of work by Robert R. Wise; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Development of the Seed
The mature ovule develops into the seed. A typical seed contains a seed coat, cotyledons, endosperm, and a
single embryo (Figure 32.20).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1000
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 989
Figure32.20Thestructuresofdicotandmonocotseedsareshown.Dicots(left)havetwocotyledons.Monocots,
suchascorn(right),haveonecotyledon,calledthescutellum;itchannelsnutritiontothegrowingembryo.Both
monocotanddicotembryoshaveaplumulethatformstheleaves,ahypocotylthatformsthestem,andaradicle
thatformstheroot.Theembryonicaxiscompriseseverythingbetweentheplumuleandtheradicle,notincluding
the cotyledon(s).
What of the following statements is true?
a. Both monocots and dicots have an endosperm.
b. The radicle develops into the root.
c. The plumule is part of the epicotyl.
d. The endosperm is part of the embryo.
Thestorageoffoodreservesinangiospermseedsdiffersbetweenmonocotsanddicots.Inmonocots,suchas
corn and wheat, the single cotyledon is called a scutellum; the scutellum is connected directly to the embryo
via vascular tissue (xylem and phloem). Food reserves are stored in the large endosperm. Upon germination,
enzymes are secreted by the aleurone, a single layer of cells just inside the seed coat that surrounds the
endosperm and embryo. The enzymes degrade the stored carbohydrates, proteins and lipids, the products
of which are absorbed by the scutellum and transported via a vasculature strand to the developing embryo.
Therefore, the scutellum can be seen to be an absorptive organ, not a storage organ.
Thetwocotyledonsinthedicotseedalsohavevascularconnectionstotheembryo.Inendospermicdicots,the
foodreservesarestoredintheendosperm.Duringgermination,thetwocotyledonsthereforeactasabsorptive
organs to take up the enzymatically released food reserves, much like in monocots (monocots, by definition,
also have endospermic seeds). Tobacco (Nicotiana tabaccum), tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), and pepper
(Capsicumannuum)areexamplesofendospermicdicots.Innon-endospermicdicots,thetriploidendosperm
develops normally following double fertilization, but the endosperm food reserves are quickly remobilized and
movedintothedevelopingcotyledonforstorage.Thetwohalvesofapeanutseed(Arachishypogaea)andthe
split peas (Pisum sativum) of split pea soup are individual cotyledons loaded with food reserves.
Theseed,alongwiththeovule,isprotectedbyaseedcoatthatisformedfromtheintegumentsoftheovulesac.
In dicots, the seed coat is further divided into an outer coat known as the testa and inner coat known as the
tegmen.
Theembryonicaxisconsistsofthreeparts:theplumule,theradicle,andthehypocotyl.Theportionoftheembryo
betweenthecotyledonattachmentpointandtheradicleisknownasthehypocotyl(hypocotylmeans“belowthe
cotyledons”).Theembryonicaxisterminatesinaradicle(theembryonicroot),whichistheregionfromwhichthe
rootwilldevelop.Indicots,thehypocotylsextendaboveground,givingrisetothestemoftheplant.Inmonocots,
the hypocotyl does not show above ground because monocots do not exhibit stem elongation. The part of the
embryonic axis that projects above the cotyledons is known as the epicotyl. The plumule is composed of the
epicotyl, young leaves, and the shoot apical meristem.
Upon germination in dicot seeds, the epicotyl is shaped like a hook with the plumule pointing downwards. This
shapeiscalledtheplumulehook,anditpersistsaslongasgerminationproceedsinthedark.Therefore,asthe
PAGE: 1001
990 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
epicotyl pushes through the tough and abrasive soil, the plumule is protected from damage. Upon exposure to
light, the hypocotyl hook straightens out, the young foliage leaves face the sun and expand, and the epicotyl
continues to elongate. During this time, the radicle is also growing and producing the primary root. As it grows
downward to form the tap root, lateral roots branch off to all sides, producing the typical dicot tap root system.
In monocot seeds (Figure 32.21), the testa and tegmen of the seed coat are fused. As the seed germinates,
theprimaryrootemerges,protectedbytheroot-tipcovering:thecoleorhiza.Next,theprimaryshootemerges,
protected by the coleoptile: the covering of the shoot tip. Upon exposure to light (i.e., when the plumule has
exited the soil and the protective coleoptile is no longer needed), elongation of the coleoptile ceases and the
leaves expand and unfold. At the other end of the embryonic axis, the primary root soon dies, while other,
adventitiousroots(rootsthatdonotarisefromtheusualplace–i.e.,theroot)emergefromthebaseofthestem.
This gives the monocot a fibrous root system.
Figure 32.21 As this monocot grass seed germinates, the primary root, or radicle, emerges first, followed by the
primary shoot, or coleoptile, and the adventitious roots.
Seed Germination
Many mature seeds enter a period of inactivity, or extremely low metabolic activity: a process known as
dormancy, which may last for months, years, or even centuries. Dormancy helps keep seeds viable during
unfavorable conditions. Upon a return to favorable conditions, seed germination takes place. Favorable
conditionscouldbeasdiverseasmoisture,light,cold,fire,orchemicaltreatments.Afterheavyrains,manynew
seedlingsemerge.Forestfiresalsoleadtotheemergenceofnewseedlings.Someseedsrequirevernalization
(cold treatment) before they can germinate. This guarantees that seeds produced by plants in temperate
climates will not germinate until the spring. Plants growing in hot climates may have seeds that need a heat
treatmentinordertogerminate,toavoidgerminationinthehot,drysummers.Inmanyseeds,thepresenceofa
thickseedcoatretardstheabilitytogerminate.Scarification,whichincludesmechanicalorchemicalprocesses
to soften the seed coat, is often employed before germination. Presoaking in hot water, or passing through an
acid environment, such as an animal’s digestive tract, may also be employed.
Depending on seed size, the time taken for a seedling to emerge may vary. Species with large seeds have
enough food reserves to germinate deep below ground, and still extend their epicotyl all the way to the soil
surface.Seedsofsmall-seededspeciesusuallyrequirelightasagerminationcue.Thisensurestheseedsonly
germinate at or near the soil surface (where the light is greatest). If they were to germinate too far underneath
the surface, the developing seedling would not have enough food reserves to reach the sunlight.
Development of Fruit and Fruit Types
Afterfertilization,theovaryoftheflowerusuallydevelopsintothefruit.Fruitsareusuallyassociatedwithhaving
a sweet taste; however, not all fruits are sweet. Botanically, the term “fruit” is used for a ripened ovary. In most
cases,flowersinwhichfertilizationhastakenplacewilldevelopintofruits,andflowersinwhichfertilizationhas
nottakenplacewillnot.Somefruitsdevelopfromtheovaryandareknownastruefruits,whereasothersdevelop
fromotherpartsofthefemalegametophyteandareknownasaccessoryfruits.Thefruitenclosestheseedsand
thedevelopingembryo,therebyprovidingitwithprotection. Fruitsareofmanytypes,dependingontheirorigin
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1002
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 991
andtexture.Thesweettissueoftheblackberry,theredfleshofthetomato,theshellofthepeanut,andthehull
ofcorn(thetough,thinpartthatgetsstuckinyourteethwhenyoueatpopcorn)areallfruits.Asthefruitmatures,
the seeds also mature.
Fruitsmaybeclassifiedassimple,aggregate,multiple,oraccessory,dependingontheirorigin(Figure32.22).
Ifthefruitdevelopsfromasinglecarpelorfusedcarpelsofasingleovary,itisknownasasimplefruit,asseen
innutsandbeans.Anaggregate fruitisonethatdevelopsfrommorethanonecarpel,butallareinthesame
flower:thematurecarpelsfusetogethertoformtheentirefruit,asseenintheraspberry.Multiplefruitdevelops
from an inflorescence or a cluster of flowers. An example is the pineapple, where the flowers fuse together to
formthefruit.Accessoryfruits(sometimescalledfalsefruits)arenotderivedfromtheovary,butfromanother
part of the flower, such as the receptacle (strawberry) or the hypanthium (apples and pears).
Figure 32.22 There are four main types of fruits. Simple fruits, such as these nuts, are derived from a single ovary.
Aggregate fruits, like raspberries, form from many carpels that fuse together. Multiple fruits, such as pineapple, form
from a cluster of flowers called an inflorescence. Accessory fruit, like the apple, are formed from a part of the plant
otherthantheovary.(credit"nuts":modificationofworkbyPetrKratochvil;credit"raspberries":modificationofworkby
Cory Zanker; credit "pineapple": modification of work by Howie Le; credit "apple": modification of work by Paolo Neo)
Fruits generally have three parts: the exocarp (the outermost skin or covering), the mesocarp (middle part of
the fruit), and the endocarp (the inner part of the fruit). Together, all three are known as the pericarp. The
mesocarpisusuallythefleshy,ediblepartofthefruit;however,insomefruits,suchasthealmond,theendocarp
is the edible part. In many fruits, two or all three of the layers are fused, and are indistinguishable at maturity.
Fruits can be dry or fleshy. Furthermore, fruits can be divided into dehiscent or indehiscent types. Dehiscent
fruits,suchaspeas,readilyreleasetheirseeds,whileindehiscentfruits,likepeaches,relyondecaytorelease
their seeds.
Fruit and Seed Dispersal
The fruit has a single purpose: seed dispersal. Seeds contained within fruits need to be dispersed far from the
PAGE: 1003
992 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
mother plant, so they may find favorable and less competitive conditions in which to germinate and grow.
Some fruit have built-in mechanisms so they can disperse by themselves, whereas others require the help of
agentslikewind,water,andanimals(Figure32.23).Modificationsinseedstructure,composition,andsizehelp
in dispersal. Wind-dispersed fruit are lightweight and may have wing-like appendages that allow them to be
carried by the wind. Some have a parachute-like structure to keep them afloat. Some fruits—for example, the
dandelion—have hairy, weightless structures that are suited to dispersal by wind.
Seedsdispersedbywaterarecontainedinlightandbuoyantfruit,givingthemtheabilitytofloat.Coconutsare
wellknownfortheirabilitytofloatonwatertoreachlandwheretheycangerminate.Similarly,willowandsilver
birches produce lightweight fruit that can float on water.
Animalsandbirdseatfruits,andtheseedsthatarenotdigestedareexcretedintheirdroppingssomedistance
away.Someanimals,likesquirrels,buryseed-containingfruitsforlateruse;ifthesquirreldoesnotfinditsstash
offruit,andifconditionsarefavorable,theseedsgerminate.Somefruits,likethecocklebur,havehooksorsticky
structuresthatsticktoananimal'scoatandarethentransportedtoanotherplace.Humansalsoplayabigrolein
dispersing seeds when they carry fruits to new places and throw away the inedible part that contains the seeds.
Alloftheabovemechanismsallowforseedstobedispersedthroughspace,muchlikeananimal’soffspringcan
move to a new location. Seed dormancy, which was described earlier, allows plants to disperse their progeny
through time: something animals cannot do. Dormant seeds can wait months, years, or even decades for the
proper conditions for germination and propagation of the species.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 32.23 Fruits and seeds are dispersed by various means. (a) Dandelion seeds are dispersed by wind, the (b)
coconutseedisdispersedbywater,andthe(c)acornisdispersedbyanimalsthatcacheandthenforgetit.(credita:
modificationofworkby"Rosendahl"/Flickr;creditb:modificationofworkbyShineOa;creditc:modificationofworkby
Paolo Neo)
32.3 | Asexual Reproduction
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare the mechanisms and methods of natural and artificial asexual reproduction
• Describe the advantages and disadvantages of natural and artificial asexual reproduction
• Discuss plant life spans
Many plants are able to propagate themselves using asexual reproduction. This method does not require
the investment required to produce a flower, attract pollinators, or find a means of seed dispersal. Asexual
reproduction produces plants that are genetically identical to the parent plant because no mixing of male and
femalegametestakesplace.Traditionally,theseplantssurvivewellunderstableenvironmentalconditionswhen
compared with plants produced from sexual reproduction because they carry genes identical to those of their
parents.
Many different types of roots exhibit asexual reproduction (Figure 32.24). The corm is used by gladiolus and
garlic.Bulbs,suchasascalybulbinliliesandatunicatebulbindaffodils,areothercommonexamples.Apotato
is a stem tuber, while parsnip propagates from a taproot. Ginger and iris produce rhizomes, while ivy uses an
adventitious root(arootarisingfromaplantpartotherthanthemainorprimaryroot), andthestrawberryplant
has a stolon, which is also called a runner.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1004
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 993
Figure32.24Differenttypesofstemsallowforasexualreproduction.(a)Thecormofagarlicplantlookssimilarto(b)a
tulipbulb,butthecormissolidtissue,whilethebulbconsistsoflayersofmodifiedleavesthatsurroundanunderground
stem. Both corms and bulbs can self-propagate, giving rise to new plants. (c) Ginger forms masses of stems called
rhizomesthatcangiverisetomultipleplants.(d)Potatoplantsformfleshystemtubers.Eacheyeinthestemtubercan
give rise to a new plant. (e) Strawberry plants form stolons: stems that grow at the soil surface or just below ground
andcangiverisetonewplants.(credita:modificationofworkbyDwightSipler;creditc:modificationofworkbyAlbert
Cahalan, USDA ARS; credit d: modification of work by Richard North; credit e: modification of work by Julie Magro)
Some plants can produce seeds without fertilization. Either the ovule or part of the ovary, which is diploid in
nature, gives rise to a new seed. This method of reproduction is known asapomixis.
Anadvantageofasexualreproductionisthattheresultingplantwillreachmaturityfaster.Sincethenewplantis
PAGE: 1005
994 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
arising from an adult plant or plant parts, it will also be sturdier than a seedling. Asexual reproduction can take
place by natural or artificial (assisted by humans) means.
Natural Methods of Asexual Reproduction
Naturalmethodsofasexualreproductionincludestrategiesthatplantshavedevelopedtoself-propagate.Many
plants—like ginger, onion, gladioli, and dahlia—continue to grow from buds that are present on the surface of
the stem. In some plants, such as the sweet potato, adventitious roots or runners can give rise to new plants
(Figure 32.25). In Bryophyllum and kalanchoe, the leaves have small buds on their margins. When these are
detachedfromtheplant,theygrowintoindependentplants;or,theymaystartgrowingintoindependentplantsif
the leaf touches the soil. Some plants can be propagated through cuttings alone.
Figure 32.25 Astolon, orrunner,isastemthat runsalongtheground. At thenodes, itformsadventitious rootsand
buds that grow into a new plant.
Artificial Methods of Asexual Reproduction
Thesemethodsarefrequentlyemployedtogiverisetonew,andsometimesnovel,plants.Theyincludegrafting,
cutting, layering, and micropropagation.
Grafting
Grafting has long been used to produce novel varieties of roses, citrus species, and other plants. In grafting,
twoplantspeciesareused;partofthestemofthedesirableplantisgraftedontoarootedplantcalledthestock.
The part that is grafted or attached is called the scion. Both are cut at an oblique angle (any angle other than
aright angle), placed in close contact with each other, and are then held together (Figure 32.26). Matching up
thesetwosurfacesascloselyaspossibleisextremelyimportantbecausethesewillbeholdingtheplanttogether.
The vascular systems of the two plants grow and fuse, forming a graft. After a period of time, the scion starts
producing shoots, and eventually starts bearing flowers and fruits. Grafting is widely used in viticulture (grape
growing)andthecitrusindustry.Scionscapableofproducingaparticularfruitvarietyaregraftedontorootstock
with specific resistance to disease.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1006
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 995
Figure32.26Graftingisanartificialmethodofasexualreproductionusedtoproduceplantscombiningfavorablestem
characteristicswithfavorablerootcharacteristics.Thestemoftheplanttobegraftedisknownasthescion,andthe
root is called the stock.
Cutting
Plants such as coleus and money plant are propagated through stem cuttings, where a portion of the stem
containing nodes and internodes is placed in moist soil and allowed to root. In some species, stems can start
producing a root even when placed only in water. For example, leaves of the African violet will root if kept in
water undisturbed for several weeks.
Layering
Layeringisamethodinwhichastemattachedtotheplantisbentandcoveredwithsoil.Youngstemsthatcan
bebenteasilywithoutanyinjuryarepreferred.Jasmineandbougainvillea(paperflower)canbepropagatedthis
way (Figure 32.27). In some plants, a modified form of layering known as air layering is employed. A portion
of the bark or outermost covering of the stem is removed and covered with moss, which is then taped. Some
gardeners also apply rooting hormone. After some time, roots will appear, and this portion of the plant can be
removed and transplanted into a separate pot.
PAGE: 1007
996 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
Figure 32.27 In layering, a part of the stem is buried so that it forms a new plant. (credit: modification of work by
Pearson Scott Foresman, donated to the Wikimedia Foundation)
Micropropagation
Micropropagation(alsocalledplanttissueculture)isamethodofpropagatingalargenumberofplantsfroma
singleplantinashorttimeunderlaboratoryconditions(Figure32.28).Thismethodallowspropagationofrare,
endangeredspeciesthatmaybedifficulttogrowundernaturalconditions,areeconomicallyimportant,orarein
demand as disease-free plants.
Figure 32.28Micropropagation is used to propagate plants in sterile conditions. (credit: Nikhilesh Sanyal)
To start plant tissue culture, a part of the plant such as a stem, leaf, embryo, anther, or seed can be used.
The plant material is thoroughly sterilized using a combination of chemical treatments standardized for that
species.Understerileconditions,theplantmaterialisplacedonaplanttissueculturemediumthatcontainsall
theminerals,vitamins,andhormonesrequiredbytheplant.Theplantpartoftengivesrisetoanundifferentiated
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1008
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 997
mass known as callus, from which individual plantlets begin to grow after a period of time. These can be
separated and are first grown under greenhouse conditions before they are moved to field conditions.
Plant Life Spans
Thelengthoftimefromthebeginningofdevelopmenttothedeathofaplantiscalleditslifespan.Thelifecycle,
ontheotherhand,isthesequenceofstagesaplantgoesthroughfromseedgerminationtoseedproductionof
thematureplant.Someplants,suchasannuals,onlyneedafewweekstogrow,produceseedsanddie.Other
plants, such as the bristlecone pine, live for thousands of years. Some bristlecone pines have a documented
age of 4,500 years (Figure 32.29). Even as some parts of a plant, such as regions containing meristematic
tissue—the area of active plant growth consisting of undifferentiated cells capable of cell division—continue
to grow, some parts undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). The cork found on stems, and the water-
conducting tissue of the xylem, for example, are composed of dead cells.
Figure 32.29 The bristlecone pine, shown here in the Ancient Bristlecone Pine Forest in the White Mountains of
eastern California, has been known to live for 4,500 years. (credit: Rick Goldwaser)
Plant species that complete their lifecycle in one season are known as annuals, an example of which is
Arabidopsis, or mouse-ear cress. Biennials such as carrots complete their lifecycle in two seasons. In a
biennial’s first season, the plant has a vegetative phase, whereas in the next season, it completes its
reproductivephase.Commercialgrowersharvestthecarrotrootsafterthefirstyearofgrowth,anddonotallow
the plants to flower. Perennials, such as the magnolia, complete their lifecycle in two years or more.
In another classification based on flowering frequency, monocarpic plants flower only once in their lifetime;
examples include bamboo and yucca. During the vegetative period of their life cycle (which may be as long as
120yearsinsomebamboospecies),theseplantsmayreproduceasexuallyandaccumulateagreatdealoffood
materialthatwillberequiredduringtheironce-in-a-lifetimefloweringandsettingofseedafterfertilization.Soon
afterflowering,theseplantsdie.Polycarpicplantsformflowersmanytimesduringtheirlifetime.Fruittrees,such
asappleandorangetrees,arepolycarpic;theyflowereveryyear.Otherpolycarpicspecies,suchasperennials,
flower several times during their life span, but not each year. By this means, the plant does not require all its
nutrients to be channelled towards flowering each year.
Asisthecasewithalllivingorganisms,geneticsandenvironmentalconditionshavearoletoplayindetermining
how long a plant will live. Susceptibility to disease, changing environmental conditions, drought, cold, and
competitionfornutrientsaresomeofthefactorsthatdeterminethesurvivalofaplant.Plantscontinuetogrow,
despite the presence of dead tissue such as cork. Individual parts of plants, such as flowers and leaves, have
differentratesofsurvival.Inmanytrees,theolderleavesturnyellowandeventuallyfallfromthetree.Leaffallis
triggeredbyfactorssuchasadecreaseinphotosyntheticefficiency,duetoshadingbyupperleaves,oroxidative
damage incurred as a result of photosynthetic reactions. The components of the part to be shed are recycled
by the plant for use in other processes, such as development of seed and storage. This process is known as
nutrient recycling.
The aging of a plant and all the associated processes is known as senescence, which is marked by several
complexbiochemicalchanges.Oneofthecharacteristicsofsenescenceisthebreakdownofchloroplasts,which
is characterized by the yellowing of leaves. The chloroplasts contain components of photosynthetic machinery
such as membranes and proteins. Chloroplasts also contain DNA. The proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids are
PAGE: 1009
998 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
broken down by specific enzymes into smaller molecules and salvaged by the plant to support the growth of
other plant tissues.
Thecomplexpathwaysofnutrientrecyclingwithinaplantarenotwellunderstood.Hormonesareknowntoplay
aroleinsenescence.Applicationsofcytokininsandethylenedelayorpreventsenescence;incontrast,abscissic
acid causes premature onset of senescence.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1010
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 999
KEY TERMS
accessory fruit fruit derived from tissues other than the ovary
aggregate fruit fruit that develops from multiple carpels in the same flower
aleurone single layer of cells just inside the seed coat that secretes enzymes upon germination
androecium sum of all the stamens in a flower
antipodals the three cells away from the micropyle
apomixis process by which seeds are produced without fertilization of sperm and egg
coleoptile covering of the shoot tip, found in germinating monocot seeds
coleorhiza covering of the root tip, found in germinating monocot seeds
cotyledon fleshy part of seed that provides nutrition to the seed
cross-pollination transfer of pollen from the anther of one flower to the stigma of a different flower
cutting methodofasexualreproductionwhereaportionofthestemcontainsnodesandinternodesisplacedin
moist soil and allowed to root
dormancy period of no growth and very slow metabolic processes
double fertilization twofertilizationeventsinangiosperms;onespermfuseswiththeegg,formingthezygote,
whereas the other sperm fuses with the polar nuclei, forming endosperm
endocarp innermost part of fruit
endosperm triploidstructureresultingfromfusionofaspermwithpolarnuclei,whichservesasanutritivetissue
for embryo
endospermic dicot dicot that stores food reserves in the endosperm
epicotyl embryonic shoot above the cotyledons
exine outermost covering of pollen
exocarp outermost covering of a fruit
gametophyte multicellular stage of the plant that gives rise to haploid gametes or spores
grafting method of asexual reproduction where the stem from one plant species is spliced to a different plant
gravitropism response of a plant growth in the same direction as gravity
gynoecium the sum of all the carpels in a flower
hypocotyl embryonic axis above the cotyledons
intine inner lining of the pollen
layering method of propagating plants by bending a stem under the soil
megagametogenesis second phase of female gametophyte development, during which the surviving haploid
megaspore undergoes mitosis to produce an eight-nucleate, seven-cell female gametophyte, also known
as the megagametophyte or embryo sac.
megasporangium tissue found in the ovary that gives rise to the female gamete or egg
PAGE: 1011
1000 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
megasporogenesis first phase of female gametophyte development, during which a single cell in the diploid
megasporangium undergoes meiosis to produce four megaspores, only one of which survives
megasporophyll bract (a type of modified leaf) on the central axis of a female gametophyte
mesocarp middle part of a fruit
micropropagation propagation of desirable plants from a plant part; carried out in a laboratory
micropyle opening on the ovule sac through which the pollen tube can gain entry
microsporangium tissue that gives rise to the microspores or the pollen grain
microsporophyll central axis of a male cone on which bracts (a type of modified leaf) are attached
monocarpic plants that flower once in their lifetime
multiple fruit fruit that develops from multiple flowers on an inflorescence
nectar guide pigment pattern on a flower that guides an insect to the nectaries
non-endospermic dicot dicot that stores food reserves in the developing cotyledon
perianth (also,petalorsepal)partoftheflowerconsistingofthecalyxand/orcorolla;formstheouterenvelope
of the flower
pericarp collectivetermdescribingtheexocarp,mesocarp,andendocarp;thestructurethatenclosestheseed
and is a part of the fruit
plumule shoot that develops from the germinating seed
polar nuclei found in the ovule sac; fusion with one sperm cell forms the endosperm
pollination transfer of pollen to the stigma
polycarpic plants that flower several times in their lifetime
radicle original root that develops from the germinating seed
scarification mechanical or chemical processes to soften the seed coat
scion the part of a plant that is grafted onto the root stock of another plant
scutellum type of cotyledon found in monocots, as in grass seeds
self-pollination transfer of pollen from the anther to the stigma of the same flower
senescence process that describes aging in plant tissues
simple fruit fruit that develops from a single carpel or fused carpels
sporophyte multicellular diploid stage in plants that is formed after the fusion of male and female gametes
suspensor part of the growing embryo that makes connection with the maternal tissues
synergid type of cell found in the ovule sac that secretes chemicals to guide the pollen tube towards the egg
tegmen inner layer of the seed coat
testa outer layer of the seed coat
vernalization exposure to cold required by some seeds before they can germinate
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1012
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 1001
CHAPTER SUMMARY
32.1Reproductive Development and Structure
The flower contains the reproductive structures of a plant. All complete flowers contain four whorls: the calyx,
corolla, androecium, and gynoecium. The stamens are made up of anthers, in which pollen grains are
produced, and a supportive strand called the filament. The pollen contains two cells— a generative cell and a
tube cell—and is covered by two layers called the intine and the exine. The carpels, which are the female
reproductive structures, consist of the stigma, style, and ovary. The female gametophyte is formed from mitotic
divisions of the megaspore, forming an eight-nuclei ovule sac. This is covered by a layer known as the
integument. The integument contains an opening called the micropyle, through which the pollen tube enters the
embryo sac.
The diploid sporophyte of angiosperms and gymnosperms is the conspicuous and long-lived stage of the life
cycle. The sporophytes differentiate specialized reproductive structures called sporangia, which are dedicated
to the production of spores. The microsporangium contains microspore mother cells, which divide by meiosis to
produce haploid microspores. The microspores develop into male gametophytes that are released as pollen.
The megasporangium contains megaspore mother cells, which divide by meiosis to produce haploid
megaspores. A megaspore develops into a female gametophyte containing a haploid egg. A new diploid
sporophyte is formed when a male gamete from a pollen grain enters the ovule sac and fertilizes this egg.
32.2Pollination and Fertilization
For fertilization to occur in angiosperms, pollen has to be transferred to the stigma of a flower: a process known
as pollination. Gymnosperm pollination involves the transfer of pollen from a male cone to a female cone.
When the pollen of the flower is transferred to the stigma of the same flower, it is called self-pollination. Cross-
pollination occurs when pollen is transferred from one flower to another flower on the same plant, or another
plant. Cross-pollination requires pollinating agents such as water, wind, or animals, and increases genetic
diversity. After the pollen lands on the stigma, the tube cell gives rise to the pollen tube, through which the
generative nucleus migrates. The pollen tube gains entry through the micropyle on the ovule sac. The
generative cell divides to form two sperm cells: one fuses with the egg to form the diploid zygote, and the other
fuses with the polar nuclei to form the endosperm, which is triploid in nature. This is known as double
fertilization. After fertilization, the zygote divides to form the embryo and the fertilized ovule forms the seed. The
walls of the ovary form the fruit in which the seeds develop. The seed, when mature, will germinate under
favorable conditions and give rise to the diploid sporophyte.
32.3Asexual Reproduction
Many plants reproduce asexually as well as sexually. In asexual reproduction, part of the parent plant is used to
generate a new plant. Grafting, layering, and micropropagation are some methods used for artificial asexual
reproduction. The new plant is genetically identical to the parent plant from which the stock has been taken.
Asexually reproducing plants thrive well in stable environments.
Plants have different life spans, dependent on species, genotype, and environmental conditions. Parts of the
plant, such as regions containing meristematic tissue, continue to grow, while other parts experience
programmed cell death. Leaves that are no longer photosynthetically active are shed from the plant as part of
senescence, and the nutrients from these leaves are recycled by the plant. Other factors, including the
presence of hormones, are known to play a role in delaying senescence.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 32.3If the anther is missing, what type of a. The pollen tube will be unable to form.
reproductive structure will the flower be unable to b. The pollen tube will form but will not be
produce? What term is used to describe a flower that guided toward the egg.
is normally lacking the androecium? What term c. Fertilization will not occur because the
describes a flower lacking a gynoecium? synergid is the egg.
d. Fertilization will occur but the embryo will
2.Figure 32.8An embryo sac is missing the
not be able to grow.
synergids. What specific impact would you expect
this to have on fertilization? 3.Figure 32.20What is the function of the
cotyledon?
PAGE: 1013
1002 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
a. It develops into the root.
b. It provides nutrition for the embryo.
c. It forms the embryo.
d. It protects the embryo.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.In a plant’s male reproductive organs, a. simple fruit
development of pollen takes place in a structure b. aggregate fruit
known as the ________. c. multiple fruit
a. stamen d. accessory fruit
b. microsporangium
11.The ________ is the outermost covering of a
c. anther
fruit.
d. tapetum
a. endocarp
5.The stamen consists of a long stalk called the b. pericarp
filament that supports the ________. c. exocarp
a. stigma d. mesocarp
b. sepal
12.________ is a useful method of asexual
c. style
reproduction for propagating hard-to-root plants.
d. anther
6.The ________ are collectively called the calyx. a. grafting
b. layering
a. sepals c. cuttings
b. petals d. budding
c. tepals
13.Which of the following is an advantage of asexual
d. stamens
reproduction?
7.The pollen lands on which part of the flower? a. Cuttings taken from an adult plant show
increased resistance to diseases.
a. stigma b. Grafted plants can more successfully
b. style endure drought.
c. ovule c. When cuttings or buds are taken from an
d. integument adult plant or plant parts, the resulting plant
will grow into an adult faster than a seedling.
8.After double fertilization, a zygote and ________
d. Asexual reproduction takes advantage of a
form.
more diverse gene pool.
a. an ovule
b. endosperm 14.Plants that flower once in their lifetime are known
c. a cotyledon as ________.
d. a suspensor a. monoecious
b. dioecious
9.The fertilized ovule gives rise to the ________.
c. polycarpic
d. monocarpic
a. fruit
b. seed 15.Plant species that complete their lifecycle in one
c. endosperm season are known as ________.
d. embryo a. biennials
b. perennials
10.What is the term for a fruit that develops from
c. annuals
tissues other than the ovary?
d. polycarpic
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Describe the reproductive organs inside a flower. 19.Discuss the differences between a complete
flower and an incomplete flower.
17.Describe the two-stage lifecycle of plants: the
gametophyte stage and the sporophyte stage. 20.Why do some seeds undergo a period of
dormancy, and how do they break dormancy?
18.Describe the four main parts, or whorls, of a
flower. 21.Discuss some ways in which fruit seeds are
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1014
Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction 1003
dispersed. reproduction in plants.
22.What are some advantages of asexual 24.Discuss the life cycles of various plants.
reproduction in plants?
25.How are plants classified on the basis of
23.Describe natural and artificial methods of asexual flowering frequency?
PAGE: 1015
1004 Chapter 32 | Plant Reproduction
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1016
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1005
33 | THE ANIMAL BODY:
BASIC FORM AND
FUNCTION
Figure33.1Anarcticfoxisacomplexanimal,welladaptedtoitsenvironment.Itchangescoatcolorwiththeseasons,
and has longer fur in winter to trap heat. (credit: modification of work by Keith Morehouse, USFWS)
Chapter Outline
33.1:Animal Form and Function
33.2:Animal Primary Tissues
33.3:Homeostasis
Introduction
The arctic fox is an example of a complex animal that has adapted to its environment and illustrates the
relationships between an animal’s form and function. The structures of animals consist of primary tissues that
make up more complex organs and organ systems. Homeostasis allows an animal to maintain a balance
between its internal and external environments.
PAGE: 1017
1006 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
33.1 | Animal Form and Function
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the various types of body plans that occur in animals
• Describe limits on animal size and shape
• Relate bioenergetics to body size, levels of activity, and the environment
Animals vary in form and function. From a sponge to a worm to a goat, an organism has a distinct body plan
that limits itssizeandshape. Animals’ bodiesarealsodesigned tointeract with their environments, whether in
thedeepsea,arainforestcanopy,orthedesert.Therefore,alargeamountofinformationaboutthestructureof
an organism's body (anatomy) and the function of its cells, tissues and organs (physiology) can be learned by
studying that organism's environment.
Body Plans
Figure 33.2 Animals exhibit different types of body symmetry. The sponge is asymmetrical, the sea anemone has
radial symmetry, and the goat has bilateral symmetry.
Animal body plans follow set patterns related to symmetry. They are asymmetrical, radial, or bilateral in form
as illustrated in Figure 33.2. Asymmetrical animals are animals with no pattern or symmetry; an example of
anasymmetricalanimalisasponge.Radialsymmetry,asillustratedinFigure33.2,describeswhenananimal
hasanup-and-downorientation:anyplanecutalongitslongitudinalaxisthroughtheorganismproducesequal
halves,butnotadefiniterightorleftside.Thisplanisfoundmostlyinaquaticanimals,especiallyorganismsthat
attachthemselvestoabase,likearockoraboat,andextracttheirfoodfromthesurroundingwaterasitflows
aroundtheorganism.Bilateralsymmetryisillustratedinthesamefigurebyagoat.Thegoatalsohasanupper
and lower component to it, but a plane cut from front to back separates the animal into definite right and left
sides. Additional terms used when describing positions in the body are anterior (front), posterior (rear), dorsal
(towardtheback),andventral(towardthestomach).Bilateralsymmetryisfoundinbothland-basedandaquatic
animals; it enables a high level of mobility.
Limits on Animal Size and Shape
Animalswithbilateralsymmetrythatliveinwatertendtohaveafusiformshape:thisisatubularshapedbody
thatistaperedatbothends.Thisshapedecreasesthedragonthebodyasitmovesthroughwaterandallows
the animal to swim at high speeds. Table 33.1 lists the maximum speed of various animals. Certain types of
sharks can swim at fifty kilometers per hour and some dolphins at 32 to 40 kilometers per hour. Land animals
frequentlytravelfaster,althoughthetortoiseandsnailaresignificantlyslowerthancheetahs.Anotherdifference
in the adaptations of aquatic and land-dwelling organisms is that aquatic organisms are constrained in shape
by the forces of drag in the water since water has higher viscosity than air. On the other hand, land-dwelling
organismsareconstrainedmainlybygravity,anddragisrelativelyunimportant.Forexample,mostadaptations
in birds are for gravity not for drag.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1018
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1007
Maximum Speed of Assorted Land & Marine Animals
Animal Speed (kmh) Speed (mph)
Cheetah 113 70
Quarter horse 77 48
Fox 68 42
Shortfin mako shark 50 31
Domestic house cat 48 30
Human 45 28
Dolphin 32–40 20–25
Mouse 13 8
Snail 0.05 0.03
Table 33.1
Most animals have an exoskeleton, including insects, spiders, scorpions, horseshoe crabs, centipedes, and
crustaceans. Scientists estimate that, of insects alone, there are over 30 million species on our planet. The
exoskeletonisahardcoveringorshellthatprovidesbenefitstotheanimal,suchasprotectionagainstdamage
from predators and from water loss (for land animals); it also provides for the attachments of muscles.
Asthetoughandresistantoutercoverofanarthropod,theexoskeletonmaybeconstructedofatoughpolymer
suchaschitinandisoftenbiomineralizedwithmaterialssuchascalciumcarbonate.Thisisfusedtotheanimal’s
epidermis. Ingrowths of the exoskeleton, called apodemes, function as attachment sites for muscles, similar
to tendons in more advanced animals (Figure 33.3). In order to grow, the animal must first synthesize a new
exoskeleton underneath the old one and then shed or molt the original covering. This limits the animal’s ability
to grow continually, and may limit the individual’s ability to mature if molting does not occur at the proper time.
The thickness of the exoskeleton must be increased significantly to accommodate any increase in weight. It is
estimated that a doubling of body size increases body weight by a factor of eight. The increasing thickness of
the chitin necessary to support this weight limits most animals with an exoskeleton to a relatively small size.
The same principles apply to endoskeletons, but they are more efficient because muscles are attached on the
outside, making it easier to compensate for increased mass.
Figure33.3Apodemesareingrowthsonarthropodexoskeletonstowhichmusclesattach.Theapodemesonthiscrab
legarelocatedaboveandbelowthefulcrumoftheclaw.Contractionofmusclesattachedtotheapodemespullsthe
claw closed.
An animal with an endoskeleton has its size determined by the amount of skeletal system it needs in order to
support the other tissues and the amount of muscle it needs for movement. As the body size increases, both
boneandmusclemassincrease.Thespeedachievablebytheanimalisabalancebetweenitsoverallsizeand
the bone and muscle that provide support and movement.
Limiting Effects of Diffusion on Size and Development
The exchange of nutrients and wastes between a cell and its watery environment occurs through the process
PAGE: 1019
1008 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
of diffusion. All living cells are bathed in liquid, whether they are in a single-celled organism or a multicellular
one. Diffusion is effective over a specific distance and limits the size that an individual cell can attain. If a cell
is a single-celled microorganism, such as an amoeba, it can satisfy all of its nutrient and waste needs through
diffusion.Ifthecellistoolarge,thendiffusionisineffectiveandthecenterofthecelldoesnotreceiveadequate
nutrients nor is it able to effectively dispel its waste.
Animportantconceptinunderstandinghowefficientdiffusionisasameansoftransportisthesurfacetovolume
ratio.Recallthatanythree-dimensionalobjecthasasurfaceareaandvolume;theratioofthesetwoquantities
2
isthesurface-to-volumeratio.Consideracellshapedlikeaperfectsphere:ithasasurfaceareaof4πr ,anda
3
volumeof(4/3)πr .Thesurface-to-volumeratioofasphereis3/r;asthecellgetsbigger,itssurfacetovolume
ratiodecreases,makingdiffusionlessefficient.Thelargerthesizeofthesphere,oranimal,thelesssurfacearea
for diffusion it possesses.
Thesolutiontoproducinglargerorganismsisforthemtobecomemulticellular.Specializationoccursincomplex
organisms, allowing cells to become more efficient at doing fewer tasks. For example, circulatory systems
bring nutrients and remove waste, while respiratory systems provide oxygen for the cells and remove carbon
dioxidefromthem.Otherorgansystemshavedevelopedfurtherspecializationofcellsandtissuesandefficiently
control body functions. Moreover, surface-to-volume ratio applies to other areas of animal development, such
as the relationship between muscle mass and cross-sectional surface area in supporting skeletons, and in the
relationship between muscle mass and the generation of dissipation of heat.
Visit this interactive site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nanoscopy) to see an entire animal (a zebrafish
embryo) at the cellular and sub-cellular level. Use the zoom and navigation functions for a virtual nanoscopy
exploration.
Animal Bioenergetics
Allanimalsmustobtaintheirenergyfromfoodtheyingestorabsorb.Thesenutrientsareconvertedtoadenosine
triphosphate (ATP) for short-term storage and use by all cells. Some animals store energy for slightly longer
times as glycogen, and others store energy for much longer times in the form of triglycerides housed in
specialized adipose tissues. No energy system is one hundred percent efficient, and an animal’s metabolism
produceswasteenergyintheformofheat.Ifananimalcanconservethatheatandmaintainarelativelyconstant
body temperature, it is classified as a warm-blooded animal and called an endotherm. The insulation used to
conserve the body heat comes in the forms of fur, fat, or feathers. The absence of insulation in ectothermic
animals increases their dependence on the environment for body heat.
The amount of energy expended by an animal over a specific time is called its metabolic rate. The rate is
measuredvariouslyinjoules,calories,orkilocalories(1000calories).Carbohydratesandproteinscontainabout
4.5 to 5 kcal/g, and fat contains about 9 kcal/g. Metabolic rate is estimated as the basal metabolic rate
(BMR)inendothermicanimalsatrestandasthestandardmetabolicrate(SMR)inectotherms.Humanmales
have a BMR of 1600 to 1800 kcal/day, and human females have a BMR of 1300 to 1500 kcal/day. Even with
insulation,endothermalanimalsrequireextensiveamountsofenergytomaintainaconstantbodytemperature.
An ectotherm such as an alligator has an SMR of 60 kcal/day.
Energy Requirements Related to Body Size
Smaller endothermic animals have a greater surface area for their mass than larger ones (Figure 33.4).
Therefore, smaller animals lose heat at a faster rate than larger animals and require more energy to maintain
a constant internal temperature. This results in a smaller endothermic animal having a higher BMR, per body
weight, than a larger endothermic animal.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1020
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1009
Figure33.4Themousehasamuchhighermetabolicratethantheelephant.(credit“mouse”:modificationofworkby
Magnus Kjaergaard; credit “elephant”: modification of work by “TheLizardQueen”/Flickr)
Energy Requirements Related to Levels of Activity
The more active an animal is, the more energy is needed to maintain that activity, and the higher its BMR
or SMR. The average daily rate of energy consumption is about two to four times an animal’s BMR or SMR.
Humansaremoresedentarythanmostanimalsandhaveanaveragedailyrateofonly1.5timestheBMR.The
dietofanendothermicanimalisdeterminedbyitsBMR.Forexample:thetypeofgrasses,leaves,orshrubsthat
anherbivoreeatsaffectsthenumberofcaloriesthatittakesin.Therelativecaloriccontent ofherbivorefoods,
in descending order, is tall grasses > legumes > short grasses > forbs (any broad-leaved plant, not a grass) >
subshrubs > annuals/biennials.
Energy Requirements Related to Environment
Animals adapt to extremes of temperature or food availability through torpor. Torpor is a process that leads to
a decrease in activity and metabolism and allows animals to survive adverse conditions. Torpor can be used
by animals for long periods, such as entering a state of hibernation during the winter months, in which case
it enables them to maintain a reduced body temperature. During hibernation, ground squirrels can achieve an
abdominaltemperatureof0°C(32°F),whileabear’sinternaltemperatureismaintainedhigheratabout37°C
(99° F).
Iftorporoccursduringthesummermonthswithhightemperaturesandlittlewater,itiscalledestivation.Some
desert animals use this to survive the harshest months of the year. Torpor can occur on a daily basis; this is
seeninbatsandhummingbirds.Whileendothermyislimitedinsmalleranimalsbysurfacetovolumeratio,some
organisms can be smaller and still be endotherms because they employ daily torpor during the part of the day
thatiscoldest.Thisallowsthemtoconserveenergyduringthecolderpartsoftheday,whentheyconsumemore
energy to maintain their body temperature.
Animal Body Planes and Cavities
A standing vertebrate animal can be divided by several planes. A sagittal plane divides the body into right
and left portions. A midsagittal plane divides the body exactly in the middle, making two equal right and left
halves.Afrontalplane(alsocalledacoronalplane)separatesthefrontfromtheback.Atransverseplane(or,
horizontalplane)dividestheanimalintoupperandlowerportions.Thisissometimescalledacrosssection,and,
ifthetransversecutisatanangle,itiscalledanobliqueplane.Figure33.5illustratestheseplanesonagoat(a
four-legged animal) and a human being.
PAGE: 1021
1010 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Figure33.5Shownaretheplanesofaquadrupedalgoatandabipedalhuman.Themidsagittalplanedividesthebody
exactlyinhalf,intorightandleftportions.Thefrontalplanedividesthefrontandback,andthetransverseplanedivides
the body into upper and lower portions.
Vertebrate animals have a number of defined body cavities, as illustrated in Figure 33.6. Two of these are
majorcavitiesthatcontainsmallercavitieswithinthem.Thedorsalcavitycontainsthecranialandthevertebral
(or spinal) cavities. The ventral cavity contains the thoracic cavity, which in turn contains the pleural cavity
around the lungs and the pericardial cavity, which surrounds the heart. The ventral cavity also contains the
abdominopelvic cavity, which can be separated into the abdominal and the pelvic cavities.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1022
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1011
Figure33.6Vertebrateanimalshavetwomajorbodycavities.Thedorsalcavity,indicatedingreen,containsthecranial
andthespinalcavity.Theventralcavity,indicatedinyellow,containsthethoraciccavityandtheabdominopelviccavity.
The thoracic cavity is separated from the abdominopelvic cavity by the diaphragm. The thoracic cavity is separated
intotheabdominalcavityandthepelviccavitybyanimaginarylineparalleltothepelvisbones.(credit:modificationof
work by NCI)
Physical Anthropologist
Physicalanthropologistsstudytheadaption,variability,andevolutionofhumanbeings,plustheirlivingand
fossilrelatives.Theycanworkinavarietyofsettings,althoughmostwillhaveanacademicappointmentat
a university, usually in an anthropology department or a biology, genetics, or zoology department.
Nonacademic positions are available in the automotive and aerospace industries where the focus is
on human size, shape, and anatomy. Research by these professionals might range from studies of
how the human body reacts to car crashes to exploring how to make seats more comfortable. Other
nonacademic positions can be obtained in museums of natural history, anthropology, archaeology, or
science and technology. These positions involve educating students from grade school through graduate
school.Physicalanthropologistsserveaseducationcoordinators,collectionmanagers,writersformuseum
publications, and as administrators. Zoos employ these professionals, especially if they have an expertise
in primate biology; they work in collection management and captive breeding programs for endangered
species.Forensicscienceutilizesphysicalanthropologyexpertiseinidentifyinghumanandanimalremains,
assisting in determining the cause of death, and for expert testimony in trials.
PAGE: 1023
1012 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
33.2 | Animal Primary Tissues
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe epithelial tissues
• Discuss the different types of connective tissues in animals
• Describe three types of muscle tissues
• Describe nervous tissue
Thetissuesofmulticellular,complexanimalsarefourprimarytypes:epithelial,connective,muscle,andnervous.
Recallthattissuesaregroupsofsimilarcells(cellscarryingoutrelatedfunctions).Thesetissuescombinetoform
organs—liketheskinorkidney—thathavespecific,specializedfunctionswithinthebody.Organsareorganized
into organ systems to perform functions; examples include the circulatory system, which consists of the heart
and blood vessels, and the digestive system, consisting of several organs, including the stomach, intestines,
liver, and pancreas. Organ systems come together to create an entire organism.
Epithelial Tissues
Epithelial tissues cover the outside of organs and structures in the body and line the lumens of organs in a
single layer or multiple layers of cells. The types of epithelia are classified by the shapes of cells present and
thenumberoflayersofcells.Epitheliacomposedofasinglelayerofcellsiscalledsimpleepithelia;epithelial
tissue composed of multiple layers is called stratified epithelia. Table 33.2 summarizes the different types of
epithelial tissues.
Different Types of Epithelial Tissues
Cell
Description Location
shape
simple: lung alveoli, capillaries; stratified: skin,
squamous flat, irregular round shape
mouth, vagina
cuboidal cube shaped, central nucleus glands, renal tubules
tall, narrow, nucleus toward base; tall, narrow, simple: digestive tract; pseudostratified:
columnar
nucleus along cell respiratory tract
transitional round, simple but appear stratified urinary bladder
Table 33.2
Squamous Epithelia
Squamousepithelialcellsaregenerallyround,flat,andhaveasmall,centrallylocatednucleus.Thecelloutline
is slightly irregular, and cells fit together to form a covering or lining. When the cells are arranged in a single
layer (simple epithelia), they facilitate diffusion in tissues, such as the areas of gas exchange in the lungs and
the exchange of nutrients and waste at blood capillaries.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1024
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1013
Figure33.7Squamousepitheliacells(a)haveaslightlyirregularshape,andasmall,centrallylocatednucleus.These
cellscanbestratifiedintolayers,asin(b)thishumancervixspecimen.(creditb:modificationofworkbyEdUthman;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Figure 33.7a illustrates a layer of squamous cells with their membranes joined together to form an epithelium.
ImageFigure33.7billustratessquamousepithelialcellsarrangedinstratifiedlayers,whereprotectionisneeded
on the body from outside abrasion and damage. This is called a stratified squamous epithelium and occurs in
the skin and in tissues lining the mouth and vagina.
Cuboidal Epithelia
Cuboidalepithelialcells,showninFigure33.8,arecube-shapedwithasingle,centralnucleus.Theyaremost
commonlyfoundinasinglelayerrepresentingasimpleepitheliainglandulartissuesthroughoutthebodywhere
theyprepareandsecreteglandularmaterial.Theyarealsofoundinthewallsoftubulesandintheductsofthe
kidney and liver.
Figure33.8Simplecuboidalepithelialcellslinetubulesinthemammaliankidney,wheretheyareinvolvedinfiltering
the blood.
Columnar Epithelia
Columnarepithelialcellsaretallerthantheyarewide:theyresembleastackofcolumnsinanepitheliallayer,
and are most commonly found in a single-layer arrangement. The nuclei of columnar epithelial cells in the
digestive tract appear to be lined up at the base of the cells, as illustrated in Figure 33.9. These cells absorb
material from the lumen of the digestive tract and prepare it for entry into the body through the circulatory and
lymphatic systems.
PAGE: 1025
1014 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Figure33.9Simplecolumnarepithelialcellsabsorbmaterialfromthedigestivetract.Gobletcellssecretmucousinto
the digestive tract lumen.
Columnarepithelialcellsliningtherespiratorytractappeartobestratified.However,eachcellisattachedtothe
basemembraneofthetissueand,therefore,theyaresimpletissues.Thenucleiarearrangedatdifferentlevels
in the layer of cells, making it appear as though there is more than one layer, as seen in Figure 33.10. This
is called pseudostratified, columnar epithelia. This cellular covering has cilia at the apical, or free, surface of
thecells. Theciliaenhancethemovement ofmucousandtrapped particles outoftherespiratory tract, helping
toprotectthesystemfrominvasivemicroorganismsandharmfulmaterialthathasbeenbreathedintothebody.
Gobletcellsareinterspersedinsometissues(suchastheliningofthetrachea).Thegobletcellscontainmucous
that traps irritants, which in the case of the trachea keep these irritants from getting into the lungs.
Figure33.10Pseudostratifiedcolumnarepithelialinetherespiratorytract.Theyexistinonelayer,butthearrangement
of nuclei at different levels makes it appear that there is more than one layer. Goblet cells interspersed between the
columnar epithelial cells secrete mucous into the respiratory tract.
Transitional Epithelia
Transitional or uroepithelial cells appear only in the urinary system, primarily in the bladder and ureter. These
cellsarearrangedinastratifiedlayer,buttheyhavethecapabilityofappearingtopileupontopofeachotherin
a relaxed, empty bladder, as illustrated in Figure 33.11. As the urinary bladder fills, the epithelial layer unfolds
andexpandstoholdthevolumeofurineintroducedintoit.Asthebladderfills,itexpandsandtheliningbecomes
thinner. In other words, the tissue transitions from thick to thin.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1026
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1015
Figure33.11Transitionalepitheliaoftheurinarybladderundergochangesinthicknessdependingonhowfullthe
bladder is.
Which of the following statements about types of epithelial cells is false?
a. Simple columnar epithelial cells line the tissue of the lung.
b. Simple cuboidal epithelial cells are involved in the filtering of blood in the kidney.
c. Pseudostratisfied columnar epithilia occur in a single layer, but the arrangement of nuclei makes it
appear that more than one layer is present.
d. Transitional epithelia change in thickness depending on how full the bladder is.
Connective Tissues
Connective tissues are made up of a matrix consisting of living cells and a nonliving substance, called the
groundsubstance.Thegroundsubstanceismadeofanorganicsubstance(usuallyaprotein)andaninorganic
substance(usuallyamineralorwater).Theprincipalcellofconnectivetissuesisthefibroblast.Thiscellmakes
thefibersfoundinnearlyalloftheconnectivetissues.Fibroblastsaremotile,abletocarryoutmitosis,andcan
synthesize whichever connective tissue is needed. Macrophages, lymphocytes, and, occasionally, leukocytes
can be found in some of the tissues. Some tissues have specialized cells that are not found in the others. The
matrix in connective tissues gives the tissue its density. When a connective tissue has a high concentration of
cells or fibers, it has proportionally a less dense matrix.
The organic portion or protein fibers found in connective tissues are either collagen, elastic, or reticular fibers.
Collagen fibers provide strength to the tissue, preventing it from being torn or separated from the surrounding
tissues.Elasticfibersaremadeoftheproteinelastin;thisfibercanstretchtooneandonehalfofitslengthand
return to its original size and shape. Elastic fibers provide flexibility to the tissues. Reticular fibers are the third
typeofproteinfiberfoundinconnectivetissues.Thisfiberconsistsofthinstrandsofcollagenthatformanetwork
offiberstosupportthetissueandotherorganstowhichitisconnected.Thevarioustypesofconnectivetissues,
the types of cells and fibers they are made of, and sample locations of the tissues is summarized inTable 33.3.
PAGE: 1027
1016 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Connective Tissues
Tissue Cells Fibers Location
fibroblasts, macrophages,
few: collagen, elastic, around blood vessels;
loose/areolar some lymphocytes, some
reticular anchors epithelia
neutrophils
dense, fibrous
irregular: skin; regular:
connective fibroblasts, macrophages mostly collagen
tendons, ligaments
tissue
hyaline: few: collagen shark skeleton, fetal bones,
cartilage chondrocytes, chondroblasts fibrocartilage: large amount of human ears, intervertebral
collagen discs
osteoblasts, osteocytes,
bone some: collagen, elastic vertebrate skeletons
osteoclasts
adipose adipocytes few adipose (fat)
red blood cells, white blood
blood none blood
cells
Table 33.3
Loose/Areolar Connective Tissue
Loose connective tissue, also called areolar connective tissue, has a sampling of all of the components of a
connective tissue. As illustrated in Figure 33.12, loose connective tissue has some fibroblasts; macrophages
arepresentaswell.Collagenfibersarerelativelywideandstainalightpink,whileelasticfibersarethinandstain
dark blue to black. The space between the formed elements of the tissue is filled with the matrix. The material
in the connective tissue gives it a loose consistency similar to a cotton ball that has been pulled apart. Loose
connective tissue is found around every blood vessel and helps to keep the vessel in place. The tissue is also
found around and between most body organs. In summary, areolar tissue is tough, yet flexible, and comprises
membranes.
Figure33.12Looseconnectivetissueiscomposedoflooselywovencollagenandelasticfibers.Thefibersandother
components of the connective tissue matrix are secreted by fibroblasts.
Fibrous Connective Tissue
Fibrous connective tissues contain large amounts of collagen fibers and few cells or matrix material. The
fibers can be arranged irregularly or regularly with the strands lined up in parallel. Irregularly arranged fibrous
connectivetissuesarefoundinareasofthebodywherestressoccursfromalldirections,suchasthedermisof
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1028
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1017
theskin.Regularfibrousconnectivetissue,showninFigure33.13,isfoundintendons(whichconnectmuscles
to bones) and ligaments (which connect bones to bones).
Figure 33.13Fibrous connective tissue from the tendon has strands of collagen fibers lined up in parallel.
Cartilage
Cartilage is a connective tissue with a large amount of the matrix and variable amounts of fibers. The cells,
called chondrocytes, make the matrix and fibers of the tissue. Chondrocytes are found in spaces within the
tissue calledlacunae.
A cartilage with few collagen and elastic fibers is hyaline cartilage, illustrated in Figure 33.14. The lacunae
are randomly scattered throughout the tissue and the matrix takes on a milky or scrubbed appearance with
routinehistologicalstains.Sharkshavecartilaginousskeletons,asdoesnearlytheentirehumanskeletonduring
a specific pre-birth developmental stage. A remnant of this cartilage persists in the outer portion of the human
nose.Hyalinecartilageisalsofoundattheendsoflongbones,reducingfrictionandcushioningthearticulations
of these bones.
Figure 33.14 Hyalinecartilage consistsofamatrixwithcellscalledchondrocytes embeddedinit. Thechondrocytes
exist in cavities in the matrix called lacunae.
Elasticcartilagehasalargeamountofelasticfibers,givingittremendousflexibility.Theearsofmostvertebrate
animalscontain this cartilage asdoportions ofthe larynx, orvoicebox. Fibrocartilage contains alargeamount
of collagen fibers, giving the tissue tremendous strength. Fibrocartilage comprises the intervertebral discs in
vertebrateanimals.Hyalinecartilagefoundinmovablejointssuchasthekneeandshoulderbecomesdamaged
as a result of age or trauma. Damaged hyaline cartilage is replaced by fibrocartilage and results in the joints
becoming “stiff.”
PAGE: 1029
1018 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Bone
Bone,orosseoustissue,isaconnectivetissuethathasalargeamountoftwodifferenttypesofmatrixmaterial.
The organic matrix is similar to the matrix material found in other connective tissues, including some amount
of collagen and elastic fibers. This gives strength and flexibility to the tissue. The inorganic matrix consists of
mineral salts—mostly calcium salts—that give the tissue hardness. Without adequate organic material in the
matrix, the tissue breaks; without adequate inorganic material in the matrix, the tissue bends.
There are three types of cells in bone: osteoblasts, osteocytes, and osteoclasts. Osteoblasts are active in
makingboneforgrowthandremodeling.Osteoblastsdepositbonematerialintothematrixand,afterthematrix
surrounds them, they continue to live, but in a reduced metabolic state as osteocytes. Osteocytes are found
in lacunae of the bone. Osteoclasts are active in breaking down bone for bone remodeling, and they provide
access to calcium stored in tissues. Osteoclasts are usually found on the surface of the tissue.
Bone can be divided into two types: compact and spongy. Compact bone is found in the shaft (or diaphysis)
of a long bone and the surface of the flat bones, while spongy bone is found in the end (or epiphysis) of a
long bone. Compact bone is organized into subunits called osteons, as illustrated in Figure 33.15. A blood
vessel and a nerve are found in the center of the structure within the Haversian canal, with radiating circles
of lacunae around it known as lamellae. The wavy lines seen between the lacunae are microchannels called
canaliculi; they connect the lacunae to aid diffusion between the cells. Spongy bone is made of tiny plates
called trabeculae; these plates serve as struts to give the spongy bone strength. Over time, these plates can
breakcausingthebonetobecomelessresilient.Bonetissueformstheinternalskeletonofvertebrateanimals,
providing structure to the animal and points of attachment for tendons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1030
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1019
Figure 33.15 (a) Compact bone is a dense matrix on the outer surface of bone. Spongy bone, inside the compact
bone, is porous with web-like trabeculae. (b) Compact bone is organized into rings called osteons. Blood vessels,
nerves, and lymphatic vessels are found in the central Haversian canal. Rings of lamellae surround the Haversian
canal.Betweenthelamellaearecavitiescalledlacunae.Canaliculiaremicrochannelsconnectingthelacunaetogether.
(c)Osteoblastssurroundtheexteriorofthebone.Osteoclastsboretunnelsintotheboneandosteocytesarefoundin
the lacunae.
Adipose Tissue
Adipose tissue, or fat tissue, is considered a connective tissue even though it does not have fibroblasts or a
real matrix and only has a few fibers. Adipose tissue is made up of cells called adipocytes that collect and
store fat in the form of triglycerides, for energy metabolism. Adipose tissues additionally serve as insulation to
helpmaintainbodytemperatures,allowinganimalstobeendothermic,andtheyfunctionascushioningagainst
damage to body organs. Under a microscope, adipose tissue cells appear empty due to the extraction of fat
during the processing of the material for viewing, as seen in Figure 33.16. The thin lines in the image are the
cell membranes, and the nuclei are the small, black dots at the edges of the cells.
PAGE: 1031
1020 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Figure 33.16 Adipose is a connective tissue is made up of cells called adipocytes. Adipocytes have small nuclei
localized at the cell edge.
Blood
Bloodisconsideredaconnectivetissuebecauseithasamatrix,asshowninFigure33.17.Thelivingcelltypes
are red blood cells (RBC), also called erythrocytes, and white blood cells (WBC), also called leukocytes. The
fluid portion of whole blood, its matrix, is commonly called plasma.
Figure33.17Bloodisaconnectivetissuethathasafluidmatrix,calledplasma,andnofibers.Erythrocytes(redblood
cells),thepredominantcelltype,areinvolvedinthetransportofoxygenandcarbondioxide.Alsopresentarevarious
leukocytes (white blood cells) involved in immune response.
Thecellfoundingreatestabundanceinbloodistheerythrocyte.Erythrocytesarecountedinmillionsinablood
sample:theaveragenumberofredbloodcellsinprimatesis4.7to5.5millioncellspermicroliter.Erythrocytes
areconsistentlythesamesizeinaspecies,butvaryinsizebetweenspecies.Forexample,theaveragediameter
ofaprimateredbloodcellis7.5µl,adogiscloseat7.0µl,butacat’sRBCdiameteris5.9µl.Sheeperythrocytes
are even smaller at 4.6 µl. Mammalian erythrocytes lose their nuclei and mitochondria when they are released
from the bone marrow where they are made. Fish, amphibian, and avian red blood cells maintain their nuclei
and mitochondria throughout the cell’s life. The principal job of an erythrocyte is to carry and deliver oxygen to
the tissues.
Leukocytesarethepredominantwhitebloodcellsfoundintheperipheralblood.Leukocytesarecountedinthe
thousands in the blood with measurements expressed as ranges: primate counts range from 4,800 to 10,800
cells per µl, dogs from 5,600 to 19,200 cells per µl, cats from 8,000 to 25,000 cells per µl, cattle from 4,000 to
12,000 cells per µl, and pigs from 11,000 to 22,000 cells per µl.
Lymphocytes function primarily in the immune response to foreign antigens or material. Different types of
lymphocytes make antibodies tailored to the foreign antigens and control the production of those antibodies.
Neutrophils are phagocytic cells and they participate in one of the early lines of defense against microbial
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1032
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1021
invaders, aiding in the removal of bacteria that has entered the body. Another leukocyte that is found in the
peripheral blood is the monocyte. Monocytes give rise to phagocytic macrophages that clean up dead and
damaged cells in the body, whether they are foreign or from the host animal. Two additional leukocytes in the
blood are eosinophils and basophils—both help to facilitate the inflammatory response.
The slightly granular material among the cells is a cytoplasmic fragment of a cell in the bone marrow. This is
calledaplateletorthrombocyte.Plateletsparticipateinthestagesleadinguptocoagulationofthebloodtostop
bleeding through damaged blood vessels. Blood has a number of functions, but primarily it transports material
through the body to bring nutrients to cells and remove waste material from them.
Muscle Tissues
Therearethreetypesofmuscleinanimalbodies:smooth,skeletal,andcardiac.Theydifferbythepresenceor
absence of striations or bands, the number and location of nuclei, whether they are voluntarily or involuntarily
controlled, and their location within the body.Table 33.4summarizes these differences.
Types of Muscles
Type of Muscle Striations Nuclei Control Location
smooth no single, in center involuntary visceral organs
skeletal yes many, at periphery voluntary skeletal muscles
cardiac yes single, in center involuntary heart
Table 33.4
Smooth Muscle
Smoothmuscledoesnothavestriationsinitscells.Ithasasingle,centrallylocatednucleus,asshowninFigure
33.18. Constriction of smooth muscle occurs under involuntary, autonomic nervous control and in response
to local conditions in the tissues. Smooth muscle tissue is also called non-striated as it lacks the banded
appearance of skeletal and cardiac muscle. The walls of blood vessels, the tubes of the digestive system, and
the tubes of the reproductive systems are composed of mostly smooth muscle.
Figure 33.18 Smooth muscle cells do not have striations, while skeletal muscle cells do. Cardiac muscle cells have
striations, but, unlike the multinucleate skeletal cells, they have only one nucleus. Cardiac muscle tissue also has
intercalateddiscs,specializedregionsrunningalongtheplasmamembranethatjoinadjacentcardiacmusclecellsand
assist in passing an electrical impulse from cell to cell.
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscle has striations across its cells caused by the arrangement of the contractile proteins actin and
myosin. These muscle cells are relatively long and have multiple nuclei along the edge of the cell. Skeletal
muscleisundervoluntary,somaticnervoussystemcontrolandisfoundinthemusclesthatmovebones.Figure
33.18illustrates the histology of skeletal muscle.
Cardiac Muscle
Cardiac muscle, shown in Figure 33.18, is found only in the heart. Like skeletal muscle, it has cross striations
in its cells, but cardiac muscle has a single, centrally located nucleus. Cardiac muscle is not under voluntary
controlbutcanbeinfluencedbytheautonomicnervoussystemtospeeduporslowdown.Anaddedfeatureto
cardiac muscle cells is a line than extends along the end of the cell as it abuts the next cardiac cell in the row.
Thislineiscalledanintercalateddisc:itassistsinpassingelectricalimpulseefficientlyfromonecelltothenext
and maintains the strong connection between neighboring cardiac cells.
PAGE: 1033
1022 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Nervous Tissues
Nervoustissuesaremadeofcellsspecializedtoreceiveandtransmitelectricalimpulsesfromspecificareasof
thebodyandtosendthemtospecificlocationsinthebody.Themaincellofthenervoussystemistheneuron,
illustratedinFigure33.19.Thelargestructurewithacentralnucleusisthecellbodyoftheneuron.Projections
fromthecellbodyareeitherdendritesspecializedinreceivinginputorasingleaxonspecializedintransmitting
impulses.Someglialcellsarealsoshown.Astrocytesregulatethechemicalenvironmentofthenervecell,and
oligodendrocytesinsulatetheaxonsotheelectricalnerveimpulseistransferredmoreefficiently.Otherglialcells
that are not shown support the nutritional and waste requirements of the neuron. Some of the glial cells are
phagocytic and remove debris or damaged cells from the tissue. A nerve consists of neurons and glial cells.
Figure33.19Theneuronhasprojectionscalleddendritesthatreceivesignalsandprojectionscalledaxonsthatsend
signals. Also shown are two types of glial cells: astrocytes regulate the chemical environment of the nerve cell, and
oligodendrocytes insulate the axon so the electrical nerve impulse is transferred more efficiently.
Click through the interactive review (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/tissues) to learn more about epithelial
tissues.
Pathologist
Apathologistisamedicaldoctororveterinarianwhohasspecializedinthelaboratorydetectionofdisease
inanimals,includinghumans.Theseprofessionalscompletemedicalschooleducationandfollowitwithan
extensive post-graduate residency at a medical center. A pathologist may oversee clinical laboratories for
the evaluation of body tissue and blood samples for the detection of disease or infection. They examine
tissuespecimensthroughamicroscopetoidentifycancersandotherdiseases.Somepathologistsperform
autopsies to determine the cause of death and the progression of disease.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1034
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1023
33.3 | Homeostasis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define homeostasis
• Describe the factors affecting homeostasis
• Discuss positive and negative feedback mechanisms used in homeostasis
• Describe thermoregulation of endothermic and ectothermic animals
Animal organs and organ systems constantly adjust to internal and external changes through a process called
homeostasis(“steadystate”).Thesechangesmightbeinthelevelofglucoseorcalciuminbloodorinexternal
temperatures. Homeostasis means to maintain dynamic equilibrium in the body. It is dynamic because it is
constantlyadjustingtothechangesthatthebody’ssystemsencounter.Itisequilibriumbecausebodyfunctions
are kept within specific ranges. Even an animal that is apparently inactive is maintaining this homeostatic
equilibrium.
Homeostatic Process
The goal of homeostasis is the maintenance of equilibrium around a point or value called a set point. While
therearenormalfluctuationsfromthesetpoint,thebody’ssystemswillusuallyattempttogobacktothispoint.
Achangeintheinternalorexternalenvironmentiscalledastimulusandisdetectedbyareceptor;theresponse
of the system is to adjust the deviation parameter toward the set point. For instance, if the body becomes too
warm,adjustmentsaremadetocooltheanimal.Iftheblood’sglucoserisesafterameal,adjustmentsaremade
to lower the blood glucose level by getting the nutrient into tissues that need it or to store it for later use.
Control of Homeostasis
When a change occurs in an animal’s environment, an adjustment must be made. The receptor senses the
change in the environment, then sends a signal to the control center (in most cases, the brain) which in turn
generates a response that is signaled to an effector. The effector is a muscle (that contracts or relaxes) or a
gland that secretes. Homeostatsis is maintained by negative feedback loops. Positive feedback loops actually
pushtheorganismfurtheroutofhomeostasis,butmaybenecessaryforlifetooccur.Homeostasisiscontrolled
by the nervous and endocrine system of mammals.
Negative Feedback Mechanisms
Anyhomeostaticprocessthatchangesthedirectionofthestimulusisanegativefeedbackloop.Itmayeither
increaseordecreasethestimulus,butthestimulusisnotallowedtocontinueasitdidbeforethereceptorsensed
it. In other words, if a level is too high, the body does something to bring it down, and conversely, if a level is
too low, the body does something to make it go up. Hence the term negative feedback. An example is animal
maintenance of blood glucose levels. When an animal has eaten, blood glucose levels rise. This is sensed
by the nervous system. Specialized cells in the pancreas sense this, and the hormone insulin is released by
the endocrine system. Insulin causes blood glucose levels to decrease, as would be expected in a negative
feedback system, as illustrated in Figure 33.20. However, if an animal has not eaten and blood glucose levels
decrease,thisissensedinanothergroupofcellsinthepancreas,andthehormoneglucagonisreleasedcausing
glucose levels to increase. This is still a negative feedback loop, but not in the direction expected by the use
of the term “negative.” Another example of an increase as a result of the feedback loop is the control of blood
calcium.Ifcalciumlevelsdecrease,specializedcellsintheparathyroidglandsensethisandreleaseparathyroid
hormone (PTH), causing an increased absorption of calcium through the intestines and kidneys and, possibly,
thebreakdownofboneinordertoliberatecalcium.TheeffectsofPTHaretoraisebloodlevelsoftheelement.
Negative feedback loops are the predominant mechanism used in homeostasis.
PAGE: 1035
1024 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Figure 33.20 Blood sugar levels are controlled by a negative feedback loop. (credit: modification of work by Jon
Sullivan)
Positive Feedback Loop
A positive feedback loop maintains the direction of the stimulus, possibly accelerating it. Few examples of
positivefeedbackloopsexistinanimalbodies,butoneisfoundinthecascadeofchemicalreactionsthatresult
inbloodclotting,orcoagulation.Asoneclottingfactorisactivated,itactivatesthenextfactorinsequenceuntila
fibrinclotisachieved.Thedirectionismaintained,notchanged,sothisispositivefeedback.Anotherexampleof
positivefeedbackisuterinecontractionsduringchildbirth,asillustratedinFigure33.21.Thehormoneoxytocin,
made by the endocrine system, stimulates the contraction of the uterus. This produces pain sensed by the
nervous system. Instead of lowering the oxytocin and causing the pain to subside, more oxytocin is produced
until the contractions are powerful enough to produce childbirth.
Figure 33.21The birth of a human infant is the result of positive feedback.
State whether each of the following processes is regulated by a positive feedback loop or a negative
feedback loop.
a. A person feels satiated after eating a large meal.
b. The blood has plenty of red blood cells. As a result, erythropoietin, a hormone that stimulates the
production of new red blood cells, is no longer released from the kidney.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1036
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1025
Set Point
It is possible to adjust a system’s set point. When this happens, the feedback loop works to maintain the new
setting.Anexampleofthisisbloodpressure:overtime,thenormalorsetpointforbloodpressurecanincrease
asaresultofcontinuedincreasesinbloodpressure.Thebodynolongerrecognizestheelevationasabnormal
and no attempt is made to return to the lower set point. The result is the maintenance of an elevated blood
pressurethatcanhaveharmfuleffectsonthebody.Medicationcanlowerbloodpressureandlowerthesetpoint
in the system to a more healthy level. This is called a process ofalterationof the set point in a feedback loop.
Changescanbemadeinagroupofbodyorgansystemsinordertomaintainasetpointinanothersystem.This
is called acclimatization. This occurs, for instance, when an animal migrates to a higher altitude than that to
whichitisaccustomed.Inordertoadjusttotheloweroxygenlevelsatthenewaltitude,thebodyincreasesthe
number of red blood cells circulating in the blood to ensure adequate oxygen delivery to the tissues. Another
example of acclimatization is animals that have seasonal changes in their coats: a heavier coat in the winter
ensuresadequateheatretention,andalightcoatinsummerassistsinkeepingbodytemperaturefromrisingto
harmful levels.
Feedback mechanisms can be understood in terms of driving a race car along a track: watch a short video
lesson on positive and negative feedback loops. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.)
(http://cnx.org/content/m66613/1.3/#eip-id2699660)
Homeostasis: Thermoregulation
Bodytemperatureaffectsbodyactivities.Generally,asbodytemperaturerises,enzymeactivityrisesaswell.For
everytendegreecentigraderiseintemperature,enzymeactivitydoubles,uptoapoint.Bodyproteins,including
o
enzymes,begintodenatureandlosetheirfunctionwithhighheat(around50 Cformammals).Enzymeactivity
will decrease by half for every ten degree centigrade drop in temperature, to the point of freezing, with a few
exceptions. Some fish can withstand freezing solid and return to normal with thawing.
Watch this Discovery Channel video on thermoregulation to see illustrations of this process in a variety
of animals. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66613/1.3/#eip-
id1168127177818)
Endotherms and Ectotherms
Animals can be divided into two groups: some maintain a constant body temperature in the face of differing
environmental temperatures, while others have a body temperature that is the same as their environment and
thusvarieswiththeenvironment.Animalsthatdonotcontroltheirbodytemperatureareectotherms.Thisgroup
has been called cold-blooded, but the term may not apply to an animal in the desert with a very warm body
temperature. In contrast to ectotherms, which rely on external temperatures to set their body temperatures,
poikilotherms are animals with constantly varying internal temperatures. An animal that maintains a constant
body temperature in the face of environmental changes is called a homeotherm. Endotherms are animals that
relyoninternalsourcesforbodytemperaturebutwhichcanexhibitextremesintemperature.Theseanimalsare
able to maintain a level of activity at cooler temperature, which an ectotherm cannot due to differing enzyme
levels of activity.
PAGE: 1037
1026 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
Heat can be exchanged between an animal and its environment through four mechanisms: radiation,
evaporation, convection, and conduction (Figure 33.22). Radiation is the emission of electromagnetic “heat”
waves.Heatcomesfromthesuninthismannerandradiatesfromdryskinthesameway.Heatcanberemoved
with liquid from a surface during evaporation. This occurs when a mammal sweats. Convection currents of air
remove heat from the surface of dry skin as the air passes over it. Heat will be conducted from one surface to
another during direct contact with the surfaces, such as an animal resting on a warm rock.
Figure 33.22 Heat can be exchanged by four mechanisms: (a) radiation, (b) evaporation, (c) convection, or (d)
conduction.(creditb:modificationofworkby“Kullez”/Flickr;creditc:modificationofworkbyChadRosenthal;creditd:
modification of work by “stacey.d”/Flickr)
Heat Conservation and Dissipation
Animals conserve or dissipate heat in a variety of ways. In certain climates, endothermic animals have some
form of insulation, such as fur, fat, feathers, or some combination thereof. Animals with thick fur or feathers
create an insulating layer of air between their skin and internal organs. Polar bears and seals live and swim in
a subfreezing environment and yet maintain a constant, warm, body temperature. The arctic fox, for example,
uses its fluffy tail as extra insulation when it curls up to sleep in cold weather. Mammals have a residual effect
fromshiveringandincreasedmuscleactivity:arrectorpilimusclescause“goosebumps,”causingsmallhairsto
standupwhentheindividualiscold;thishastheintendedeffectofincreasingbodytemperature.Mammalsuse
layers of fat to achieve the same end. Loss of significant amounts of body fat will compromise an individual’s
ability to conserve heat.
Endotherms use their circulatory systems to help maintain body temperature. Vasodilation brings more blood
and heat to the body surface, facilitating radiation and evaporative heat loss, which helps to cool the body.
Vasoconstriction reduces blood flow in peripheral blood vessels, forcing blood toward the core and the vital
organsfoundthere,andconservingheat.Someanimalshaveadaptionstotheircirculatorysystemthatenable
themtotransferheatfromarteriestoveins,warmingbloodreturningtotheheart.Thisiscalledacountercurrent
heatexchange;itpreventsthecoldvenousbloodfromcoolingtheheartandotherinternalorgans.Thisadaption
can be shut down in some animals to prevent overheating the internal organs. The countercurrent adaption
is found in many animals, including dolphins, sharks, bony fish, bees, and hummingbirds. In contrast, similar
adaptations can help cool endotherms when needed, such as dolphin flukes and elephant ears.
Some ectothermic animals use changes in their behavior to help regulate body temperature. For example, a
desertectothermicanimalmaysimplyseekcoolerareasduringthehottestpartofthedayinthedeserttokeep
fromgettingtoowarm.Thesameanimalsmayclimbontorockstocaptureheatduringacolddesertnight.Some
animalsseekwatertoaidevaporationincoolingthem,asseenwithreptiles.Otherectothermsusegroupactivity
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1038
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1027
such as the activity of bees to warm a hive to survive winter.
Manyanimals,especiallymammals,usemetabolicwasteheatasaheatsource.Whenmusclesarecontracted,
mostoftheenergyfromtheATPusedinmuscleactionsiswastedenergythattranslatesintoheat.Severecold
elicitsashiveringreflexthatgeneratesheatforthebody.Manyspeciesalsohaveatypeofadiposetissuecalled
brown fat that specializes in generating heat.
Neural Control of Thermoregulation
The nervous system is important to thermoregulation, as illustrated in Figure 33.22. The processes of
homeostasis and temperature control are centered in the hypothalamus of the advanced animal brain.
Figure 33.23The body is able to regulate temperature in response to signals from the nervous system.
When bacteria are destroyed by leuckocytes, pyrogens are released into the blood. Pyrogens reset
the body’s thermostat to a higher temperature, resulting in fever. How might pyrogens cause the body
temperature to rise?
The hypothalamus maintains the set point for body temperature through reflexes that cause vasodilation
and sweating when the body is too warm, or vasoconstriction and shivering when the body is too cold. It
respondstochemicalsfromthebody.Whenabacteriumisdestroyedbyphagocyticleukocytes,chemicalscalled
endogenouspyrogensarereleasedintotheblood.Thesepyrogenscirculatetothehypothalamusandresetthe
thermostat. This allows the body’s temperature to increase in what is commonly called a fever. An increase in
body temperature causes iron to be conserved, which reduces a nutrient needed by bacteria. An increase in
body heat also increases the activity of the animal’s enzymes and protective cells while inhibiting the enzymes
andactivityoftheinvadingmicroorganisms.Finally,heatitselfmayalsokillthepathogen.Afeverthatwasonce
thought to be a complication of an infection is now understood to be a normal defense mechanism.
PAGE: 1039
1028 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
KEY TERMS
acclimatization alteration in a body system in response to environmental change
alteration change of the set point in a homeostatic system
apodeme ingrowth of an animal’s exoskeleton that functions as an attachment site for muscles
asymmetrical describes animals with no axis of symmetry in their body pattern
basal metabolic rate (BMR) metabolic rate at rest in endothermic animals
canaliculus microchannel that connects the lacunae and aids diffusion between cells
cartilage typeofconnectivetissuewithalargeamountofgroundsubstancematrix,cellscalledchondrocytes,
and some amount of fibers
chondrocyte cell found in cartilage
columnar epithelia epithelia made of cells taller than they are wide, specialized in absorption
connective tissue type of tissue made of cells, ground substance matrix, and fibers
cuboidal epithelia epithelia made of cube-shaped cells, specialized in glandular functions
dorsal cavity body cavity on the posterior or back portion of an animal; includes the cranial and vertebral
cavities
ectotherm animal incapable of maintaining a relatively constant internal body temperature
endotherm animal capable of maintaining a relatively constant internal body temperature
epithelial tissue tissue that either lines or covers organs or other tissues
estivation torpor in response to extremely high temperatures and low water availability
fibrous connective tissue type of connective tissue with a high concentration of fibers
frontal (coronal) plane plane cutting through an animal separating the individual into front and back portions
fusiform animal body shape that is tubular and tapered at both ends
hibernation torpor over a long period of time, such as a winter
homeostasis dynamic equilibrium maintaining appropriate body functions
lacuna space in cartilage and bone that contains living cells
loose (areolar) connective tissue type of connective tissue with small amounts of cells, matrix, and fibers;
found around blood vessels
matrix component of connective tissue made of both living and nonliving (ground substances) cells
midsagittal plane plane cutting through an animal separating the individual into even right and left sides
negative feedback loop feedback to a control mechanism that increases or decreases a stimulus instead of
maintaining it
osteon subunit of compact bone
positive feedback loop feedback to a control mechanism that continues the direction of a stimulus
pseudostratified layer of epithelia that appears multilayered, but is a simple covering
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1040
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1029
sagittal plane plane cutting through an animal separating the individual into right and left sides
set point midpoint or target point in homeostasis
simple epithelia single layer of epithelial cells
squamous epithelia type of epithelia made of flat cells, specialized in aiding diffusion or preventing abrasion
standard metabolic rate (SMR) metabolic rate at rest in ectothermic animals
stratified epithelia multiple layers of epithelial cells
thermoregulation regulation of body temperature
torpor decrease in activity and metabolism that allows an animal to survive adverse conditions
trabecula tiny plate that makes up spongy bone and gives it strength
transitional epithelia epithelia that can transition for appearing multilayered to simple; also called uroepithelial
transverse (horizontal) plane plane cutting through an animal separating the individual into upper and lower
portions
ventral cavity bodycavityontheanteriororfrontportionofananimalthatincludesthethoraciccavitiesandthe
abdominopelvic cavities
CHAPTER SUMMARY
33.1Animal Form and Function
Animal bodies come in a variety of sizes and shapes. Limits on animal size and shape include impacts to their
movement. Diffusion affects their size and development. Bioenergetics describes how animals use and obtain
energy in relation to their body size, activity level, and environment.
33.2Animal Primary Tissues
The basic building blocks of complex animals are four primary tissues. These are combined to form organs,
which have a specific, specialized function within the body, such as the skin or kidney. Organs are organized
together to perform common functions in the form of systems. The four primary tissues are epithelia,
connective tissues, muscle tissues, and nervous tissues.
33.3Homeostasis
Homeostasis is a dynamic equilibrium that is maintained in body tissues and organs. It is dynamic because it is
constantly adjusting to the changes that the systems encounter. It is in equilibrium because body functions are
kept within a normal range, with some fluctuations around a set point for the processes.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 33.11Which of the following statements 2.Figure 33.21State whether each of the following
about types of epithelial cells is false? processes are regulated by a positive feedback loop
a. Simple columnar epithelial cells line the or a negative feedback loop.
tissue of the lung. a. A person feels satiated after eating a large
b. Simple cuboidal epithelial cells are involved meal.
in the filtering of blood in the kidney. b. The blood has plenty of red blood cells. As a
c. Pseudostratisfied columnar epithilia occur in result, erythropoietin, a hormone that
a single layer, but the arrangement of nuclei stimulates the production of new red blood
makes it appear that more than one layer is cells, is no longer released from the kidney.
present.
3.Figure 33.23When bacteria are destroyed by
d. Transitional epithelia change in thickness
leuckocytes, pyrogens are released into the blood.
depending on how full the bladder is.
Pyrogens reset the body’s thermostat to a higher
PAGE: 1041
1030 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
temperature, resulting in fever. How might pyrogens cause the body temperature to rise?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which type of animal maintains a constant internal a. It confuses predators.
body temperature? b. It allows the animal to gather food from all
a. endotherm sides.
b. ectotherm c. It allows the animal to undergo rapid,
c. coelomate purposeful movement in any direction.
d. mesoderm d. It lets an animal use its dorsal surface to
sense its environment.
5.The symmetry found in animals that move swiftly is
________. 12.Which type of epithelial cell is best adapted to aid
a. radial diffusion?
b. bilateral a. squamous
c. sequential b. cuboidal
d. interrupted c. columnar
d. transitional
6.What term describes the condition of a desert
mouse that lowers its metabolic rate and “sleeps” 13.Which type of epithelial cell is found in glands?
during the hot day?
a. turgid a. squamous
b. hibernation b. cuboidal
c. estivation c. columnar
d. normal sleep pattern d. transitional
7.A plane that divides an animal into equal right and 14.Which type of epithelial cell is found in the urinary
left portions is ________. bladder?
a. diagonal a. squamous
b. midsagittal b. cuboidal
c. coronal c. columnar
d. transverse d. transitional
8.A plane that divides an animal into dorsal and 15.Which type of connective tissue has the most
ventral portions is ________. fibers?
a. sagittal a. loose connective tissue
b. midsagittal b. fibrous connective tissue
c. coronal c. cartilage
d. transverse d. bone
9.The pleural cavity is a part of which cavity? 16.Which type of connective tissue has a
mineralized different matrix?
a. dorsal cavity a. loose connective tissue
b. thoracic cavity b. fibrous connective tissue
c. abdominal cavity c. cartilage
d. pericardial cavity d. bone
10.How could the increasing global temperature 17.The cell found in bone that breaks it down is
associated with climate change impact ectotherms? called an ________.
a. osteoblast
a. Ectotherm diversity will decrease in cool b. osteocyte
regions. c. osteoclast
b. Ectotherms will be able to be active all day d. osteon
in the tropics.
18.The cell found in bone that makes the bone is
c. Ectotherms will have to expend more
called an ________.
energy to cool their body temperatures.
a. osteoblast
d. Ectotherms will be able to expand into new
b. osteocyte
habitats.
c. osteoclast
11.Although most animals are bilaterally d. osteon
symmetrical, a few exhibit radial symmetry. What is
19.Plasma is the ________.
an advantage of radial symmetry?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1042
Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function 1031
a. fibers in blood a. lowering of blood glucose after a meal
b. matrix of blood b. blood clotting after an injury
c. cell that phagocytizes bacteria c. lactation during nursing
d. cell fragment found in the tissue d. uterine contractions during labor
20.The type of muscle cell under voluntary control is 25.Which method of heat exchange occurs during
the ________. direct contact between the source and animal?
a. smooth muscle
b. skeletal muscle a. radiation
c. cardiac muscle b. evaporation
d. visceral muscle c. convection
d. conduction
21.The part of a neuron that contains the nucleus is
the 26.The body’s thermostat is located in the
a. cell body ________.
b. dendrite a. homeostatic receptor
c. axon b. hypothalamus
d. glial c. medulla
d. vasodilation center
22.Why are intercalated discs essential to the
function of cardiac muscle? 27.Which of the following isnottrue about
a. The discs maintain the barriers between the acclimatization?
cells. a. Acclimatization allows animals to
b. The discs pass nutrients between cells. compensate for changes in their
c. The discs ensure that all the cardiac muscle environment.
cells beat as a single unit. b. Acclimatization improves function in a new
d. The discs control the heart rate. environment.
c. Acclimatization occurs when an animal tries
23.When faced with a sudden drop in environmental
to reestablish a homeostatic set point.
temperature, an endothermic animal will:
d. Acclimatization is passed on to offspring of
a. experience a drop in its body temperature
acclimated individuals.
b. wait to see if it goes lower
c. increase muscle activity to generate heat 28.Which of the following isnota way that
d. add fur or fat to increase insulation ectotherms can change their body temperatures?
24.Which is an example of negative feedback?
a. Sweating for evaporative cooling.
b. Adjusting the timing of their daily activities.
c. Seek out or avoid direct sunlight.
d. Huddle in a group.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
29.How does diffusion limit the size of an organism? system attacking, and how does this disrupt the
How is this counteracted? transfer of messages by the nervous system?
30.What is the relationship between BMR and body 36.When a person leads a sedentary life his skeletal
size? Why? muscles atrophy, but his smooth muscles do not.
Why?
31.Explain how using an open circulatory system
constrains the size of animals. 37.Why are negative feedback loops used to control
body homeostasis?
32.Describe one key environmental constraint for
ectotherms and one for endotherms. Why are they 38.Why is a fever a “good thing” during a bacterial
limited by different factors? infection?
33.How can squamous epithelia both facilitate 39.How is a condition such as diabetes a good
diffusion and prevent damage from abrasion? example of the failure of a set point in humans?
34.What are the similarities between cartilage and 40.On a molecular level, how can endotherms
bone? produce their own heat by adjusting processes
associated with cellular respiration? If needed, review
35.Multiple sclerosis is a debilitating autoimmune
Ch. 7 for details on respiration.
disease that results in the loss of the insulation
around neuron axons. What cell type is the immune
PAGE: 1043
1032 Chapter 33 | The Animal Body: Basic Form and Function
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1044
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1033
34 | ANIMAL NUTRITION
AND THE DIGESTIVE
SYSTEM
Figure 34.1 For humans, fruits and vegetables are important in maintaining a balanced diet. (credit: modification of
work by Julie Rybarczyk)
Chapter Outline
34.1:Digestive Systems
34.2:Nutrition and Energy Production
34.3:Digestive System Processes
34.4:Digestive System Regulation
Introduction
All living organisms need nutrients to survive. While plants can obtain the molecules required for cellular
function through the process of photosynthesis, most animals obtain their nutrients by the consumption of
other organisms. At the cellular level, the biological molecules necessary for animal function are amino acids,
lipid molecules, nucleotides, and simple sugars. However, the food consumed consists of protein, fat, and
complex carbohydrates. Animals must convert these macromolecules into the simple molecules required for
maintainingcellularfunctions,suchasassemblingnewmolecules,cells,andtissues.Theconversionofthefood
consumedtothenutrients requiredisamultistep processinvolvingdigestion andabsorption. Duringdigestion,
food particles are broken down to smaller components, and later, they are absorbed by the body.
One of the challenges in human nutrition is maintaining a balance between food intake, storage, and energy
PAGE: 1045
1034 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
expenditure. Imbalances can have serious health consequences. For example, eating too much food while
not expending much energy leads to obesity, which in turn will increase the risk of developing illnesses
such as type-2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The recent rise in obesity and related diseases makes
understanding the role of diet and nutrition in maintaining good health all the more important.
34.1 | Digestive Systems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the processes of digestion and absorption
• Compare and contrast different types of digestive systems
• Explain the specialized functions of the organs involved in processing food in the body
• Describe the ways in which organs work together to digest food and absorb nutrients
Animalsobtaintheirnutritionfromtheconsumptionofotherorganisms.Dependingontheirdiet,animalscanbe
classified into the following categories: plant eaters (herbivores), meat eaters (carnivores), and those that eat
both plants and animals (omnivores). The nutrients and macromolecules present in food are not immediately
accessible to the cells. There are a number of processes that modify food within the animal body in order to
make the nutrients and organic molecules accessible for cellular function. As animals evolved in complexity of
form and function, their digestive systems have also evolved to accommodate their various dietary needs.
Herbivores, Omnivores, and Carnivores
Herbivoresareanimalswhoseprimaryfoodsourceisplant-based.Examplesofherbivores,asshowninFigure
34.2includevertebrateslikedeer,koalas,andsomebirdspecies,aswellasinvertebratessuchascricketsand
caterpillars.Theseanimalshaveevolveddigestivesystemscapableofhandlinglargeamountsofplantmaterial.
Herbivores can be further classified into frugivores (fruit-eaters), granivores (seed eaters), nectivores (nectar
feeders), and folivores (leaf eaters).
Figure 34.2 Herbivores, like this (a) mule deer and (b) monarch caterpillar, eat primarily plant material. (credit a:
modification of work by Bill Ebbesen; credit b: modification of work by Doug Bowman)
Carnivores are animals that eat other animals. The word carnivore is derived from Latin and literally means
“meateater.”Wildcatssuchaslions,showninFigure34.3aandtigersareexamplesofvertebratecarnivores,
as are snakes and sharks, while invertebrate carnivores include sea stars, spiders, and ladybugs, shown in
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1046
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1035
Figure34.3b.Obligatecarnivoresarethosethatrelyentirelyonanimalfleshtoobtaintheirnutrients;examples
of obligate carnivores are members of the cat family, such as lions and cheetahs. Facultative carnivores are
thosethatalsoeatnon-animalfoodinadditiontoanimalfood.Notethatthereisnoclearlinethatdifferentiates
facultative carnivores from omnivores; dogs would be considered facultative carnivores.
Figure 34.3 Carnivores like the (a) lion eat primarily meat. The (b) ladybug is also a carnivore that consumes small
insects called aphids. (credit a: modification of work by Kevin Pluck; credit b: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Omnivores are animals that eat both plant- and animal-derived food. In Latin, omnivore means to eat
everything. Humans, bears (shown in Figure 34.4a), and chickens are example of vertebrate omnivores;
invertebrate omnivores include cockroaches and crayfish (shown inFigure 34.4b).
Figure34.4Omnivoreslikethe(a)bearand(b)crayfisheatbothplantandanimalbasedfood.(credita:modification
of work by Dave Menke; credit b: modification of work by Jon Sullivan)
Invertebrate Digestive Systems
Animals have evolved different types of digestive systems to aid in the digestion of the different foods they
consume. The simplest example is that of a gastrovascular cavity and is found in organisms with only one
openingfordigestion.Platyhelminthes(flatworms),Ctenophora(combjellies),andCnidaria(coral,jellyfish,and
sea anemones) use this type of digestion. Gastrovascular cavities, as shown in Figure 34.5a, are typically a
blindtubeorcavitywithonlyoneopening,the“mouth”,whichalsoservesasan“anus”.Ingestedmaterialenters
the mouth and passes through a hollow, tubular cavity. Cells within the cavity secrete digestive enzymes that
breakdown the food. The food particles are engulfed by the cells lining the gastrovascular cavity.
Thealimentarycanal,showninFigure34.5b,isamoreadvancedsystem:itconsistsofonetubewithamouth
atoneendandananusattheother.Earthworms areanexampleofananimalwith analimentary canal. Once
the food is ingested through the mouth, it passes through the esophagus and is stored in an organ called the
crop;thenitpassesintothegizzardwhereitischurnedanddigested.Fromthegizzard,thefoodpassesthrough
theintestine,thenutrientsareabsorbed,andthewasteiseliminatedasfeces,calledcastings,throughtheanus.
PAGE: 1047
1036 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Figure34.5(a)Agastrovascularcavityhasasingleopeningthroughwhichfoodisingestedandwasteisexcreted,as
showninthishydraandinthisjellyfishmedusa.(b)Analimentarycanalhastwoopenings:amouthforingestingfood,
and an anus for eliminating waste, as shown in this nematode.
Vertebrate Digestive Systems
Vertebrateshaveevolvedmorecomplexdigestivesystemstoadapttotheirdietaryneeds.Someanimalshavea
singlestomach,whileothershavemulti-chamberedstomachs.Birdshavedevelopedadigestivesystemadapted
to eating unmasticated food.
Monogastric: Single-chambered Stomach
As the word monogastric suggests, this type of digestive system consists of one (“mono”) stomach chamber
(“gastric”). Humans and many animals have a monogastric digestive system as illustrated in Figure 34.6ab.
The process of digestion begins with the mouth and the intake of food. The teeth play an important role in
masticating (chewing) or physically breaking down food into smaller particles. The enzymes present in saliva
alsobegintochemicallybreakdownfood.Theesophagusisalongtubethatconnectsthemouthtothestomach.
Usingperistalsis,orwave-likesmoothmusclecontractions,themusclesoftheesophaguspushthefoodtowards
the stomach. In order to speed up the actions of enzymes in the stomach, the stomach is an extremely acidic
environment,withapHbetween1.5and2.5.Thegastricjuices,whichincludeenzymesinthestomach,acton
the food particles and continue the process of digestion. Further breakdown of food takes place in the small
intestine where enzymes produced by the liver, the small intestine, and the pancreas continue the process of
digestion.Thenutrientsareabsorbedintothebloodstreamacrosstheepithelialcellsliningthewallsofthesmall
intestines. The waste material travels on to the large intestine where water is absorbed and the drier waste
material is compacted into feces; it is stored until it is excreted through the rectum.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1048
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1037
Figure 34.6 (a) Humans and herbivores, such as the (b) rabbit, have a monogastric digestive system. However, in
therabbitthesmallintestineandcecumareenlargedtoallowmoretimetodigestplantmaterial.Theenlargedorgan
provides more surface area for absorption of nutrients. Rabbits digest their food twice: the first time food passes
throughthedigestivesystem,itcollectsinthececum,andthenitpassesassoftfecescalledcecotrophes.Therabbit
re-ingests these cecotrophes to further digest them.
Avian
Birds face special challenges when it comes to obtaining nutrition from food. They do not have teeth and
so their digestive system, shown in Figure 34.7, must be able to process un-masticated food. Birds have
evolvedavarietyofbeaktypesthatreflectthevastvarietyintheirdiet,rangingfromseedsandinsectstofruits
and nuts. Because most birds fly, their metabolic rates are high in order to efficiently process food and keep
their body weight low. The stomach of birds has two chambers: the proventriculus, where gastric juices are
producedtodigestthefoodbeforeitentersthestomach,andthegizzard,wherethefoodisstored,soaked,and
mechanically ground. The undigested material forms food pellets that are sometimes regurgitated. Most of the
chemical digestion and absorption happens in the intestine and the waste is excreted through the cloaca.
PAGE: 1049
1038 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Figure 34.7 The avian esophagus has a pouch, called a crop, which stores food. Food passes from the crop to
the first of two stomachs, called the proventriculus, which contains digestive juices that breakdown food. From the
proventriculus,thefoodentersthesecondstomach,calledthegizzard,whichgrindsfood.Somebirdsswallowstones
or grit, which are stored in the gizzard, to aid the grinding process. Birds do not have separate openings to excrete
urineandfeces.Instead,uricacidfromthekidneysissecretedintothelargeintestineandcombinedwithwastefrom
the digestive process. This waste is excreted through an opening called the cloaca.
Avian Adaptations
Birds have a highly efficient, simplified digestive system. Recent fossil evidence has shown that the
evolutionarydivergenceofbirdsfromotherlandanimalswascharacterizedbystreamliningandsimplifying
the digestive system. Unlike many other animals, birds do not have teeth to chew their food. In place of
lips, they have sharp pointy beaks. The horny beak, lack of jaws, and the smaller tongue of the birds can
be traced back to their dinosaur ancestors. The emergence of these changes seems to coincide with the
inclusion of seeds in the bird diet. Seed-eating birds have beaks that are shaped for grabbing seeds and
thetwo-compartmentstomachallowsfordelegationoftasks.Sincebirdsneedtoremainlightinordertofly,
their metabolic rates are very high, which means they digest their food very quickly and need to eat often.
Contrast this with the ruminants, where the digestion of plant matter takes a very long time.
Ruminants
Ruminants are mainly herbivores like cows, sheep, and goats, whose entire diet consists of eating large
amounts of roughage or fiber. They have evolved digestive systems that help them digest vast amounts of
cellulose. An interesting feature of the ruminants’ mouth is that they do not have upper incisor teeth. They use
theirlowerteeth,tongueandlipstotearandchewtheirfood.Fromthemouth,thefoodtravelstotheesophagus
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1050
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1039
and on to the stomach.
Tohelpdigestthelargeamountofplantmaterial,thestomachoftheruminantsisamulti-chamberedorgan,as
illustratedinFigure34.8.Thefourcompartmentsofthestomacharecalledtherumen,reticulum,omasum,and
abomasum.Thesechamberscontainmanymicrobesthatbreakdowncelluloseandfermentingestedfood.The
abomasumisthe“true”stomachandistheequivalentofthemonogastricstomachchamberwheregastricjuices
aresecreted.Thefour-compartmentgastricchamberprovideslargerspaceandthemicrobialsupportnecessary
to digest plant material in ruminants. The fermentation process produces large amounts of gas in the stomach
chamber, which must be eliminated. As in other animals, the small intestine plays an important role in nutrient
absorption, and the large intestine helps in the elimination of waste.
Figure34.8Ruminantanimals,suchasgoatsandcows,havefourstomachs.Thefirsttwostomachs,therumenand
the reticulum, contain prokaryotes and protists that are able to digest cellulose fiber. The ruminant regurgitates cud
from the reticulum, chews it, and swallows it into a third stomach, the omasum, which removes water. The cud then
passes onto the fourth stomach, the abomasum, where it is digested by enzymes produced by the ruminant.
Pseudo-ruminants
Some animals, such as camels and alpacas, are pseudo-ruminants. They eat a lot of plant material and
roughage. Digesting plant material is not easy because plant cell walls contain the polymeric sugar molecule
cellulose.Thedigestiveenzymesoftheseanimalscannotbreakdowncellulose,butmicroorganismspresentin
thedigestivesystemcan.Therefore,thedigestivesystemmustbeabletohandlelargeamountsofroughageand
breakdown the cellulose. Pseudo-ruminants have a three-chamber stomach in the digestive system. However,
theircecum—apouchedorganatthebeginningofthelargeintestinecontainingmanymicroorganismsthatare
necessary for the digestion of plant materials—is large and is the site where the roughage is fermented and
digested. These animals do not have a rumen but have an omasum, abomasum, and reticulum.
Parts of the Digestive System
The vertebrate digestive system is designed to facilitate the transformation of food matter into the nutrient
components that sustain organisms.
Oral Cavity
The oral cavity, or mouth, is the point of entry of food into the digestive system, illustrated in Figure 34.9. The
food consumed is broken into smaller particles by mastication, the chewing action of the teeth. All mammals
have teeth and can chew their food.
Theextensivechemicalprocessofdigestionbeginsinthemouth.Asfoodisbeingchewed,saliva,producedby
PAGE: 1051
1040 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
thesalivaryglands,mixeswiththefood.Salivaisawaterysubstanceproducedinthemouthsofmanyanimals.
There are three major glands that secrete saliva—the parotid, the submandibular, and the sublingual. Saliva
contains mucus that moistens food and buffers the pH of the food. Saliva also contains immunoglobulins and
lysozymes, which have antibacterial action to reduce tooth decay by inhibiting growth of some bacteria. Saliva
alsocontainsanenzymecalledsalivaryamylasethatbeginstheprocessofconvertingstarchesinthefoodinto
adisaccharidecalledmaltose.Anotherenzymecalledlipaseisproducedbythecellsinthetongue.Lipasesare
aclassofenzymesthatcanbreakdowntriglycerides.Thelinguallipasebeginsthebreakdownoffatcomponents
inthefood.Thechewingandwettingactionprovidedbytheteethandsalivapreparethefoodintoamasscalled
the bolus for swallowing. The tongue helps in swallowing—moving the bolus from the mouth into the pharynx.
Thepharynxopenstotwopassageways:thetrachea,whichleadstothelungs,andtheesophagus,whichleads
to the stomach. The trachea has an opening called the glottis, which is covered by a cartilaginous flap called
theepiglottis.Whenswallowing,theepiglottisclosestheglottisandfoodpassesintotheesophagusandnotthe
trachea. This arrangement allows food to be kept out of the trachea.
Figure 34.9 Digestion of food begins in the (a) oral cavity. Food is masticated by teeth and moistened by saliva
secreted from the (b) salivary glands. Enzymes in the saliva begin to digest starches and fats. With the help of the
tongue, the resulting bolus is moved into the esophagus by swallowing. (credit: modification of work by the National
Cancer Institute)
Esophagus
The esophagus is a tubular organ that connects the mouth to the stomach. The chewed and softened food
passesthroughtheesophagusafterbeingswallowed.Thesmoothmusclesoftheesophagusundergoaseries
ofwavelikemovementscalledperistalsisthatpushthefoodtowardthestomach,asillustratedinFigure34.10.
Theperistalsiswaveisunidirectional—itmovesfoodfromthemouthtothestomach,andreversemovementis
not possible. The peristaltic movement of the esophagus is an involuntary reflex; it takes place in response to
the act of swallowing.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1052
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1041
Figure 34.10The esophagus transfers food from the mouth to the stomach through peristaltic movements.
A ring-like muscle called a sphincter forms valves in the digestive system. The gastro-esophageal sphincter
is located at the stomach end of the esophagus. In response to swallowing and the pressure exerted by the
bolusoffood,thissphincteropens,andthebolusentersthestomach.Whenthereisnoswallowingaction,this
sphincter is shut and prevents the contents of the stomach from traveling up the esophagus. Many animals
haveatruesphincter;however,inhumans,thereisnotruesphincter,buttheesophagusremainsclosedwhen
thereisnoswallowingaction.Acidrefluxor“heartburn”occurswhentheacidicdigestivejuicesescapeintothe
esophagus.
Stomach
A large part of digestion occurs in the stomach, shown in Figure 34.11. The stomach is a saclike organ that
secretesgastricdigestivejuices.ThepHinthestomachisbetween1.5and2.5.Thishighlyacidicenvironmentis
requiredforthechemicalbreakdownoffoodandtheextractionofnutrients.Whenempty,thestomachisarather
smallorgan;however,itcanexpandtoupto20timesitsrestingsizewhenfilledwithfood.Thischaracteristicis
particularly useful for animals that need to eat when food is available.
PAGE: 1053
1042 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Figure34.11Thehumanstomachhasanextremelyacidicenvironmentwheremostoftheproteingetsdigested.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Which of the following statements about the digestive system is false?
a. Chyme is a mixture of food and digestive juices that is produced in the stomach.
b. Food enters the large intestine before the small intestine.
c. In the small intestine, chyme mixes with bile, which emulsifies fats.
d. The stomach is separated from the small intestine by the pyloric sphincter.
The stomach is also the major site for protein digestion in animals other than ruminants. Protein digestion is
mediated by an enzyme called pepsin in the stomach chamber. Pepsin is secreted by the chief cells in the
stomachinaninactiveformcalledpepsinogen.Pepsinbreakspeptidebondsandcleavesproteinsintosmaller
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1054
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1043
polypeptides; it also helps activate more pepsinogen, starting a positive feedback mechanism that generates
morepepsin.Anothercelltype—parietalcells—secretehydrogenandchlorideions,whichcombineinthelumen
toformhydrochloricacid,theprimaryacidiccomponentofthestomachjuices.Hydrochloricacidhelpstoconvert
the inactive pepsinogen to pepsin. The highly acidic environment also kills many microorganisms in the food
and, combined with the action of the enzyme pepsin, results in the hydrolysis of protein in the food. Chemical
digestion is facilitated by the churning action of the stomach. Contraction and relaxation of smooth muscles
mixes the stomach contents about every 20 minutes. The partially digested food and gastric juice mixture is
called chyme. Chyme passes from the stomach to the small intestine. Further protein digestion takes place in
thesmallintestine.Gastricemptyingoccurswithintwotosixhoursafterameal.Onlyasmallamountofchyme
isreleasedintothesmallintestineatatime.Themovementofchymefromthestomachintothesmallintestine
is regulated by the pyloric sphincter.
When digesting protein and some fats, the stomach lining must be protected from getting digested by pepsin.
There are two points to consider when describing how the stomach lining is protected. First, as previously
mentioned, the enzyme pepsin is synthesized in the inactive form. This protects the chief cells, because
pepsinogen does not have the same enzyme functionality of pepsin. Second, the stomach has a thick mucus
lining that protects the underlying tissue from the action of the digestive juices. When this mucus lining is
ruptured, ulcers can form in the stomach. Ulcers are open wounds in or on an organ caused by bacteria
(Helicobacter pylori) when the mucus lining is ruptured and fails to reform.
Small Intestine
Chymemovesfromthestomachtothesmallintestine.Thesmallintestineistheorganwherethedigestionof
protein, fats, and carbohydrates is completed. The small intestine is a long tube-like organ with a highly folded
surfacecontainingfinger-likeprojectionscalledthevilli.Theapicalsurfaceofeachvillushasmanymicroscopic
projections called microvilli. These structures, illustrated in Figure 34.12, are lined with epithelial cells on the
luminalsideandallowforthenutrientstobeabsorbedfromthedigestedfoodandabsorbedintothebloodstream
on the other side. The villi and microvilli, with their many folds, increase the surface area of the intestine and
increaseabsorptionefficiencyofthenutrients.Absorbednutrientsinthebloodarecarriedintothehepaticportal
vein, which leads to the liver. There, the liver regulates the distribution of nutrients to the rest of the body and
removes toxic substances, including drugs, alcohol, and some pathogens.
PAGE: 1055
1044 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Figure34.12Villiarefoldsonthesmallintestineliningthatincreasethesurfaceareatofacilitatetheabsorption
of nutrients.
Which of the following statements about the small intestine is false?
a. Absorptivecellsthatlinethesmallintestinehavemicrovilli,smallprojectionsthatincreasesurfacearea
and aid in the absorption of food.
b. The inside of the small intestine has many folds, called villi.
c. Microvilli are lined with blood vessels as well as lymphatic vessels.
d. The inside of the small intestine is called the lumen.
Thehumansmallintestineisover6mlongandisdividedintothreeparts:theduodenum,thejejunum,andthe
ileum. The “C-shaped,” fixed part of the small intestine is called the duodenum and is shown in Figure 34.11.
Theduodenumisseparatedfromthestomachbythepyloricsphincterwhichopenstoallowchymetomovefrom
the stomach to the duodenum. In the duodenum, chyme is mixed with pancreatic juices in an alkaline solution
rich in bicarbonate that neutralizes the acidity of chyme and acts as a buffer. Pancreatic juices also contain
severaldigestiveenzymes.Digestivejuicesfromthepancreas,liver,andgallbladder,aswellasfromglandcells
oftheintestinalwallitself,entertheduodenum.Bileisproducedintheliverandstoredandconcentratedinthe
gallbladder. Bile contains bile salts which emulsify lipids while the pancreas produces enzymes that catabolize
starches, disaccharides, proteins, and fats. These digestive juices breakdown the food particles in the chyme
into glucose, triglycerides, and amino acids. Some chemical digestion of food takes place in the duodenum.
Absorption of fatty acids also takes place in the duodenum.
Thesecondpartofthesmallintestineiscalledthejejunum,showninFigure34.11.Here,hydrolysisofnutrients
is continued while most of the carbohydrates and amino acids are absorbed through the intestinal lining. The
bulk of chemical digestion and nutrient absorption occurs in the jejunum.
The ileum, also illustrated in Figure 34.11 is the last part of the small intestine and here the bile salts and
vitamins are absorbed into the bloodstream. The undigested food is sent to the colon from the ileum via
peristaltic movements of the muscle. The ileum ends and the large intestine begins at the ileocecal valve. The
vermiform,“worm-like,”appendixislocatedattheileocecalvalve.Theappendixofhumanssecretesnoenzymes
and has an insignificant role in immunity.
Large Intestine
The large intestine, illustrated in Figure 34.13, reabsorbs the water from the undigested food material and
processes the waste material. The human large intestine is much smaller in length compared to the small
intestine but larger in diameter. It has three parts: the cecum, the colon, and the rectum. The cecum joins the
ileum to the colon and is the receiving pouch for the waste matter. The colon is home to many bacteria or
“intestinal flora” that aid in the digestive processes. The colon can be divided into four regions, the ascending
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1056
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1045
colon, the transverse colon, the descending colon, and the sigmoid colon. The main functions of the colon are
toextractthewaterandmineralsaltsfromundigestedfood,andtostorewastematerial.Carnivorousmammals
have a shorter large intestine compared to herbivorous mammals due to their diet.
Figure34.13Thelargeintestinereabsorbswaterfromundigestedfoodandstoreswastematerialuntilitiseliminated.
Rectum and Anus
Therectumistheterminalendofthelargeintestine,asshowninFigure34.13.Theprimaryroleoftherectum
istostorethefecesuntildefecation.Thefecesarepropelledusingperistalticmovementsduringelimination.The
anusisanopeningatthefar-endofthedigestivetractandistheexitpointforthewastematerial.Twosphincters
between the rectum and anus control elimination: the inner sphincter is involuntary and the outer sphincter is
voluntary.
Accessory Organs
Theorgansdiscussedabovearetheorgansofthedigestivetractthroughwhichfoodpasses.Accessoryorgans
areorgansthataddsecretions(enzymes)thatcatabolizefoodintonutrients.Accessoryorgansincludesalivary
glands, the liver, the pancreas, and the gallbladder. The liver, pancreas, and gallbladder are regulated by
hormones in response to the food consumed.
The liver is the largest internal organ in humans and it plays a very important role in digestion of fats and
detoxifyingblood.Theliverproducesbile,adigestivejuicethatisrequiredforthebreakdownoffattycomponents
of the food in the duodenum. The liver also processes the vitamins and fats and synthesizes many plasma
proteins.
Thepancreasisanotherimportantglandthatsecretesdigestivejuices.Thechymeproducedfromthestomach
is highly acidic in nature; the pancreatic juices contain high levels of bicarbonate, an alkali that neutralizes the
acidic chyme. Additionally, the pancreatic juices contain a large variety of enzymes that are required for the
digestion of protein and carbohydrates.
The gallbladder is a small organ that aids the liver by storing bile and concentrating bile salts. When chyme
containing fatty acids enters the duodenum, the bile is secreted from the gallbladder into the duodenum.
34.2 | Nutrition and Energy Production
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain why an animal’s diet should be balanced and meet the needs of the body
• Define the primary components of food
• Describe the essential nutrients required for cellular function that cannot be synthesized by the animal
body
• Explain how energy is produced through diet and digestion
• Describe how excess carbohydrates and energy are stored in the body
PAGE: 1057
1046 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Given the diversity of animal life on our planet, it is not surprising that the animal diet would also vary
substantially.The animaldiet isthe sourceofmaterials neededforbuilding DNA andother complexmolecules
needed for growth, maintenance, and reproduction; collectively these processes are called biosynthesis. The
diet is also the source of materials for ATP production in the cells. The diet must be balanced to provide the
minerals and vitamins that are required for cellular function.
Food Requirements
What are the fundamental requirements of the animal diet? The animal diet should be well balanced and
providenutrientsrequiredforbodilyfunctionandthemineralsandvitaminsrequiredformaintainingstructureand
regulationnecessaryforgoodhealthandreproductivecapability.Theserequirementsforahumanareillustrated
graphically inFigure 34.14
Figure 34.14For humans, a balanced diet includes fruits, vegetables, grains, and protein. (credit: USDA)
The first step in ensuring that you are meeting the food requirements of your body is an awareness of the
food groups and the nutrients they provide. To learn more about each food group and the recommended
dailyamounts,explorethisinteractivesite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/food_groups)bytheUnitedStates
Department of Agriculture.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1058
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1047
Let’s Move! Campaign
ObesityisagrowingepidemicandtherateofobesityamongchildrenisrapidlyrisingintheUnitedStates.
To combat childhood obesity and ensure that children get a healthy start in life, first lady Michelle Obama
has launched the Let’s Move! campaign. The goal of this campaign is to educate parents and caregivers
onprovidinghealthynutritionandencouragingactivelifestylestofuturegenerations.Thisprogramaimsto
involvetheentirecommunity,includingparents,teachers,andhealthcareproviderstoensurethatchildren
haveaccesstohealthyfoods—morefruits,vegetables,andwholegrains—andconsumefewercaloriesfrom
processedfoods.Anothergoalistoensurethatchildrengetphysicalactivity.Withtheincreaseintelevision
viewing and stationary pursuits such as video games, sedentary lifestyles have become the norm. Learn
more athttps://letsmove.obamawhitehouse.archives.gov (http://openstax.org/l/Letsmove).
Organic Precursors
Theorganicmoleculesrequiredforbuildingcellularmaterialandtissuesmustcomefromfood.Carbohydratesor
sugarsaretheprimarysourceoforganiccarbonsintheanimalbody.Duringdigestion,digestiblecarbohydrates
are ultimately broken down into glucose and used to provide energy through metabolic pathways. Complex
carbohydrates, including polysaccharides, can be broken down into glucose through biochemical modification;
however, humans do not produce the enzyme cellulase and lack the ability to derive glucose from the
polysaccharide cellulose. In humans, these molecules provide the fiber required for moving waste through the
largeintestineandahealthycolon.Theintestinalflorainthehumangutareabletoextractsomenutritionfrom
theseplantfibers.Theexcesssugarsinthebodyareconvertedintoglycogenandstoredintheliverandmuscles
forlateruse.Glycogenstoresareusedtofuelprolongedexertions,suchaslong-distancerunning,andtoprovide
energy during food shortage. Excess glycogen can be converted to fats, which are stored in the lower layer of
theskinofmammalsforinsulationandenergystorage.Excessdigestiblecarbohydratesarestoredbymammals
in order to survive famine and aid in mobility.
Another important requirement is that of nitrogen. Protein catabolism provides a source of organic nitrogen.
Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins and protein breakdown provides amino acids that are used for
cellularfunction.Thecarbonandnitrogenderivedfromthesebecomethebuildingblockfornucleotides,nucleic
acids, proteins, cells, and tissues. Excess nitrogen must be excreted as it is toxic. Fats add flavor to food and
promote a sense of satiety or fullness. Fatty foods are also significant sources of energy because one gram
of fat contains nine calories. Fats are required in the diet to aid the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and the
production of fat-soluble hormones.
Essential Nutrients
Whiletheanimalbodycansynthesizemanyofthemoleculesrequiredforfunctionfromtheorganicprecursors,
therearesomenutrientsthatneedtobeconsumedfromfood.Thesenutrientsaretermedessentialnutrients,
meaning they must be eaten, and the body cannot produce them.
Theomega-3alpha-linolenicacidandtheomega-6linoleicacidareessentialfattyacidsneededtomakesome
membranephospholipids.Vitaminsareanotherclassofessentialorganicmoleculesthatarerequiredinsmall
quantitiesformanyenzymestofunctionand,forthisreason,areconsideredtobecoenzymes.Absenceorlow
levelsofvitaminscanhaveadramaticeffectonhealth,asoutlinedinTable34.1andTable34.2.Bothfat-soluble
and water-soluble vitamins must be obtained from food. Minerals, listed in Table 34.3, are inorganic essential
nutrientsthatmustbeobtainedfromfood.Amongtheirmanyfunctions,mineralshelpinstructureandregulation
andareconsideredcofactors.Certainaminoacidsalsomustbeprocuredfromfoodandcannotbesynthesized
bythebody.Theseaminoacidsarethe“essential”aminoacids.Thehumanbodycansynthesizeonly11ofthe
20requiredaminoacids;therestmustbeobtainedfromfood.TheessentialaminoacidsarelistedinTable34.4.
PAGE: 1059
1048 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Water-soluble Essential Vitamins
Vitamin Function Deficiencies Can Lead To Sources
Needed by the body to process lipids, Milk, meat,
Vitamin B1 Muscle weakness, Beriberi: reduced
proteins, and carbohydrates; coenzyme dried beans,
(Thiamine) heart function, CNS problems
removes CO2from organic compounds whole grains
Cracks or sores on the outer surface
Meat, eggs,
Takes an active role in metabolism, of the lips (cheliosis); inflammation
Vitamin B2 enriched
aiding in the conversion of food to energy and redness of the tongue; moist,
(Riboflavin) grains,
(FAD and FMN) scaly skin inflammation (seborrheic
vegetables
dermatitis)
Used by the body to release energy from
carbohydrates and to process alcohol; Pellagra, which can result in Meat, eggs,
Vitamin B3
required for the synthesis of sex dermatitis, diarrhea, dementia, and grains, nuts,
(Niacin)
hormones; component of coenzyme death potatoes
+ +
NAD and NADP
Meat, whole
Vitamin B5 Assists in producing energy from foods Fatigue, poor coordination, retarded
grains, milk,
(Pantothenic (lipids, in particular); component of growth, numbness, tingling of hands
fruits,
acid) coenzyme A and feet
vegetables
Meat, dairy
The principal vitamin for processing Irritability, depression, confusion,
Vitamin B6 products,
amino acids and lipids; also helps mouth sores or ulcers, anemia,
(Pyridoxine) whole grains,
convert nutrients into energy muscular twitching
orange juice
Used in energy and amino acid Meat, eggs,
Hair loss, dermatitis, depression,
Vitamin B7 metabolism, fat synthesis, and fat legumes and
numbness and tingling in the
(Biotin) breakdown; helps the body use blood other
extremities; neuromuscular disorders
sugar vegetables
Leafy green
Assists the normal development of cells,
Deficiency during pregnancy is vegetables,
Vitamin B9 especially during fetal development;
associated with birth defects, such as whole wheat,
(Folic acid) helps metabolize nucleic and amino
neural tube defects and anemia fruits, nuts,
acids
legumes
Maintains healthy nervous system and Meat, eggs,
Vitamin B12 Anemia, neurological disorders,
assists with blood cell formation; animal
(Cobalamin) numbness, loss of balance
coenzyme in nucleic acid metabolism products
Citrus fruits,
Vitamin C Helps maintain connective tissue: bone, Scurvy, which results in bleeding, hair broccoli,
(Ascorbic cartilage, and dentin; boosts the immune and tooth loss; joint pain and tomatoes, red
acid) system swelling; delayed wound healing sweet bell
peppers
Table 34.1
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1060
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1049
Fat-soluble Essential Vitamins
Deficiencies
Vitamin Function Can Lead Sources
To
Critical to the development of bones, teeth, and Night-blindness, Dark green leafy
Vitamin A skin; helps maintain eyesight, enhances the skin disorders, vegetables, yellow-
(Retinol) immune system, fetal development, gene impaired orange vegetables,
expression immunity fruits, milk, butter
Critical for calcium absorption for bone
Rickets,
development and strength; maintains a stable Cod liver oil, milk, egg
Vitamin D osteomalacia,
nervous system; maintains a normal and strong yolk
immunity
heartbeat; helps in blood clotting
Deficiency is Wheat germ oil,
Lessens oxidative damage of cells and prevents
Vitamin E rare; anemia, unrefined vegetable
lung damage from pollutants; vital to the immune
(Tocopherol) nervous system oils, nuts, seeds,
system
degeneration grains
Vitamin K Bleeding and Leafy green
Essential to blood clotting
(Phylloquinone) easy bruising vegetables, tea
Table 34.2
Figure 34.15 A healthy diet should include a variety of foods to ensure that needs for essential nutrients are met.
(credit: Keith Weller, USDA ARS)
Minerals and Their Function in the Human Body
Deficiencies Can
Mineral Function Sources
Lead To
Needed for muscle and neuron function;
Osteoporosis, rickets,
heart health; builds bone and supports Milk, yogurt, fish, green leafy
*Calcium muscle spasms,
synthesis and function of blood cells; vegetables, legumes
impaired growth
nerve function
Table 34.3
PAGE: 1061
1050 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Minerals and Their Function in the Human Body
Deficiencies Can
Mineral Function Sources
Lead To
Needed for production of hydrochloric Muscle cramps, mood
*Chlorine acid (HCl) in the stomach and nerve disturbances, reduced Table salt
function; osmotic balance appetite
Required component of many redox
Copper
enzymes, including cytochrome c Copper deficiency is Liver, oysters, cocoa,
(trace
oxidase; cofactor for hemoglobin rare chocolate, sesame, nuts
amounts)
synthesis
Required for the synthesis of thyroid Seafood, iodized salt, dairy
Iodine Goiter
hormones products
Anemia, which causes Red meat, leafy green
Required for many proteins and
poor concentration, vegetables, fish (tuna,
Iron enzymes, notably hemoglobin, to
fatigue, and poor salmon), eggs, dried fruits,
prevent anemia
immune function beans, whole grains
Required cofactor for ATP formation;
Mood disturbances, Whole grains, leafy green
*Magnesium bone formation; normal membrane
muscle spasms vegetables
functions; muscle function
Manganese
A cofactor in enzyme functions; trace Manganese deficiency
(trace Common in most foods
amounts are required is rare
amounts)
Molybdenum Acts as a cofactor for three essential
Molybdenum deficiency
(trace enzymes in humans: sulfite oxidase,
is rare
amounts) xanthine oxidase, and aldehyde oxidase
A component of bones and teeth; helps Weakness, bone
Milk, hard cheese, whole
*Phosphorus regulate acid-base balance; nucleotide abnormalities, calcium
grains, meats
synthesis loss
Cardiac rhythm
Vital for muscles, heart, and nerve Legumes, potato skin,
*Potassium disturbance, muscle
function tomatoes, bananas
weakness
Selenium A cofactor essential to activity of
Selenium deficiency is
(trace antioxidant enzymes like glutathione Common in most foods
rare
amounts) peroxidase; trace amounts are required
Systemic electrolyte required for many Muscle cramps,
*Sodium functions; acid-base balance; water fatigue, reduced Table salt
balance; nerve function appetite
Required for several enzymes such as
Anemia, poor wound
Zinc (trace carboxypeptidase, liver alcohol
healing, can lead to Common in most foods
amounts) dehydrogenase, and carbonic
short stature
anhydrase
*Greater than 200mg/day required
Table 34.3
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1062
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1051
Essential Amino Acids
Amino acids that must be consumed Amino acids anabolized by the body
isoleucine alanine
leucine selenocysteine
lysine aspartate
methionine cysteine
phenylalanine glutamate
tryptophan glycine
valine proline
histidine* serine
threonine tyrosine
arginine* asparagine
*The human body can synthesize histidine and arginine, but not in the quantities required, especially for
growing children.
Table 34.4
Food Energy and ATP
Animalsneedfoodtoobtainenergyandmaintainhomeostasis.Homeostasisistheabilityofasystemtomaintain
astableinternalenvironmenteveninthefaceofexternalchangestotheenvironment.Forexample,thenormal
body temperature of humans is 37°C (98.6°F). Humans maintain this temperature even when the external
temperature is hot or cold. It takes energy to maintain this body temperature, and animals obtain this energy
from food.
The primary source of energy for animals is carbohydrates, mainly glucose. Glucose is called the body’s fuel.
Thedigestiblecarbohydratesinananimal’sdietareconvertedtoglucosemoleculesthroughaseriesofcatabolic
chemical reactions.
Adenosine triphosphate, or ATP, is the primary energy currency in cells; ATP stores energy in phosphate ester
bonds. ATP releases energy when the phosphodiester bonds are broken and ATP is converted to ADP and
a phosphate group. ATP is produced by the oxidative reactions in the cytoplasm and mitochondrion of the
cell,wherecarbohydrates,proteins,andfatsundergoaseriesofmetabolicreactionscollectivelycalledcellular
respiration. For example, glycolysis is a series of reactions in which glucose is converted to pyruvic acid and
some of its chemical potential energy is transferred to NADH and ATP.
ATPisrequiredforallcellularfunctions.Itisusedtobuildtheorganicmoleculesthatarerequiredforcellsand
tissues; it provides energy for muscle contraction and for the transmission of electrical signals in the nervous
system. When the amount of ATP is available in excess of the body’s requirements, the liver uses the excess
ATP and excess glucose to produce molecules called glycogen. Glycogen is a polymeric form of glucose and
is stored in the liver and skeletal muscle cells. When blood sugar drops, the liver releases glucose from stores
of glycogen. Skeletal muscle converts glycogen to glucose during intense exercise. The process of converting
glucose and excess ATP to glycogen and the storage of excess energy is an evolutionarily important step in
helping animals deal with mobility, food shortages, and famine.
PAGE: 1063
1052 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Obesity
ObesityisamajorhealthconcernintheUnitedStates,andthereisagrowingfocusonreducingobesityand
the diseases it may lead to, such as type-2 diabetes, cancers of the colon and breast, and cardiovascular
disease. How does the food consumed contribute to obesity?
Fatty foods are calorie-dense, meaning that they have more calories per unit mass than carbohydrates or
proteins.Onegramofcarbohydrateshasfourcalories,onegramofproteinhasfourcalories,andonegram
of fat has nine calories. Animals tend to seek lipid-rich food for their higher energy content.
The signals of hunger (“time to eat”) and satiety (“time to stop eating”) are controlled in the hypothalamus
region of the brain. Foods that are rich in fatty acids tend to promote satiety more than foods that are rich
only in carbohydrates.
ExcesscarbohydrateandATPareusedbythelivertosynthesizeglycogen.Thepyruvateproducedduring
glycolysis is used to synthesize fatty acids. When there is more glucose in the body than required, the
resulting excess pyruvate is converted into molecules that eventually result in the synthesis of fatty acids
within the body. These fatty acids are stored in adipose cells—the fat cells in the mammalian body whose
primary role is to store fat for later use.
It is important to note that some animals benefit from obesity. Polar bears and seals need body fat for
insulationandtokeepthemfromlosingbodyheatduringArcticwinters.Whenfoodisscarce,storedbody
fatprovidesenergyformaintaininghomeostasis.Fatspreventfamineinmammals,allowingthemtoaccess
energywhenfoodisnotavailableonadailybasis;fatsarestoredwhenalargekillismadeorlotsoffood
is available.
34.3 | Digestive System Processes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the process of digestion
• Detail the steps involved in digestion and absorption
• Define elimination
• Explain the role of both the small and large intestines in absorption
Obtainingnutritionandenergyfromfoodisamultistepprocess.Fortrueanimals,thefirststepisingestion,the
actoftakinginfood.Thisisfollowedbydigestion,absorption,andelimination.Inthefollowingsections,eachof
these steps will be discussed in detail.
Ingestion
Thelargemoleculesfoundinintactfoodcannotpassthroughthecellmembranes.Foodneedstobebrokeninto
smallerparticlessothatanimalscanharnessthenutrientsandorganicmolecules.Thefirststepinthisprocess
isingestion.Ingestionistheprocessoftakinginfoodthroughthemouth.Invertebrates,theteeth,saliva,and
tongueplayimportantrolesinmastication(preparingthefoodintobolus).Whilethefoodisbeingmechanically
brokendown,theenzymesinsalivabegintochemicallyprocessthefoodaswell.Thecombinedactionofthese
processesmodifiesthefoodfromlargeparticlestoasoftmassthatcanbeswallowedandcantravelthelength
of the esophagus.
Digestion and Absorption
Digestion is the mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into small organic fragments. It is important to
breakdown macromolecules into smaller fragments that are of suitable size for absorption across the digestive
epithelium. Large, complex molecules of proteins, polysaccharides, and lipids must be reduced to simpler
particlessuchassimplesugarbeforetheycanbeabsorbedbythedigestiveepithelialcells.Differentorgansplay
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1064
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1053
specificrolesinthedigestiveprocess.Theanimaldietneedscarbohydrates,protein,andfat,aswellasvitamins
andinorganiccomponentsfornutritionalbalance.Howeachofthesecomponentsisdigestedisdiscussedinthe
following sections.
Carbohydrates
The digestion of carbohydrates begins in the mouth. The salivary enzyme amylase begins the breakdown of
foodstarchesintomaltose,adisaccharide.Asthebolusoffoodtravelsthroughtheesophagustothestomach,
nosignificantdigestionofcarbohydratestakesplace.Theesophagusproducesnodigestiveenzymesbutdoes
producemucousforlubrication.Theacidicenvironmentinthestomachstopstheactionoftheamylaseenzyme.
Thenextstepofcarbohydratedigestiontakesplaceintheduodenum.Recallthatthechymefromthestomach
enterstheduodenumandmixeswiththedigestivesecretionfromthepancreas,liver,andgallbladder.Pancreatic
juices also contain amylase, which continues the breakdown of starch and glycogen into maltose, a
disaccharide. The disaccharides are broken down into monosaccharides by enzymes called maltases,
sucrases,andlactases,whicharealsopresentinthebrushborderofthesmallintestinalwall.Maltasebreaks
down maltose into glucose. Other disaccharides, such as sucrose and lactose are broken down by sucrase
and lactase, respectively. Sucrase breaks down sucrose (or “table sugar”) into glucose and fructose, and
lactasebreaksdownlactose(or“milksugar”)intoglucoseandgalactose.Themonosaccharides(glucose)thus
producedareabsorbedandthencanbeusedinmetabolicpathwaystoharnessenergy.Themonosaccharides
aretransportedacrosstheintestinalepitheliumintothebloodstreamtobetransportedtothedifferentcellsinthe
body. The steps in carbohydrate digestion are summarized inFigure 34.16andTable 34.5.
Figure34.16Digestionofcarbohydratesisperformedbyseveralenzymes.Starchandglycogenarebrokendowninto
glucose by amylase and maltase. Sucrose (table sugar) and lactose (milk sugar) are broken down by sucrase and
lactase, respectively.
Digestion of Carbohydrates
Site of Substrate
Enzyme Produced By End Products
Action Acting On
Polysaccharides Disaccharides (maltose),
Salivary amylase Salivary glands Mouth
(Starch) oligosaccharides
Small Polysaccharides Disaccharides (maltose),
Pancreatic amylase Pancreas
intestine (starch) monosaccharides
Lining of the intestine; Small Monosaccharides (e.g.,
Oligosaccharidases Disaccharides
brush border membrane intestine glucose, fructose, galactose)
Table 34.5
Protein
A large part of protein digestion takes place in the stomach. The enzyme pepsin plays an important role in the
digestionofproteinsbybreakingdowntheintactproteintopeptides,whichareshortchainsoffourtonineamino
acids.Intheduodenum,otherenzymes—trypsin,elastase,andchymotrypsin—actonthepeptidesreducing
themtosmallerpeptides.Trypsinelastase,carboxypeptidase,andchymotrypsinareproducedbythepancreas
and released into the duodenum where they act on the chyme. Further breakdown of peptides to single amino
acidsisaidedbyenzymescalledpeptidases(thosethatbreakdownpeptides).Specifically,carboxypeptidase,
PAGE: 1065
1054 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
dipeptidase, and aminopeptidase play important roles in reducing the peptides to free amino acids. The
amino acids are absorbed into the bloodstream through the small intestines. The steps in protein digestion are
summarized inFigure 34.17andTable 34.6.
Figure34.17Proteindigestionisamultistepprocessthatbeginsinthestomachandcontinuesthroughtheintestines.
Digestion of Protein
Produced Site of Substrate Acting
Enzyme End Products
By Action On
Stomach chief
Pepsin Stomach Proteins Peptides
cells
Table 34.6
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1066
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1055
Digestion of Protein
Produced Site of Substrate Acting
Enzyme End Products
By Action On
Trypsin
Elastase Pancreas Small intestine Proteins Peptides
Chymotrypsin
Amino acids and
Carboxypeptidase Pancreas Small intestine Peptides
peptides
Aminopeptidase
Lining of intestine Small intestine Peptides Amino acids
Dipeptidase
Table 34.6
Lipids
Lipiddigestionbeginsinthestomachwiththeaidoflinguallipaseandgastriclipase.However,thebulkoflipid
digestionoccursinthesmallintestineduetopancreaticlipase.Whenchymeenterstheduodenum,thehormonal
responses trigger the release of bile, which is produced in the liver and stored in the gallbladder. Bile aids in
the digestion of lipids, primarily triglycerides by emulsification. Emulsification is a process in which large lipid
globules are broken down into several small lipid globules. These small globules are more widely distributed
in the chyme rather than forming large aggregates. Lipids are hydrophobic substances: in the presence of
water, they will aggregate to form globules to minimize exposure to water. Bile contains bile salts, which are
amphipathic, meaning they contain hydrophobic and hydrophilic parts. Thus, the bile salts hydrophilic side can
interface with water on one side and the hydrophobic side interfaces with lipids on the other. By doing so, bile
salts emulsify large lipid globules into small lipid globules.
Why is emulsification important for digestion of lipids? Pancreatic juices contain enzymes called lipases
(enzymesthatbreakdownlipids).Ifthelipidinthechymeaggregatesintolargeglobules,verylittlesurfacearea
of the lipids is available for the lipases to act on, leaving lipid digestion incomplete. By forming an emulsion,
bilesaltsincreasetheavailablesurfaceareaofthelipidsmanyfold.Thepancreaticlipasescanthenactonthe
lipidsmoreefficientlyanddigestthem,asdetailedinFigure34.18.Lipasesbreakdownthelipidsintofattyacids
and glycerides. These molecules can pass through the plasma membrane of the cell and enter the epithelial
cells of the intestinal lining. The bile salts surround long-chain fatty acids and monoglycerides forming tiny
spheres called micelles. The micelles move into the brush border of the small intestine absorptive cells where
the long-chain fatty acids and monoglycerides diffuse out of the micelles into the absorptive cells leaving the
micellesbehindinthechyme.Thelong-chainfattyacidsandmonoglyceridesrecombineintheabsorptivecells
toformtriglycerides,whichaggregateintoglobulesandbecomecoatedwithproteins.Theselargespheresare
calledchylomicrons.Chylomicronscontaintriglycerides,cholesterol,andotherlipidsandhaveproteinsontheir
surface. The surface is also composed of the hydrophilic phosphate "heads" of phospholipids. Together, they
enablethechylomicrontomoveinanaqueousenvironmentwithoutexposingthelipidstowater.Chylomicrons
leavetheabsorptivecellsviaexocytosis.Chylomicronsenterthelymphaticvessels,andthenenterthebloodin
the subclavian vein.
PAGE: 1067
1056 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
Figure 34.18Lipids are digested and absorbed in the small intestine.
Vitamins
Vitaminscanbeeitherwater-solubleorlipid-soluble.Fatsolublevitaminsareabsorbedinthesamemanneras
lipids. It is important to consume some amount of dietary lipid to aid the absorption of lipid-soluble vitamins.
Water-soluble vitamins can be directly absorbed into the bloodstream from the intestine.
Thiswebsite(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/digest_enzymes)hasanoverviewofthedigestionofprotein,fat,
and carbohydrates.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1068
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1057
Figure34.19Mechanicalandchemicaldigestionoffoodtakesplaceinmanysteps,beginninginthemouthand
ending in the rectum.
Which of the following statements about digestive processes is true?
a. Amylase, maltase, and lactase in the mouth digest carbohydrates.
b. Trypsin and lipase in the stomach digest protein.
c. Bile emulsifies lipids in the small intestine.
d. No food is absorbed until the small intestine.
Elimination
The final step in digestion is the elimination of undigested food content and waste products. The undigested
foodmaterialentersthecolon,wheremostofthewaterisreabsorbed.Recallthatthecolonisalsohometothe
microflora called “intestinal flora” that aid in the digestion process. The semi-solid waste is moved through the
colonbyperistalticmovementsofthemuscleandisstoredintherectum.Astherectumexpandsinresponseto
storageoffecalmatter,ittriggerstheneuralsignalsrequiredtosetuptheurgetoeliminate.Thesolidwasteis
eliminated through the anus using peristaltic movements of the rectum.
Common Problems with Elimination
Diarrhea and constipation are some of the most common health concerns that affect digestion. Constipation is
PAGE: 1069
1058 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
aconditionwherethefecesarehardenedbecauseofexcesswaterremovalinthecolon.Incontrast,ifenough
waterisnotremovedfromthefeces,itresultsindiarrhea.Manybacteria,includingtheonesthatcausecholera,
affect the proteins involved in water reabsorption in the colon and result in excessive diarrhea.
Emesis
Emesis,orvomiting,iseliminationoffoodbyforcefulexpulsionthroughthemouth.Itisofteninresponsetoan
irritant that affects the digestive tract, including but not limited to viruses, bacteria, emotions, sights, and food
poisoning.Thisforcefulexpulsionofthefoodisduetothestrongcontractionsproducedbythestomachmuscles.
The process of emesis is regulated by the medulla.
34.4 | Digestive System Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the role of neural regulation in digestive processes
• Explain how hormones regulate digestion
Thebrainisthecontrolcenterforthesensationofhungerandsatiety.Thefunctionsofthedigestivesystemare
regulated through neural and hormonal responses.
Neural Responses to Food
In reaction to the smell, sight, or thought of food, like that shown in Figure 34.20, the first response is that of
salivation.Thesalivaryglandssecretemoresalivainresponsetostimulationbytheautonomicnervoussystem
triggeredbyfoodinpreparationfordigestion.Simultaneously,thestomachbeginstoproducehydrochloricacid
todigestthefood.Recallthattheperistalticmovementsoftheesophagusandotherorgansofthedigestivetract
areunderthecontrolofthebrain.Thebrainpreparesthesemusclesformovementaswell.Whenthestomach
is full, the part of the brain that detects satiety signals fullness. There are three overlapping phases of gastric
control—the cephalic phase, the gastric phase, and the intestinal phase—each requires many enzymes and is
under neural control as well.
Figure 34.20 Seeing a plate of food triggers the secretion of saliva in the mouth and the production of HCL in the
stomach. (credit: Kelly Bailey)
Digestive Phases
Theresponsetofoodbeginsevenbeforefoodentersthemouth.Thefirstphaseofingestion,calledthecephalic
phase,iscontrolledbytheneuralresponsetothestimulusprovidedbyfood.Allaspects—suchassight,sense,
and smell—trigger the neural responses resulting in salivation and secretion of gastric juices. The gastric and
salivary secretion in the cephalic phase can also take place due to the thought of food. Right now, if you think
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1070
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1059
aboutapieceofchocolateoracrispypotatochip,theincreaseinsalivationisacephalicphaseresponsetothe
thought. The central nervous system prepares the stomach to receive food.
The gastric phase begins once the food arrives in the stomach. It builds on the stimulation provided during
thecephalicphase.Gastricacidsandenzymesprocesstheingestedmaterials.Thegastricphaseisstimulated
by (1) distension of the stomach, (2) a decrease in the pH of the gastric contents, and (3) the presence of
undigestedmaterial.Thisphaseconsistsoflocal,hormonal,andneuralresponses.Theseresponsesstimulate
secretions and powerful contractions.
Theintestinalphasebeginswhenchymeentersthesmallintestinetriggeringdigestivesecretions.Thisphase
controls the rate of gastric emptying. In addition to gastrin emptying, when chyme enters the small intestine, it
triggersotherhormonalandneuraleventsthatcoordinatetheactivitiesoftheintestinaltract,pancreas,liver,and
gallbladder.
Hormonal Responses to Food
Theendocrinesystemcontrolstheresponseofthevariousglandsinthebodyandthereleaseofhormonesat
the appropriate times.
Oneoftheimportantfactorsunderhormonalcontrolisthestomachacidenvironment.Duringthegastricphase,
the hormone gastrin is secreted by G cells in the stomach in response to the presence of proteins. Gastrin
stimulates the release of stomach acid, or hydrochloric acid (HCl) which aids in the digestion of the proteins.
However, when the stomach is emptied, the acidic environment need not be maintained and a hormone called
somatostatinstops the release of hydrochloric acid. This is controlled by a negative feedback mechanism.
In the duodenum, digestive secretions from the liver, pancreas, and gallbladder play an important role in
digestingchymeduringtheintestinalphase.Inordertoneutralizetheacidicchyme,ahormonecalledsecretin
stimulates the pancreas to produce alkaline bicarbonate solution and deliver it to the duodenum. Secretin acts
in tandem with another hormone called cholecystokinin (CCK). Not only does CCK stimulate the pancreas to
produce the requisite pancreatic juices, it also stimulates the gallbladder to release bile into the duodenum.
Visit this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/enteric_endo) to learn more about the endocrine system.
Review the text and watch the animation of how control is implemented in the endocrine system.
Anotherlevelofhormonalcontroloccursinresponsetothecompositionoffood.Foodshighinlipidstakealong
timetodigest.Ahormonecalledgastricinhibitorypeptideissecretedbythesmallintestinetoslowdownthe
peristaltic movements of the intestine to allow fatty foods more time to be digested and absorbed.
Understandingthehormonalcontrolofthedigestivesystemisanimportantareaofongoingresearch.Scientists
areexploringtheroleofeachhormoneinthedigestiveprocessanddevelopingwaystotargetthesehormones.
Advances could lead to knowledge that may help to battle the obesity epidemic.
PAGE: 1071
1060 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
KEY TERMS
alimentary canal tubular digestive system with a mouth and anus
aminopeptidase protease that breaks down peptides to single amino acids; secreted by the brush border of
small intestine
anus exit point for waste material
bile digestive juice produced by the liver; important for digestion of lipids
bolus mass of food resulting from chewing action and wetting by saliva
carboxypeptidase proteasethatbreaksdownpeptidestosingleaminoacids;secretedbythebrushborderof
the small intestine
carnivore animal that consumes animal flesh
cephalic phase first phase of digestion, controlled by the neural response to the stimulus provided by food
cholecystokinin hormone that stimulates the contraction of the gallbladder to release bile
chylomicron small lipid globule
chyme mixture of partially digested food and stomach juices
chymotrypsin pancreatic protease
digestion mechanical and chemical breakdown of food into small organic fragments
dipeptidase protease that breaks down peptides to single amino acids; secreted by the brush border of small
intestine
duodenum first part of the small intestine where a large part of digestion of carbohydrates and fats occurs
elastase pancreatic protease
endocrine system system that controls the response of the various glands in the body and the release of
hormones at the appropriate times
esophagus tubular organ that connects the mouth to the stomach
essential nutrient nutrient that cannot be synthesized by the body; it must be obtained from food
gallbladder organ that stores and concentrates bile
gastric inhibitory peptide hormonesecretedbythesmallintestineinthepresenceoffattyacidsandsugars;it
also inhibits acid production and peristalsis in order to slow down the rate at which food enters the small
intestine
gastric phase digestivephasebeginningoncefoodentersthestomach;gastricacidsandenzymesprocessthe
ingested materials
gastrin hormone which stimulates hydrochloric acid secretion in the stomach
gastrovascular cavity digestive system consisting of a single opening
gizzard muscular organ that grinds food
herbivore animal that consumes a strictly plant diet
ileum lastpartofthesmallintestine;connectsthesmallintestinetothelargeintestine;importantforabsorption
of B-12
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1072
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1061
ingestion act of taking in food
intestinal phase third digestive phase; begins when chyme enters the small intestine triggering digestive
secretions and controlling the rate of gastric emptying
jejunum second part of the small intestine
lactase enzyme that breaks down lactose into glucose and galactose
large intestine digestive system organ that reabsorbs water from undigested material and processes waste
matter
lipase enzyme that chemically breaks down lipids
liver organ that produces bile for digestion and processes vitamins and lipids
maltase enzyme that breaks down maltose into glucose
mineral inorganic, elemental molecule that carries out important roles in the body
monogastric digestive system that consists of a single-chambered stomach
omnivore animal that consumes both plants and animals
pancreas gland that secretes digestive juices
pepsin enzyme found in the stomach whose main role is protein digestion
pepsinogen inactive form of pepsin
peristalsis wave-like movements of muscle tissue
proventriculus glandular part of a bird’s stomach
rectum area of the body where feces is stored until elimination
roughage component of food that is low in energy and high in fiber
ruminant animal with a stomach divided into four compartments
salivary amylase enzyme found in saliva, which converts carbohydrates to maltose
secretin hormone which stimulates sodium bicarbonate secretion in the small intestine
small intestine organ where digestion of protein, fats, and carbohydrates is completed
somatostatin hormone released to stop acid secretion when the stomach is empty
sphincter band of muscle that controls movement of materials throughout the digestive tract
stomach saclike organ containing acidic digestive juices
sucrase enzyme that breaks down sucrose into glucose and fructose
trypsin pancreatic protease that breaks down protein
villi folds on the inner surface of the small intestine whose role is to increase absorption area
vitamin organic substance necessary in small amounts to sustain life
PAGE: 1073
1062 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
CHAPTER SUMMARY
34.1Digestive Systems
Different animals have evolved different types of digestive systems specialized to meet their dietary needs.
Humans and many other animals have monogastric digestive systems with a single-chambered stomach. Birds
have evolved a digestive system that includes a gizzard where the food is crushed into smaller pieces. This
compensates for their inability to masticate. Ruminants that consume large amounts of plant material have a
multi-chambered stomach that digests roughage. Pseudo-ruminants have similar digestive processes as
ruminants but do not have the four-compartment stomach. Processing food involves ingestion (eating),
digestion (mechanical and enzymatic breakdown of large molecules), absorption (cellular uptake of nutrients),
and elimination (removal of undigested waste as feces).
Many organs work together to digest food and absorb nutrients. The mouth is the point of ingestion and the
location where both mechanical and chemical breakdown of food begins. Saliva contains an enzyme called
amylase that breaks down carbohydrates. The food bolus travels through the esophagus by peristaltic
movements to the stomach. The stomach has an extremely acidic environment. An enzyme called pepsin
digests protein in the stomach. Further digestion and absorption take place in the small intestine. The large
intestine reabsorbs water from the undigested food and stores waste until elimination.
34.2Nutrition and Energy Production
Animal diet should be balanced and meet the needs of the body. Carbohydrates, proteins, and fats are the
primary components of food. Some essential nutrients are required for cellular function but cannot be produced
by the animal body. These include vitamins, minerals, some fatty acids, and some amino acids. Food intake in
more than necessary amounts is stored as glycogen in the liver and muscle cells, and in fat cells. Excess
adipose storage can lead to obesity and serious health problems. ATP is the energy currency of the cell and is
obtained from the metabolic pathways. Excess carbohydrates and energy are stored as glycogen in the body.
34.3Digestive System Processes
Digestion begins with ingestion, where the food is taken in the mouth. Digestion and absorption take place in a
series of steps with special enzymes playing important roles in digesting carbohydrates, proteins, and lipids.
Elimination describes removal of undigested food contents and waste products from the body. While most
absorption occurs in the small intestines, the large intestine is responsible for the final removal of water that
remains after the absorptive process of the small intestines. The cells that line the large intestine absorb some
vitamins as well as any leftover salts and water. The large intestine (colon) is also where feces is formed.
34.4Digestive System Regulation
The brain and the endocrine system control digestive processes. The brain controls the responses of hunger
and satiety. The endocrine system controls the release of hormones and enzymes required for digestion of food
in the digestive tract.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 34.11Which of the following statements a. Absorptive cells that line the small intestine
about the digestive system is false? have microvilli, small projections that
a. Chyme is a mixture of food and digestive increase surface area and aid in the
juices that is produced in the stomach. absorption of food.
b. Food enters the large intestine before the b. The inside of the small intestine has many
small intestine. folds, called villi.
c. In the small intestine, chyme mixes with bile, c. Microvilli are lined with blood vessels as well
which emulsifies fats. as lymphatic vessels.
d. The stomach is separated from the small d. The inside of the small intestine is called the
intestine by the pyloric sphincter. lumen.
2.Figure 34.12Which of the following statements 3.Figure 34.19Which of the following statements
about the small intestine is false? about digestive processes is true?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1074
Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System 1063
a. Amylase, maltase, and lactase in the mouth
digest carbohydrates.
b. Trypsin and lipase in the stomach digest
protein.
c. Bile emulsifies lipids in the small intestine.
d. No food is absorbed until the small intestine.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following is a pseudo-ruminant? a. vitamin A
b. vitamin E
a. cow c. vitamin K
b. pig d. vitamin C
c. crow
11.What is the primary fuel for the body?
d. horse
a. carbohydrates
5.Which of the following statements is untrue? b. lipids
c. protein
a. Roughage takes a long time to digest. d. glycogen
b. Birds eat large quantities at one time so that
12.Excess glucose is stored as ________.
they can fly long distances.
a. fat
c. Cows do not have upper teeth.
b. glucagon
d. In pseudo-ruminants, roughage is digested
c. glycogen
in the cecum.
d. it is not stored in the body
6.The acidic nature of chyme is neutralized by
13.Many distance runners “carb load” the day before
________.
a big race. How does this eating strategy provide an
a. potassium hydroxide
advantage to the runner?
b. sodium hydroxide
a. The carbohydrates cause the release of
c. bicarbonates
insulin.
d. vinegar
b. The excess carbohydrates are converted to
7.The digestive juices from the liver are delivered to fats, which have a higher calorie density.
the ________. c. The glucose from the carbohydrates lets the
a. stomach muscles make excess ATP overnight.
b. liver d. The excess carbohydrates can be stored in
c. duodenum the muscles as glycogen.
d. colon
14.Where does the majority of protein digestion take
8.A scientist dissects a new species of animal. If the place?
animal’s digestive system has a single stomach with a. stomach
an extended small intestine, to which animal could b. duodenum
the dissected specimen be closely related? c. mouth
a. lion d. jejunum
b. snowshoe hare
15.Lipases are enzymes that breakdown ________.
c. earthworm
d. eagle
a. disaccharides
9.Which of the following statements is not true? b. lipids
c. proteins
a. Essential nutrients can be synthesized by d. cellulose
the body.
16.Which of the following conditions is most likely to
b. Vitamins are required in small quantities for
cause constipation?
bodily function.
a. bacterial infection
c. Some amino acids can be synthesized by
b. dehydration
the body, while others need to be obtained
c. ulcer
from diet.
d. excessive cellulose consumption
d. Vitamins come in two categories: fat-soluble
and water-soluble. 17.Which hormone controls the release of bile from
the gallbladder
10.Which of the following is a water-soluble vitamin?
PAGE: 1075
1064 Chapter 34 | Animal Nutrition and the Digestive System
a. pepsin 19.In the famous conditioning experiment, Pavlov
b. amylase demonstrated that his dogs started drooling in
c. CCK response to a bell sounding. What part of the
d. gastrin digestive process did he stimulate?
a. cephalic phase
18.Which hormone stops acid secretion in the
b. gastric phase
stomach?
c. intestinal phase
a. gastrin
d. elimination phase
b. somatostatin
c. gastric inhibitory peptide
d. CCK
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
20.How does the polygastric digestive system aid in among people trying to lose weight. However, many
digesting roughage? dieticians now conclude that the fat-free trend made
people less healthy and heavier. Describe how this
21.How do birds digest their food in the absence of
could occur.
teeth?
31.Explain why some dietary lipid is a necessary
22.What is the role of the accessory organs in
part of a balanced diet.
digestion?
32.The gut microbiome (the bacterial colonies in the
23.Explain how the villi and microvilli aid in
intestines) have become a popular area of study in
absorption.
biomedical research. How could varying gut
24.Name two components of the digestive system microbiomes impact a person’s nutrition?
that perform mechanical digestion. Describe how
33.Many mammals become ill if they drink milk as
mechanical digestion contributes to acquiring
adults even though they could consume it as babies.
nutrients from food.
What causes this digestive issue?
25.What are essential nutrients?
34.Describe how hormones regulate digestion.
26.What is the role of minerals in maintaining good
35.Describe one or more scenarios where loss of
health?
hormonal regulation of digestion can lead to
27.Discuss why obesity is a growing epidemic. diseases.
28.There are several nations where malnourishment 36.A scientist is studying a model that has a
is a common occurrence. What may be some of the mutation in the receptor for somatostatin that
health challenges posed by malnutrition? prevents hormone binding. How would this mutation
29.Generally describe how a piece of bread can affect the structure and function of the digestive
power your legs as you walk up a flight of stairs. system?
30.In the 1990s fat-free foods became popular
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1076
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1065
35 | THE NERVOUS
SYSTEM
Figure35.1Anathlete’snervoussystemishardatworkduringtheplanningandexecutionofamovementasprecise
asahighjump.Partsofthenervoussystemareinvolvedindetermininghowhardtopushoffandwhentoturn,aswell
as controlling the muscles throughout the body that make this complicated movement possible without knocking the
bar down—all in just a few seconds. (credit: modification of work by Shane T. McCoy, U.S. Navy)
Chapter Outline
35.1:Neurons and Glial Cells
35.2:How Neurons Communicate
35.3:The Central Nervous System
35.4:The Peripheral Nervous System
35.5:Nervous System Disorders
Introduction
Whenyou’rereadingthisbook,yournervoussystemisperformingseveralfunctionssimultaneously.Thevisual
systemisprocessingwhatisseenonthepage;themotorsystemcontrolstheturnofthepages(orclickofthe
mouse); the prefrontal cortex maintains attention. Even fundamental functions, like breathing and regulation of
body temperature, are controlled by the nervous system. A nervous system is an organism’s control center: it
processes sensory information from outside (and inside) the body and controls all behaviors—from eating to
sleeping to finding a mate.
PAGE: 1077
1066 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
35.1 | Neurons and Glial Cells
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List and describe the functions of the structural components of a neuron
• List and describe the four main types of neurons
• Compare the functions of different types of glial cells
Nervous systems throughout the animal kingdom vary in structure and complexity, as illustrated by the variety
of animals shown in Figure 35.2. Some organisms, like sea sponges, lack a true nervous system. Others, like
jellyfish, lack a true brain and instead have a system of separate but connected nerve cells (neurons) called
a “nerve net.” Echinoderms such as sea stars have nerve cells that are bundled into fibers called nerves.
Flatworms of the phylum Platyhelminthes have both a central nervous system (CNS), made up of a small
“brain”andtwonervecords,andaperipheralnervoussystem(PNS)containingasystemofnervesthatextend
throughout the body. The insect nervous system is more complex but also fairly decentralized. It contains a
brain, ventral nerve cord, and ganglia (clusters of connected neurons). These ganglia can control movements
and behaviors without input from the brain. Octopi may have the most complicated of invertebrate nervous
systems—they have neurons that are organized in specialized lobes and eyes that are structurally similar to
vertebrate species.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1078
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1067
Figure35.2Nervoussystemsvaryinstructureandcomplexity.In(a)cnidarians,nervecellsformadecentralizednerve
net. In (b) echinoderms, nerve cells are bundled into fibers called nerves. In animals exhibiting bilateral symmetry
such as (c) planarians, neurons cluster into an anterior brain that processes information. In addition to a brain, (d)
arthropodshaveclustersofnervecellbodies,calledperipheralganglia,locatedalongtheventralnervecord.Mollusks
such as squid and (e) octopi, which must hunt to survive, have complex brains containing millions of neurons. In (f)
vertebrates, the brain and spinal cord comprise the central nervous system, while neurons extending into the rest of
the body comprise the peripheral nervous system. (credit e: modification of work by Michael Vecchione, Clyde F.E.
Roper, and Michael J. Sweeney, NOAA; credit f: modification of work by NIH)
Comparedtoinvertebrates,vertebratenervoussystemsaremorecomplex,centralized,andspecialized.While
thereisgreatdiversityamongdifferentvertebratenervoussystems,theyallshareabasicstructure:aCNSthat
contains a brain and spinal cord and a PNS made up of peripheral sensory and motor nerves. One interesting
difference between the nervous systems of invertebrates and vertebrates is that the nerve cords of many
invertebrates are located ventrally whereas the vertebrate spinal cords are located dorsally. There is debate
amongevolutionarybiologistsastowhetherthesedifferentnervoussystemplansevolvedseparatelyorwhether
the invertebrate body plan arrangement somehow “flipped” during the evolution of vertebrates.
Watch this video of biologist Mark Kirschner discussing the “flipping” phenomenon of vertebrate
evolution.(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66620/1.3/
#eip-id1170503155069)
Thenervoussystemismadeupofneurons,specializedcellsthatcanreceiveandtransmitchemicalorelectrical
PAGE: 1079
1068 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
signals,andglia,cellsthatprovidesupportfunctionsfortheneuronsbyplayinganinformationprocessingrole
that is complementary to neurons. A neuron can be compared to an electrical wire—it transmits a signal from
oneplacetoanother.Gliacanbecomparedtotheworkersattheelectriccompanywhomakesurewiresgoto
therightplaces,maintainthewires,andtakedownwiresthatarebroken.Althoughgliahavebeencomparedto
workers, recent evidence suggests that they also usurp some of the signaling functions of neurons.
Thereisgreatdiversityinthetypesofneuronsandgliathatarepresentindifferentpartsofthenervoussystem.
There are four major types of neurons, and they share several important cellular components.
Neurons
Thenervoussystemofthecommonlaboratoryfly,Drosophilamelanogaster,containsaround100,000neurons,
thesamenumberasalobster.Thisnumbercomparesto75millioninthemouseand300millionintheoctopus.
A human brain contains around 86 billion neurons. Despite these very different numbers, the nervous systems
of these animals control many of the same behaviors—from basic reflexes to more complicated behaviors like
finding food and courting mates. The ability of neurons to communicate with each other as well as with other
types of cells underlies all of these behaviors.
Most neurons share the same cellular components. But neurons are also highly specialized—different types of
neurons have different sizes and shapes that relate to their functional roles.
Parts of a Neuron
Likeothercells,eachneuronhasacellbody(orsoma)thatcontainsanucleus,smoothandroughendoplasmic
reticulum, Golgi apparatus, mitochondria, and other cellular components. Neurons also contain unique
structures, illustrated in Figure 35.3 for receiving and sending the electrical signals that make neuronal
communication possible. Dendrites are tree-like structures that extend away from the cell body to receive
messages from other neurons at specialized junctions called synapses. Although some neurons do not have
any dendrites, some types of neurons have multiple dendrites. Dendrites can have small protrusions called
dendritic spines, which further increase surface area for possible synaptic connections.
Once a signal is received by the dendrite, it then travels passively to the cell body. The cell body contains a
specialized structure, the axon hillock that integrates signals from multiple synapses and serves as a junction
between the cell body and an axon. An axon is a tube-like structure that propagates the integrated signal to
specializedendingscalledaxonterminals.Theseterminalsinturnsynapseonotherneurons,muscle,ortarget
organs. Chemicals released at axon terminals allow signals to be communicated to these other cells. Neurons
usually have one or two axons, but some neurons, like amacrine cells in the retina, do not contain any axons.
Someaxonsarecoveredwithmyelin,whichactsasaninsulatortominimizedissipationoftheelectricalsignal
asittravelsdowntheaxon,greatlyincreasingthespeedofconduction.Thisinsulationisimportantastheaxon
from a human motor neuron can be as long as a meter—from the base of the spine to the toes. The myelin
sheathisnotactuallypartoftheneuron.Myelinisproducedbyglialcells.Alongtheaxonthereareperiodicgaps
inthemyelinsheath.ThesegapsarecallednodesofRanvierandaresiteswherethesignalis“recharged”as
it travels along the axon.
It is important to note that a single neuron does not act alone—neuronal communication depends on the
connectionsthatneuronsmakewithoneanother(aswellaswithothercells,likemusclecells).Dendritesfrom
asingleneuronmayreceivesynapticcontactfrommanyotherneurons.Forexample,dendritesfromaPurkinje
cell in the cerebellum are thought to receive contact from as many as 200,000 other neurons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1080
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1069
Figure35.3Neuronscontainorganellescommontomanyothercells,suchasanucleusandmitochondria.They
also have more specialized structures, including dendrites and axons.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. The soma is the cell body of a nerve cell.
b. Myelin sheath provides an insulating layer to the dendrites.
c. Axons carry the signal from the soma to the target.
d. Dendrites carry the signal to the soma.
Types of Neurons
There are different types of neurons, and the functional role of a given neuron is intimately dependent on its
structure. There is an amazing diversity of neuron shapes and sizes found in different parts of the nervous
system (and across species), as illustrated by the neurons shown inFigure 35.4.
PAGE: 1081
1070 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure35.4Thereisgreatdiversityinthesizeandshapeofneuronsthroughoutthenervoussystem.Examplesinclude
(a)apyramidalcellfromthecerebralcortex,(b)aPurkinjecellfromthecerebellarcortex,and(c)olfactorycellsfrom
the olfactory epithelium and olfactory bulb.
Whiletherearemanydefinedneuroncellsubtypes,neuronsarebroadlydividedintofourbasictypes:unipolar,
bipolar,multipolar,andpseudounipolar.Figure35.5illustratesthesefourbasicneurontypes.Unipolarneurons
have only one structure that extends away from the soma. These neurons are not found in vertebrates but
are found in insects where they stimulate muscles or glands. A bipolar neuron has one axon and one dendrite
extending from the soma. An example of a bipolar neuron is a retinal bipolar cell, which receives signals from
photoreceptorcellsthataresensitivetolightandtransmitsthesesignalstoganglioncellsthatcarrythesignalto
the brain. Multipolar neurons are the most common type of neuron. Each multipolar neuron contains one axon
and multiple dendrites. Multipolar neurons can be found in the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord).
AnexampleofamultipolarneuronisaPurkinjecellinthecerebellum,whichhasmanybranchingdendritesbut
onlyoneaxon.Pseudounipolarcellssharecharacteristicswithbothunipolarandbipolarcells.Apseudounipolar
cellhasasingleprocessthatextendsfromthesoma,likeaunipolarcell,butthisprocesslaterbranchesintotwo
distinctstructures,likeabipolarcell.Mostsensoryneuronsarepseudounipolarandhaveanaxonthatbranches
intotwoextensions:oneconnectedtodendritesthatreceivesensoryinformationandanotherthattransmitsthis
information to the spinal cord.
Figure 35.5 Neurons are broadly divided into four main types based on the number and placement of axons: (1)
unipolar, (2) bipolar, (3) multipolar, and (4) pseudounipolar.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1082
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1071
Neurogenesis
Atonetime,scientistsbelievedthatpeoplewerebornwithalltheneuronstheywouldeverhave.Research
performed during the last few decades indicates that neurogenesis, the birth of new neurons, continues
into adulthood. Neurogenesis was first discovered in songbirds that produce new neurons while learning
songs. For mammals, new neurons also play an important role in learning: about 1000 new neurons
develop in the hippocampus (a brain structure involved in learning and memory) each day. While most of
the new neurons will die, researchers found that an increase in the number of surviving new neurons in
the hippocampus correlated with how well rats learned a new task. Interestingly, both exercise and some
antidepressantmedicationsalsopromoteneurogenesisinthehippocampus.Stresshastheoppositeeffect.
While neurogenesis is quite limited compared to regeneration in other tissues, research in this area may
lead to new treatments for disorders such as Alzheimer’s, stroke, and epilepsy.
How do scientists identify new neurons? A researcher can inject a compound called bromodeoxyuridine
(BrdU) into the brain of an animal. While all cells will be exposed to BrdU, BrdU will only be incorporated
into the DNA of newly generated cells that are in S phase. A technique called immunohistochemistry can
be used to attach a fluorescent label to the incorporated BrdU, and a researcher can use fluorescent
microscopy to visualize the presence of BrdU, and thus new neurons, in brain tissue. Figure 35.6 is a
micrograph which shows fluorescently labeled neurons in the hippocampus of a rat.
Figure 35.6 This micrograph shows fluorescently labeled new neurons in a rat hippocampus. Cells that are
actively dividing have bromodoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporated into their DNA and are labeled in red. Cells that
express glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) are labeled in green. Astrocytes, but not neurons, express GFAP.
Thus, cells that are labeled both red and green are actively dividing astrocytes, whereas cells labeled red only
are actively dividing neurons. (credit: modification of work by Dr. Maryam Faiz, et. al., University of Barcelona;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
This site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/neurogenesis) contains more information about neurogenesis,
including an interactive laboratory simulation and a video that explains how BrdU labels new cells.
Glia
Whilegliaareoftenthoughtofasthesupportingcastofthenervoussystem,thenumberofglialcellsinthebrain
PAGE: 1083
1072 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
actuallyoutnumbersthenumberofneuronsbyafactoroften.Neuronswouldbeunabletofunctionwithoutthe
vital roles that are fulfilled by these glial cells. Glia guide developing neurons to their destinations, buffer ions
and chemicals that would otherwise harm neurons, and provide myelin sheaths around axons. Scientists have
recently discovered that they also play a role in responding to nerve activity and modulating communication
between nerve cells. When glia do not function properly, the result can be disastrous—most brain tumors are
caused by mutations in glia.
Types of Glia
There are several different types of glia with different functions, two of which are shown in Figure 35.7.
Astrocytes, shown in Figure 35.8a make contact with both capillaries and neurons in the CNS. They provide
nutrientsandothersubstancestoneurons,regulatetheconcentrationsofionsandchemicalsintheextracellular
fluid, and provide structural support for synapses. Astrocytes also form the blood-brain barrier—a structure
that blocks entrance of toxic substances into the brain. Astrocytes, in particular, have been shown through
calcium imaging experiments to become active in response to nerve activity, transmit calcium waves between
astrocytes, and modulate the activity of surrounding synapses. Satellite glia provide nutrients and structural
supportforneuronsinthePNS.Microgliascavengeanddegradedeadcellsandprotectthebrainfrominvading
microorganisms.Oligodendrocytes,showninFigure35.8bformmyelinsheathsaroundaxonsintheCNS.One
axon can be myelinated by several oligodendrocytes, and one oligodendrocyte can provide myelin for multiple
neurons.ThisisdistinctivefromthePNSwhereasingleSchwanncellprovidesmyelinforonlyoneaxonasthe
entireSchwanncellsurroundstheaxon.Radialgliaserveasscaffoldsfordevelopingneuronsastheymigrate
to their end destinations. Ependymal cells line fluid-filled ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the
spinal cord. They are involved in the production of cerebrospinal fluid, which serves as a cushion for the brain,
moves the fluid between the spinal cord and the brain, and is a component for the choroid plexus.
Figure 35.7 Glial cells support neurons and maintain their environment. Glial cells of the (a) central nervous system
includeoligodendrocytes,astrocytes,ependymalcells,andmicroglialcells.Oligodendrocytesformthemyelinsheath
aroundaxons.Astrocytesprovidenutrientstoneurons,maintaintheirextracellularenvironment,andprovidestructural
support.Microgliascavengepathogensanddeadcells.Ependymalcellsproducecerebrospinalfluidthatcushionsthe
neurons. Glial cells of the (b) peripheral nervous system include Schwann cells, which form the myelin sheath, and
satellite cells, which provide nutrients and structural support to neurons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1084
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1073
Figure35.8(a)Astrocytesand(b)oligodendrocytesareglialcellsofthecentralnervoussystem.(credita:modification
of work by Uniformed Services University; credit b: modification of work by Jurjen Broeke; scale-bar data from Matt
Russell)
35.2 | How Neurons Communicate
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the basis of the resting membrane potential
• Explain the stages of an action potential and how action potentials are propagated
• Explain the similarities and differences between chemical and electrical synapses
• Describe long-term potentiation and long-term depression
All functions performed by the nervous system—from a simple motor reflex to more advanced functions like
making a memory or a decision—require neurons to communicate with one another. While humans use words
and body language to communicate, neurons use electrical and chemical signals. Just like a person in a
committee,oneneuronusuallyreceivesandsynthesizesmessagesfrommultipleotherneuronsbefore“making
the decision” to send the message on to other neurons.
Nerve Impulse Transmission within a Neuron
For the nervous system to function, neurons must be able to send and receive signals. These signals are
possible because each neuron has a charged cellular membrane (a voltage difference between the inside
and the outside), and the charge of this membrane can change in response to neurotransmitter molecules
released from other neurons and environmental stimuli. To understand how neurons communicate, one must
first understand the basis of the baseline or ‘resting’ membrane charge.
Neuronal Charged Membranes
The lipid bilayer membrane that surrounds a neuron is impermeable to charged molecules or ions. To enter
or exit the neuron, ions must pass through special proteins called ion channels that span the membrane.
Ion channels have different configurations: open, closed, and inactive, as illustrated in Figure 35.9. Some
ion channels need to be activated in order to open and allow ions to pass into or out of the cell. These ion
channels are sensitive to the environment and can change their shape accordingly. Ion channels that change
theirstructureinresponsetovoltagechangesarecalledvoltage-gatedionchannels.Voltage-gatedionchannels
regulate the relative concentrations of different ions inside and outside the cell. The difference in total charge
between the inside and outside of the cell is called themembrane potential.
PAGE: 1085
1074 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.9 Voltage-gated ion channels open in response to changes in membrane voltage. After activation, they
become inactivated for a brief period and will no longer open in response to a signal.
This video discusses the basis of the resting membrane potential. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66621/1.3/#eip-id1172233931654)
Resting Membrane Potential
A neuron at rest is negatively charged: the inside of a cell is approximately 70 millivolts more negative than
the outside (−70 mV, note that this number varies by neuron type and by species). This voltage is called the
restingmembranepotential;itiscausedbydifferencesintheconcentrationsofionsinsideandoutsidethecell.
Ifthemembranewereequallypermeabletoallions,eachtypeofionwouldflowacrossthemembraneandthe
system would reach equilibrium. Because ions cannot simply cross the membrane at will, there are different
concentrationsofseveralionsinsideandoutsidethecell,asshowninTable35.1.Thedifferenceinthenumber
+
ofpositivelychargedpotassiumions(K )insideandoutsidethecelldominatestherestingmembranepotential
+
(Figure 35.10).When the membraneisatrest, K ionsaccumulate insidethe cellduetoanet movement with
the concentration gradient. The negative resting membrane potential is created and maintained by increasing
theconcentrationofcationsoutsidethecell(intheextracellularfluid)relativetoinsidethecell(inthecytoplasm).
The negative charge within the cell is created by the cell membrane being more permeable to potassium
ion movement than sodium ion movement. In neurons, potassium ions are maintained at high concentrations
within the cell while sodium ions are maintained at high concentrations outside of the cell. The cell possesses
potassiumandsodiumleakagechannelsthatallowthetwocationstodiffusedowntheirconcentrationgradient.
However, the neurons have far more potassium leakage channels than sodium leakage channels. Therefore,
potassiumdiffusesoutofthecellatamuchfasterratethansodiumleaksin.Becausemorecationsareleaving
the cell than are entering, this causes the interior of the cell to be negatively charged relative to the outside of
the cell. The actions of the sodium potassium pump help to maintain the resting potential, once established.
+ +
Recall that sodium potassium pumps brings two K ions into the cell while removing three Na ions per ATP
consumed. As more cations are expelled from the cell than taken in, the inside of the cell remains negatively
–
charged relative to the extracellular fluid. It should be noted that chloride ions (Cl ) tend to accumulate outside
of the cell because they are repelled by negatively-charged proteins within the cytoplasm.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1086
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1075
Ion Concentration Inside and Outside Neurons
Extracellular Intracellular concentration Ratio outside/
Ion
concentration (mM) (mM) inside
Na + 145 12 12
K+ 4 155 0.026
Cl − 120 4 30
Organic anions
— 100
(A−)
Table 35.1The resting membrane potential is a result of different concentrations inside and outside the
cell.
PAGE: 1087
1076 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.10 The (a) resting membrane potential is a result of different concentrations of Na+ and K+ ions inside
andoutside the cell. A nerveimpulse causesNa+ to enter the cell, resulting in(b)depolarization. At the peakaction
potential, K+channels open and the cell becomes (c) hyperpolarized.
Action Potential
Aneuroncanreceiveinputfromotherneuronsand,ifthisinputisstrongenough,sendthesignaltodownstream
neurons.Transmissionofasignalbetweenneuronsisgenerallycarriedbyachemicalcalledaneurotransmitter.
Transmission of a signal within a neuron (from dendrite to axon terminal) is carried by a brief reversal of the
resting membrane potential called an action potential. When neurotransmitter molecules bind to receptors
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1088
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1077
located on a neuron’s dendrites, ion channels open. At excitatory synapses, this opening allows positive ions
to enter the neuron and results in depolarization of the membrane—a decrease in the difference in voltage
between the inside and outside of the neuron. A stimulus from a sensory cell or another neuron depolarizes
+
the target neuron to its threshold potential (-55 mV). Na channels in the axon hillock open, allowing positive
ionstoenterthecell(Figure35.10andFigure35.11).Oncethesodiumchannelsopen,theneuroncompletely
depolarizestoamembranepotentialofabout+40mV.Actionpotentialsareconsideredan"all-ornothing"event,
inthat,oncethethresholdpotentialisreached,theneuronalwayscompletelydepolarizes.Oncedepolarization
is complete, the cell must now "reset" its membrane voltage back to the resting potential. To accomplish this,
+
the Na channels close and cannot be opened. This begins the neuron's refractory period, in which it cannot
produce another action potential because its sodium channels will not open. At the same time, voltage-gated
+ + +
K channels open, allowing K to leave the cell. As K ions leave the cell, the membrane potential once again
+
becomes negative. The diffusion of K out of the cell actually hyperpolarizes the cell, in that the membrane
potentialbecomesmorenegativethanthecell'snormalrestingpotential.Atthispoint,thesodiumchannelswill
returntotheirrestingstate,meaningtheyarereadytoopenagainifthemembranepotentialagainexceedsthe
+
thresholdpotential.EventuallytheextraK ionsdiffuseoutofthecellthroughthepotassiumleakagechannels,
bringing the cell from its hyperpolarized state, back to its resting membrane potential.
Figure 35.11 The formation of an action potential can be divided into five steps: (1) A stimulus from a sensory
cell or another neuron causes the target cell to depolarize toward the threshold potential. (2) If the threshold of
excitation is reached, all Na+ channels open and the membrane depolarizes. (3) At the peak action potential,
K+ channels open and K+ begins to leave the cell. At the same time, Na+ channels close. (4) The membrane
becomes hyperpolarized as K+ ions continue to leave the cell. The hyperpolarized membrane is in a refractory
period and cannot fire. (5) The K+channels close and the Na+/K+transporter restores the resting potential.
Potassium channel blockers, such as amiodarone and procainamide, which are used to treat abnormal
+
electricalactivityintheheart,calledcardiacdysrhythmia,impedethemovementofK throughvoltage-gated
+
K channels. Which part of the action potential would you expect potassium channels to affect?
PAGE: 1089
1078 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.12The action potential is conducted down the axon as the axon membrane depolarizes, then repolarizes.
Thisvideo (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/actionpotential)presents an overview of action potential.
Myelin and the Propagation of the Action Potential
For an action potential to communicate information to another neuron, it must travel along the axon and reach
theaxonterminalswhereitcaninitiateneurotransmitterrelease.Thespeedofconductionofanactionpotential
along an axon is influenced by both the diameter of the axon and the axon’s resistance to current leak. Myelin
acts as an insulator that prevents current from leaving the axon; this increases the speed of action potential
conduction.Indemyelinatingdiseaseslikemultiplesclerosis,actionpotentialconductionslowsbecausecurrent
leaks from previously insulated axon areas. The nodes of Ranvier, illustrated in Figure 35.13 are gaps in the
myelinsheathalongtheaxon.Theseunmyelinatedspacesareaboutonemicrometerlongandcontainvoltage-
+ + +
gatedNa andK channels.Flowofionsthroughthesechannels,particularlytheNa channels,regeneratesthe
actionpotentialoverandoveragainalongtheaxon.This‘jumping’oftheactionpotentialfromonenodetothe
next is called saltatory conduction. If nodes of Ranvier were not present along an axon, the action potential
+ +
wouldpropagateveryslowlysinceNa andK channelswouldhavetocontinuouslyregenerateactionpotentials
at every point along the axon instead of at specific points. Nodes of Ranvier also save energy for the neuron
since the channels only need to be present at the nodes and not along the entire axon.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1090
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1079
Figure 35.13 Nodes of Ranvier are gaps in myelin coverage along axons. Nodes contain voltage-gated K+ and Na+
channels. Action potentials travel down the axon by jumping from one node to the next.
Synaptic Transmission
The synapse or “gap” is the place where information is transmitted from one neuron to another. Synapses
usuallyformbetween axonterminals anddendritic spines, but this isnot universally true. There arealsoaxon-
to-axon, dendrite-to-dendrite, and axon-to-cell body synapses. The neuron transmitting the signal is called the
presynaptic neuron, and the neuron receiving the signal is called the postsynaptic neuron. Note that these
designations are relative to a particular synapse—most neurons are both presynaptic and postsynaptic. There
are two types of synapses: chemical and electrical.
Chemical Synapse
+
Whenanactionpotentialreachestheaxonterminalitdepolarizesthemembraneandopensvoltage-gatedNa
+
channels. Na ions enter the cell, further depolarizing the presynaptic membrane. This depolarization causes
2+
voltage-gated Ca channels to open. Calcium ions entering the cell initiate a signaling cascade that causes
small membrane-bound vesicles, called synaptic vesicles, containing neurotransmitter molecules to fuse with
the presynaptic membrane. Synaptic vesicles are shown in Figure 35.14, which is an image from a scanning
electron microscope.
Figure35.14Thispseudocoloredimagetakenwithascanningelectronmicroscopeshowsanaxonterminalthatwas
broken open to reveal synaptic vesicles (blue and orange) inside the neuron. (credit: modification of work by Tina
Carvalho, NIH-NIGMS; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Fusion of a vesicle with the presynaptic membrane causes neurotransmitter to be released into the synaptic
cleft, the extracellular space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes, as illustrated in Figure
35.15.Theneurotransmitterdiffusesacrossthesynapticcleftandbindstoreceptorproteinsonthepostsynaptic
membrane.
PAGE: 1091
1080 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.15 Communication at chemical synapses requires release of neurotransmitters. When the presynaptic
membrane is depolarized, voltage-gated Ca2+ channels open and allow Ca2+ to enter the cell. The calcium entry
causes synaptic vesicles to fuse with the membrane and release neurotransmitter molecules into the synaptic cleft.
The neurotransmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to ligand-gated ion channels in the postsynaptic
membrane, resulting in a localized depolarization or hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic neuron.
The binding of a specific neurotransmitter causes particular ion channels, in this case ligand-gated channels,
onthepostsynapticmembranetoopen.Neurotransmitterscaneitherhaveexcitatoryorinhibitoryeffectsonthe
postsynapticmembrane,asdetailedinTable35.1.Forexample,whenacetylcholineisreleasedatthesynapse
betweenanerveandmuscle(calledtheneuromuscularjunction)byapresynapticneuron,itcausespostsynaptic
+ +
Na channels to open. Na enters the postsynaptic cell and causes the postsynaptic membrane to depolarize.
Thisdepolarizationiscalledanexcitatorypostsynapticpotential(EPSP)andmakesthepostsynapticneuron
more likely to fire an action potential. Release of neurotransmitter at inhibitory synapses causes inhibitory
postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs), a hyperpolarization of the presynaptic membrane. For example, when the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1092
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1081
neurotransmitterGABA(gamma-aminobutyricacid)isreleasedfromapresynapticneuron,itbindstoandopens
- -
Cl channels. Cl ions enter the cell and hyperpolarizes the membrane, making the neuron less likely to fire an
action potential.
Once neurotransmission has occurred, the neurotransmitter must be removed from the synaptic cleft so the
postsynaptic membranecan“reset”andbereadytoreceiveanothersignal.Thiscanbeaccomplishedinthree
ways: the neurotransmitter can diffuse away from the synaptic cleft, it can be degraded by enzymes in the
synaptic cleft, or it can be recycled (sometimes called reuptake) by the presynaptic neuron. Several drugs act
at this step of neurotransmission. For example, some drugs that are given to Alzheimer’s patients work by
inhibitingacetylcholinesterase,theenzymethatdegradesacetylcholine.Thisinhibitionoftheenzymeessentially
increases neurotransmission at synapses that release acetylcholine. Once released, the acetylcholine stays in
the cleft and can continually bind and unbind to postsynaptic receptors.
Neurotransmitter Function and Location
Neurotransmitter Example Location
Acetylcholine — CNS and/or PNS
Biogenic amine Dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine CNS and/or PNS
Amino acid Glycine, glutamate, aspartate, gamma aminobutyric acid CNS
Neuropeptide Substance P, endorphins CNS and/or PNS
Table 35.2
Electrical Synapse
While electrical synapses are fewer in number than chemical synapses, they are found in all nervous systems
andplayimportantanduniqueroles.Themodeofneurotransmissioninelectricalsynapsesisquitedifferentfrom
thatinchemicalsynapses.Inanelectricalsynapse,thepresynapticandpostsynapticmembranesareveryclose
together and are actually physically connected by channel proteins forming gap junctions. Gap junctions allow
currenttopassdirectlyfromonecelltothenext.Inadditiontotheionsthatcarrythiscurrent,othermolecules,
such as ATP, can diffuse through the large gap junction pores.
There are key differences between chemical and electrical synapses. Because chemical synapses depend
on the release of neurotransmitter molecules from synaptic vesicles to pass on their signal, there is an
approximately one millisecond delay between when the axon potential reaches the presynaptic terminal and
when the neurotransmitter leads to opening of postsynaptic ion channels. Additionally, this signaling is
unidirectional. Signaling in electrical synapses, in contrast, is virtually instantaneous (which is important for
synapsesinvolvedinkeyreflexes),andsomeelectricalsynapsesarebidirectional.Electricalsynapsesarealso
morereliableastheyarelesslikelytobeblocked,andtheyareimportantforsynchronizingtheelectricalactivity
ofagroupofneurons.Forexample,electricalsynapsesinthethalamusarethoughttoregulateslow-wavesleep,
and disruption of these synapses can cause seizures.
Signal Summation
Sometimes a single EPSP is strong enough to induce an action potential in the postsynaptic neuron, but
often multiple presynaptic inputs must create EPSPs around the same time for the postsynaptic neuron to
be sufficiently depolarized to fire an action potential. This process is called summation and occurs at the
axon hillock, as illustrated in Figure 35.16. Additionally, one neuron often has inputs from many presynaptic
neurons—some excitatory and some inhibitory—so IPSPs can cancel out EPSPs and vice versa. It is the
net change in postsynaptic membrane voltage that determines whether the postsynaptic cell has reached its
threshold of excitation needed to fire an action potential. Together, synaptic summation and the threshold for
excitation act as a filter so that random “noise” in the system is not transmitted as important information.
PAGE: 1093
1082 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure35.16Asingleneuroncanreceivebothexcitatoryandinhibitoryinputsfrommultipleneurons,resultinginlocal
membranedepolarization(EPSPinput)andhyperpolarization(IPSPinput).Alltheseinputsareaddedtogetheratthe
axonhillock.IftheEPSPsarestrongenoughtoovercometheIPSPsandreachthethresholdofexcitation,theneuron
will fire.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1094
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1083
Brain-computer interface
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, also called Lou Gehrig’s Disease) is a neurological disease
characterized by the degeneration of the motor neurons that control voluntary movements. The disease
begins with muscle weakening and lack of coordination and eventually destroys the neurons that control
speech, breathing, and swallowing; in the end, the disease can lead to paralysis. At that point, patients
requireassistancefrommachinestobeabletobreatheandtocommunicate.Severalspecialtechnologies
have been developed to allow “locked-in” patients to communicate with the rest of the world. One
technology, for example, allows patients to type out sentences by twitching their cheek. These sentences
can then be read aloud by a computer.
A relatively new line of research for helping paralyzed patients, including those with ALS, to communicate
andretainadegreeofself-sufficiencyiscalledbrain-computerinterface(BCI)technologyandisillustrated
in Figure 35.17. This technology sounds like something out of science fiction: it allows paralyzed patients
to control a computer using only their thoughts. There are several forms of BCI. Some forms use EEG
recordings from electrodes taped onto the skull. These recordings contain information from large
populationsofneuronsthatcanbedecodedbyacomputer.OtherformsofBCIrequiretheimplantationof
an array of electrodes smaller than a postage stamp in the arm and hand area of the motor cortex. This
formofBCI,whilemoreinvasive,isverypowerfulaseachelectrodecanrecordactualactionpotentialsfrom
one or more neurons. These signals are then sent to a computer, which has been trained to decode the
signalandfeedittoatool—suchasacursoronacomputerscreen.ThismeansthatapatientwithALScan
use e-mail, read the Internet, and communicate with others by thinking of moving his or her hand or arm
(eventhough theparalyzedpatient cannot makethat bodilymovement). Recent advanceshavealloweda
paralyzed locked-in patient who suffered a stroke 15 years ago to control a robotic arm and even to feed
herself coffee using BCI technology.
Despite the amazing advancements in BCI technology, it also has limitations. The technology can require
many hours of training and long periods of intense concentration for the patient; it can also require brain
surgery to implant the devices.
Figure 35.17 With brain-computer interface technology, neural signals from a paralyzed patient are collected,
decoded, and then fed to a tool, such as a computer, a wheelchair, or a robotic arm.
PAGE: 1095
1084 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Watch this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/paralyzation) in which a paralyzed woman uses a brain-
controlled robotic arm to bring a drink to her mouth, among other images of brain-computer interface
technology in action. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/
m66621/1.3/#eip-id2102965)
Synaptic Plasticity
Synapses are not static structures. They can be weakened or strengthened. They can be broken, and new
synapses can be made. Synaptic plasticity allows for these changes, which are all needed for a functioning
nervous system. In fact, synaptic plasticity is the basis of learning and memory. Two processes in particular,
long-termpotentiation(LTP)andlong-termdepression(LTD)areimportantformsofsynapticplasticitythatoccur
in synapses in the hippocampus, a brain region that is involved in storing memories.
Long-term Potentiation (LTP)
Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a persistent strengthening of a synaptic connection. LTP is based on the
Hebbian principle: cells that fire together wire together. There are various mechanisms, none fully understood,
behind the synaptic strengthening seen with LTP. One known mechanism involves a type of postsynaptic
glutamate receptor, called NMDA (N-Methyl-D-aspartate) receptors, shown in Figure 35.18. These receptors
are normally blocked by magnesium ions; however, when the postsynaptic neuron is depolarized by multiple
presynaptic inputs in quick succession (either from one neuron or multiple neurons), the magnesium ions
2+
are forced out allowing Ca ions to pass into the postsynaptic cell. Next, Ca ions entering the cell initiate
a signaling cascade that causes a different type of glutamate receptor, called AMPA (α-
amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionicacid)receptors,tobeinsertedintothepostsynapticmembrane,
since activated AMPA receptors allow positive ions to enter the cell. So, the next time glutamate is released
from the presynaptic membrane, it will have a larger excitatory effect (EPSP) on the postsynaptic cell because
the binding of glutamate to these AMPA receptors will allow more positive ions into the cell. The insertion of
additional AMPA receptors strengthens the synapse and means that the postsynaptic neuron is more likely to
fireinresponsetopresynapticneurotransmitterrelease.Somedrugsofabuseco-opttheLTPpathway,andthis
synaptic strengthening can lead to addiction.
Long-term Depression (LTD)
Long-term depression (LTD) is essentially the reverse of LTP: it is a long-term weakening of a synaptic
connection. One mechanism known to cause LTD also involves AMPA receptors. In this situation, calcium that
enters through NMDA receptors initiates a different signaling cascade, which results in the removal of AMPA
receptors from the postsynaptic membrane, as illustrated in Figure 35.18. The decrease in AMPA receptors
in the membrane makes the postsynaptic neuron less responsive to glutamate released from the presynaptic
neuron. While it may seem counterintuitive, LTD may be just as important for learning and memory as LTP.
The weakening and pruning of unused synapses allows for unimportant connections to be lost and makes the
synapses that have undergone LTP that much stronger by comparison.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1096
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1085
Figure35.18CalciumentrythroughpostsynapticNMDAreceptorscaninitiatetwodifferentformsofsynapticplasticity:
long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD). LTP arises when a single synapse is repeatedly
stimulated.Thisstimulationcausesacalcium-andCaMKII-dependentcellularcascade,whichresultsintheinsertionof
moreAMPAreceptorsintothepostsynapticmembrane.Thenexttimeglutamateisreleasedfromthepresynapticcell,
itwillbindtobothNMDAandthenewlyinsertedAMPAreceptors,thusdepolarizingthemembranemoreefficiently.LTD
occurswhenfewglutamatemoleculesbindtoNMDAreceptorsatasynapse(duetoalowfiringrateofthepresynaptic
neuron).ThecalciumthatdoesflowthroughNMDAreceptorsinitiatesadifferentcalcineurinandproteinphosphatase
1-dependentcascade,whichresultsintheendocytosisofAMPAreceptors.Thismakesthepostsynapticneuronless
responsive to glutamate released from the presynaptic neuron.
35.3 | The Central Nervous System
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the spinal cord, cerebral lobes, and other brain areas on a diagram of the brain
• Describe the basic functions of the spinal cord, cerebral lobes, and other brain areas
The central nervous system (CNS) is made up of the brain, a part of which is shown in Figure 35.19 and
spinal cord and is covered with three layers of protective coverings called meninges (from the Greek word
for membrane). The outermost layer is the dura mater (Latin for “hard mother”). As the Latin suggests, the
primaryfunctionforthisthicklayeristoprotectthebrainandspinalcord.Theduramateralsocontainsvein-like
structuresthatcarrybloodfromthebrainbacktotheheart.Themiddlelayeristheweb-likearachnoid mater.
Thelastlayeristhepiamater(Latinfor“softmother”),whichdirectlycontactsandcoversthebrainandspinal
cordlikeplasticwrap.Thespacebetweenthearachnoidandpiamatersisfilledwithcerebrospinalfluid(CSF).
CSF is produced by a tissue called choroid plexus in fluid-filled compartments in the CNS called ventricles.
The brain floats in CSF, which acts as a cushion and shock absorber and makes the brain neutrally buoyant.
CSF also functions to circulate chemical substances throughout the brain and into the spinal cord.
PAGE: 1097
1086 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
The entire brain contains only about 8.5 tablespoons of CSF, but CSF is constantly produced in the ventricles.
This creates a problem when a ventricle is blocked—the CSF builds up and creates swelling and the brain is
pushedagainsttheskull.Thisswellingconditioniscalledhydrocephalus(“waterhead”)andcancauseseizures,
cognitive problems, and even death if a shunt is not inserted to remove the fluid and pressure.
Figure35.19Thecerebralcortexiscoveredbythreelayersofmeninges:thedura,arachnoid,andpiamaters.(credit:
modification of work by Gray’s Anatomy)
Brain
Thebrainisthepartofthecentralnervoussystemthatiscontainedinthecranialcavityoftheskull.Itincludes
the cerebral cortex, limbic system, basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus, and cerebellum. There are three
differentwaysthatabraincanbesectionedinordertoviewinternalstructures:asagittalsectioncutsthebrain
lefttoright,asshowninFigure35.21b,acoronalsectioncutsthebrainfronttoback,asshowninFigure35.20a,
and a horizontal section cuts the brain top to bottom.
Cerebral Cortex
The outermost part of the brain is a thick piece of nervous system tissue called the cerebral cortex, which is
foldedintohillscalledgyri(singular:gyrus)andvalleyscalledsulci(singular:sulcus).Thecortexismadeupof
twohemispheres—rightandleft—whichareseparatedbyalargesulcus.Athickfiberbundlecalledthecorpus
callosum (Latin: “tough body”) connects the two hemispheres and allows information to be passed from one
side to the other. Although there are some brain functions that are localized more to one hemisphere than the
other, the functions of the two hemispheres are largely redundant. In fact, sometimes (very rarely) an entire
hemisphere is removed to treat severe epilepsy. While patients do suffer some deficits following the surgery,
they can have surprisingly few problems, especially when the surgery is performed on children who have very
immature nervous systems.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1098
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1087
(a) (b)
Figure 35.20These illustrations show the (a) coronal and (b) sagittal sections of the human brain.
Inothersurgeriestotreatsevereepilepsy,thecorpuscallosumiscutinsteadofremovinganentirehemisphere.
This causes a condition called split-brain, which gives insights into unique functions of the two hemispheres.
Forexample,whenanobjectispresentedtopatients’leftvisualfield,theymaybeunabletoverballynamethe
object(andmayclaimtonothaveseenanobjectatall).Thisisbecausethevisualinputfromtheleftvisualfield
crossesandenterstherighthemisphereandcannotthensignaltothespeechcenter,whichgenerallyisfound
intheleftsideofthebrain.Remarkably,ifasplit-brainpatientisaskedtopickupaspecificobjectoutofagroup
of objects with the left hand, the patient will be able to do so but will still be unable to vocally identify it.
See this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/split-brain) to learn more about split-brain patients and to
play a game where you can model the split-brain experiments yourself.
Each cortical hemisphere contains regions called lobes that are involved in different functions. Scientists use
various techniques to determine what brain areas are involved in different functions: they examine patients
who have had injuries or diseases that affect specific areas and see how those areas are related to functional
deficits.Theyalsoconductanimalstudieswheretheystimulatebrainareasandseeifthereareanybehavioral
changes. They use a technique called transmagnetic stimulation (TMS) to temporarily deactivate specific parts
of the cortex using strong magnets placed outside the head; and they use functional magnetic resonance
imaging(fMRI)tolookatchangesinoxygenatedbloodflowinparticularbrainregionsthatcorrelatewithspecific
behavioral tasks. These techniques, and others, have given great insight into the functions of different brain
regionsbuthavealsoshowedthatanygivenbrainareacanbeinvolvedinmorethanonebehaviororprocess,
and any given behavior or process generally involves neurons in multiple brain areas. That being said, each
hemisphere of the mammalian cerebral cortex can be broken down into four functionally and spatially defined
lobes: frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital. Figure 35.21 illustrates these four lobes of the human cerebral
cortex.
PAGE: 1099
1088 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.21The human cerebral cortex includes the frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes.
The frontal lobe is located at the front of the brain, over the eyes. This lobe contains the olfactory bulb,
which processes smells. The frontal lobe also contains the motor cortex, which is important for planning and
implementing movement. Areas within the motor cortex map to different muscle groups, and there is some
organization to this map, as shown in Figure 35.22. For example, the neurons that control movement of the
fingers are next to the neurons that control movement of the hand. Neurons in the frontal lobe also control
cognitive functions like maintaining attention, speech, and decision-making. Studies of humans who have
damagedtheirfrontallobesshowthatpartsofthisareaareinvolvedinpersonality,socialization,andassessing
risk.
Figure35.22Differentpartsofthemotorcortexcontroldifferentmusclegroups.Musclegroupsthatareneighborsin
the body are generally controlled by neighboring regions of the motor cortex as well. For example, the neurons that
control finger movement are near the neurons that control hand movement.
The parietal lobe is located at the top of the brain. Neurons in the parietal lobe are involved in speech and
alsoreading.Twooftheparietallobe’smainfunctionsareprocessingsomatosensation—touchsensationslike
pressure,pain,heat,cold—andprocessingproprioception—thesenseofhowpartsofthebodyareorientedin
space. The parietal lobe contains a somatosensory map of the body similar to the motor cortex.
Theoccipitallobeislocatedatthebackofthebrain.Itisprimarilyinvolvedinvision—seeing,recognizing,and
identifying the visual world.
The temporal lobe is located at the base of the brain by your ears and is primarily involved in processing
andinterpreting sounds.Italsocontainsthehippocampus (Greekfor“seahorse”)—astructurethatprocesses
memory formation. The hippocampus is illustrated in Figure 35.24. The role of the hippocampus in memory
waspartiallydeterminedbystudyingonefamousepilepticpatient,HM,whohadbothsidesofhishippocampus
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1100
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1089
removedinanattempttocurehisepilepsy.Hisseizureswentaway,buthecouldnolongerformnewmemories
(although he could remember some facts from before his surgery and could learn new motor tasks).
Cerebral Cortex
Compared to other vertebrates, mammals have exceptionally large brains for their body size. An entire
alligator’s brain, for example, would fill about one and a half teaspoons. This increase in brain to body
size ratio is especially pronounced in apes, whales, and dolphins. While this increase in overall brain size
doubtlessly played a role in the evolution of complex behaviors unique to mammals, it does not tell the
wholestory.Scientistshavefoundarelationshipbetweentherelativelyhighsurfaceareaofthecortexand
theintelligenceandcomplexsocialbehaviorsexhibitedbysomemammals.Thisincreasedsurfaceareais
due,inpart,toincreasedfoldingofthecorticalsheet(moresulciandgyri).Forexample,aratcortexisvery
smoothwithveryfewsulciandgyri.Catandsheepcorticeshavemoresulciandgyri.Chimps,humans,and
dolphins have even more.
Figure 35.23 Mammals have larger brain-to-body ratios than other vertebrates. Within mammals, increased
cortical folding and surface area is correlated with complex behavior.
Basal Ganglia
Interconnectedbrainareascalledthebasalganglia(orbasalnuclei),showninFigure35.20b,playimportant
rolesinmovementcontrolandposture.Damagetothebasalganglia,asinParkinson’sdisease,leadstomotor
impairmentslikeashufflinggaitwhenwalking.Thebasalgangliaalsoregulatemotivation.Forexample,whena
waspstingledtobilateralbasalgangliadamageina25-year-oldbusinessman,hebegantospendallhisdaysin
bedandshowednointerestinanythingoranybody.Butwhenhewasexternallystimulated—aswhensomeone
askedtoplayacardgamewithhim—hewasabletofunctionnormally.Interestingly,heandothersimilarpatients
do not report feeling bored or frustrated by their state.
Thalamus
Thethalamus(Greekfor“innerchamber”),illustratedinFigure35.24,actsasagatewaytoandfromthecortex.
It receives sensory and motor inputs from the body and also receives feedback from the cortex. This feedback
mechanism can modulate conscious awareness of sensory and motor inputs depending on the attention and
arousal state of the animal. The thalamus helps regulate consciousness, arousal, and sleep states. A rare
genetic disorder called fatal familial insomnia causes the degeneration of thalamic neurons and glia. This
disorder prevents affected patients from being able to sleep, among other symptoms, and is eventually fatal.
PAGE: 1101
1090 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure35.24Thelimbicsystemregulatesemotionandotherbehaviors.Itincludespartsofthecerebralcortexlocated
nearthecenterofthebrain,includingthecingulategyrusandthehippocampusaswellasthethalamus,hypothalamus,
and amygdala.
Hypothalamus
Below the thalamus is the hypothalamus, shown in Figure 35.24. The hypothalamus controls the endocrine
system by sending signals to the pituitary gland, a pea-sized endocrine gland that releases several different
hormones that affect other glands as well as other cells. This relationship means that the hypothalamus
regulates important behaviors that are controlled by these hormones. The hypothalamus is the body’s
thermostat—itmakessurekeyfunctionslikefoodandwaterintake,energyexpenditure,andbodytemperature
are kept at appropriate levels. Neurons within the hypothalamus also regulate circadian rhythms, sometimes
called sleep cycles.
Limbic System
Thelimbicsystemisaconnectedsetofstructuresthatregulatesemotion,aswellasbehaviorsrelatedtofear
and motivation. It plays a role in memory formation and includes parts of the thalamus and hypothalamus as
well as the hippocampus. One important structure within the limbic system is a temporal lobe structure called
the amygdala (Greek for “almond”), illustrated in Figure 35.24. The two amygdala are important both for the
sensation of fear and for recognizing fearful faces. Thecingulate gyrushelps regulate emotions and pain.
Cerebellum
The cerebellum (Latin for “little brain”), shown in Figure 35.21, sits at the base of the brain on top of the
brainstem. The cerebellum controls balance and aids in coordinating movement and learning new motor tasks.
Brainstem
Thebrainstem,illustratedinFigure35.21,connectstherestofthebrainwiththespinalcord.Itconsistsofthe
midbrain,medullaoblongata,andthepons.Motorandsensoryneuronsextendthroughthebrainstemallowing
for the relay of signals between the brain and spinal cord. Ascending neural pathways cross in this section of
the brain allowing the left hemisphere of the cerebrum to control the right side of the body and vice versa. The
brainstem coordinates motor control signals sent from the brain to the body. The brainstem controls several
important functions of the body including alertness, arousal, breathing, blood pressure, digestion, heart rate,
swallowing, walking, and sensory and motor information integration.
Spinal Cord
Connectingtothebrainstemandextendingdownthebodythroughthespinalcolumnisthespinalcord,shown
inFigure35.21.Thespinalcordisathickbundleofnervetissuethatcarriesinformationaboutthebodytothe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1102
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1091
brain and from the brain to the body. The spinal cord is contained within the bones of the vertebrate column
butisabletocommunicatesignalstoandfromthebodythroughitsconnectionswithspinalnerves(partofthe
peripheralnervoussystem).Across-sectionofthespinalcordlookslikeawhiteovalcontainingagraybutterfly-
shape, as illustrated in Figure 35.25. Myelinated axons make up the “white matter” and neuron and glial cell
bodies make up the “gray matter.” Gray matter is also composed of interneurons, which connect two neurons
each located in different parts of the body. Axons and cell bodies in the dorsal (facing the back of the animal)
spinal cord convey mostly sensory information from the body to the brain. Axons and cell bodies in the ventral
(facingthefrontoftheanimal)spinalcordprimarilytransmitsignalscontrollingmovementfromthebraintothe
body.
The spinal cord also controls motor reflexes. These reflexes are quick, unconscious movements—like
automatically removing a hand from a hot object. Reflexes are so fast because they involve local synaptic
connections. For example, the knee reflex that a doctor tests during a routine physical is controlled by a single
synapsebetweenasensoryneuronandamotorneuron.Whileareflexmayonlyrequiretheinvolvementofone
or two synapses, synapses with interneurons in the spinal column transmit information to the brain to convey
what happened (the knee jerked, or the hand was hot).
In the United States, there around 10,000 spinal cord injuries each year. Because the spinal cord is the
information superhighway connecting the brain with the body, damage to the spinal cord can lead to paralysis.
The extent of the paralysis depends on the location of the injury along the spinal cord and whether the spinal
cord was completely severed. For example, if the spinal cord is damaged at the level of the neck, it can cause
paralysisfromtheneckdown,whereasdamagetothespinalcolumnfurtherdownmaylimitparalysistothelegs.
Spinal cord injuries are notoriously difficult to treat because spinal nerves do not regenerate, although ongoing
research suggests that stem cell transplants may be able to act as a bridge to reconnect severed nerves.
Researchersarealsolookingatwaystopreventtheinflammationthatworsensnervedamageafterinjury.One
such treatment is to pump the body with cold saline to induce hypothermia. This cooling can prevent swelling
and other processes that are thought to worsen spinal cord injuries.
Figure35.25Across-sectionofthespinalcordshowsgraymatter(containingcellbodiesandinterneurons)andwhite
matter (containing axons).
35.4 | The Peripheral Nervous System
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the organization and functions of the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems
• Describe the organization and function of the sensory-somatic nervous system
Theperipheralnervoussystem(PNS)istheconnectionbetweenthecentralnervoussystemandtherestofthe
body. The CNS is like the power plant of the nervous system. It creates the signals that control the functions
ofthebody.ThePNSislikethewiresthatgotoindividualhouses.Withoutthose“wires,”thesignalsproduced
bytheCNScouldnotcontrolthebody(andtheCNSwouldnotbeabletoreceivesensoryinformationfromthe
body either).
The PNS can be broken down into the autonomic nervous system, which controls bodily functions without
conscious control, and the sensory-somatic nervous system, which transmits sensory information from the
skin, muscles, and sensory organs to the CNS and sends motor commands from the CNS to the muscles.
PAGE: 1103
1092 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Autonomic Nervous System
Figure 35.26 In the autonomic nervous system, a preganglionic neuron of the CNS synapses with a
postganglionic neuron of the PNS. The postganglionic neuron, in turn, acts on a target organ. Autonomic
responses are mediated by the sympathetic and the parasympathetic systems, which are antagonistic to one
another. The sympathetic system activates the “fight or flight” response, while the parasympathetic system
activates the “rest and digest” response.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. The parasympathetic pathway is responsible for resting the body, while the sympathetic pathway is
responsible for preparing for an emergency.
b. Most preganglionic neurons in the sympathetic pathway originate in the spinal cord.
c. Slowing of the heartbeat is a parasympathetic response.
d. Parasympathetic neurons are responsible for releasing norepinephrine on the target organ, while
sympathetic neurons are responsible for releasing acetylcholine.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1104
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1093
The autonomic nervous system serves as the relay between the CNS and the internal organs. It controls the
lungs, the heart, smooth muscle, and exocrine and endocrine glands. The autonomic nervous system controls
these organs largely without conscious control; it can continuously monitor the conditions of these different
systems and implement changes as needed. Signaling to the target tissue usually involves two synapses: a
preganglionicneuron(originatingintheCNS)synapsestoaneuroninaganglionthat,inturn,synapsesonthe
targetorgan,asillustratedinFigure35.26.Therearetwodivisionsoftheautonomicnervoussystemthatoften
have opposing effects: the sympathetic nervous system and the parasympathetic nervous system.
Sympathetic Nervous System
The sympathetic nervous system is responsible for the “fight or flight” response that occurs when an animal
encounters a dangerous situation. One way to remember this is to think of the surprise a person feels when
encountering a snake (“snake” and “sympathetic” both begin with “s”). Examples of functions controlled by the
sympathetic nervous system include an accelerated heart rate and inhibited digestion. These functions help
prepareanorganism’sbodyforthephysicalstrainrequiredtoescapeapotentiallydangeroussituationortofend
off a predator.
Figure 35.27The sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems often have opposing effects on target organs.
Most preganglionic neurons in the sympathetic nervous system originate in the spinal cord, as illustrated in
Figure35.27.Theaxonsoftheseneuronsreleaseacetylcholineonpostganglionicneuronswithinsympathetic
ganglia (the sympathetic ganglia form a chain that extends alongside the spinal cord). The acetylcholine
activatesthepostganglionicneurons.Postganglionicneuronsthenreleasenorepinephrineontotargetorgans.
As anyone who has ever felt a rush before a big test, speech, or athletic event can attest, the effects of the
sympathetic nervous system are quite pervasive. This is both because one preganglionic neuron synapses
PAGE: 1105
1094 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
on multiple postganglionic neurons, amplifying the effect of the original synapse, and because the adrenal
gland also releases norepinephrine (and the closely related hormone epinephrine) into the bloodstream. The
physiologicaleffectsofthisnorepinephrinereleaseincludedilatingthetracheaandbronchi(makingiteasierfor
the animal to breathe), increasing heart rate, and moving blood from the skin to the heart, muscles, and brain
(sotheanimalcanthinkandrun).Thestrengthandspeedofthesympatheticresponsehelpsanorganismavoid
danger,andscientistshavefoundevidencethatitmayalsoincreaseLTP—allowingtheanimaltorememberthe
dangerous situation and avoid it in the future.
Parasympathetic Nervous System
While the sympathetic nervous system is activated in stressful situations, the parasympathetic nervous
systemallowsananimalto“restanddigest.”Onewaytorememberthisistothinkthatduringarestfulsituation
like a picnic, the parasympathetic nervous system is in control (“picnic” and “parasympathetic” both start with
“p”).Parasympatheticpreganglionicneuronshavecellbodieslocatedinthebrainstemandinthesacral(toward
thebottom)spinalcord,asshowninFigure35.27.Theaxonsofthepreganglionicneuronsreleaseacetylcholine
on the postganglionic neurons, which are generally located very near the target organs. Most postganglionic
neurons release acetylcholine onto target organs, although some release nitric oxide.
The parasympathetic nervous system resets organ function after the sympathetic nervous system is activated
(the common adrenaline dump you feel after a ‘fight-or-flight’ event). Effects of acetylcholine release on target
organs include slowing of heart rate, lowered blood pressure, and stimulation of digestion.
Sensory-Somatic Nervous System
The sensory-somatic nervous system is made up of cranial and spinal nerves and contains both sensory and
motor neurons. Sensory neurons transmit sensory information from the skin, skeletal muscle, and sensory
organs to the CNS. Motor neurons transmit messages about desired movement from the CNS to the muscles
tomakethemcontract.Withoutitssensory-somaticnervoussystem,ananimalwouldbeunabletoprocessany
informationaboutitsenvironment(whatitsees,feels,hears,andsoon)andcouldnotcontrolmotormovements.
Unliketheautonomicnervoussystem,whichhastwosynapsesbetweentheCNSandthetargetorgan,sensory
and motor neurons have only one synapse—one ending of the neuron is at the organ and the other directly
contacts a CNS neuron. Acetylcholine is the main neurotransmitter released at these synapses.
Humanshave12cranialnerves,nervesthatemergefromorentertheskull(cranium),asopposedtothespinal
nerves,whichemergefromthevertebralcolumn.Eachcranialnerveisaccordedaname,whicharedetailedin
Figure35.28.Somecranialnervestransmitonlysensoryinformation.Forexample,theolfactorynervetransmits
information about smells from the nose to the brainstem. Other cranial nerves transmit almost solely motor
information. For example, the oculomotor nerve controls the opening and closing of the eyelid and some eye
movements.Othercranialnervescontainamixofsensoryandmotorfibers.Forexample,theglossopharyngeal
nerve has a role in both taste (sensory) and swallowing (motor).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1106
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1095
Figure35.28Thehumanbraincontains12cranialnervesthatreceivesensoryinputandcontrolmotoroutputforthe
head and neck.
Spinal nerves transmit sensory and motor information between the spinal cord and the rest of the body. Each
ofthe31spinalnerves(inhumans)containsbothsensoryandmotoraxons.Thesensoryneuroncellbodiesare
groupedinstructures calleddorsalrootgangliaandareshowninFigure 35.29.Eachsensoryneuronhasone
projection—withasensoryreceptorendinginskin,muscle,orsensoryorgans—andanotherthatsynapseswith
a neuron in the dorsal spinal cord. Motor neurons have cell bodies in the ventral gray matter of the spinal cord
thatprojecttomusclethroughtheventralroot.Theseneuronsareusuallystimulatedbyinterneuronswithinthe
spinal cord but are sometimes directly stimulated by sensory neurons.
Figure 35.29 Spinal nerves contain both sensory and motor axons. The somas of sensory neurons are located in
dorsal root ganglia. The somas of motor neurons are found in the ventral portion of the gray matter of the spinal cord.
PAGE: 1107
1096 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
35.5 | Nervous System Disorders
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the symptoms, potential causes, and treatment of several examples of nervous system
disorders
A nervous system that functions correctly is a fantastically complex, well-oiled machine—synapses fire
appropriately,musclesmovewhenneeded,memoriesareformedandstored,andemotionsarewellregulated.
Unfortunately,eachyearmillionsofpeopleintheUnitedStatesdealwithsomesortofnervoussystemdisorder.
While scientists have discovered potential causes of many of these diseases, and viable treatments for some,
ongoing research seeks to find ways to better prevent and treat all of these disorders.
Neurodegenerative Disorders
Neurodegenerative disorders are illnesses characterized by a loss of nervous system functioning that are
usually caused by neuronal death. These diseases generally worsen over time as more and more neurons
die. The symptoms of a particular neurodegenerative disease are related to where in the nervous system
the death of neurons occurs. Spinocerebellar ataxia, for example, leads to neuronal death in the cerebellum.
The death of these neurons causes problems in balance and walking. Neurodegenerative disorders include
Huntington’sdisease,amyotrophiclateralsclerosis,Alzheimer’sdiseaseandothertypesofdementiadisorders,
and Parkinson’s disease. Here, Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease will be discussed in more depth.
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly. In 2012, an estimated 5.4 million
AmericanssufferedfromAlzheimer’sdisease,andpaymentsfortheircareareestimatedat$200billion.Roughly
one in every eight people age 65 or older has the disease. Due to the aging of the baby-boomer generation,
there are projected to be as many as 13 million Alzheimer’s patients in the United States in the year 2050.
Symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease include disruptive memory loss, confusion about time or place, difficulty
planningorexecutingtasks,poorjudgment,andpersonalitychanges.Problemssmellingcertainscentscanalso
beindicativeofAlzheimer’sdiseaseandmayserveasanearlywarningsign.Manyofthesesymptomsarealso
common in people who are aging normally, so it is the severity and longevity of the symptoms that determine
whether a person is suffering from Alzheimer’s.
Alzheimer’s disease was named for Alois Alzheimer, a German psychiatrist who published a report in 1911
aboutawomanwhoshowedseveredementiasymptoms.Alongwithhiscolleagues,heexaminedthewoman’s
brainfollowingherdeathandreportedthepresenceofabnormalclumps,whicharenowcalledamyloidplaques,
along with tangled brain fibers called neurofibrillary tangles. Amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and an
overall shrinking of brain volume are commonly seen in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. Loss of neurons in
thehippocampusisespeciallysevereinadvancedAlzheimer’spatients.Figure35.30comparesanormalbrain
tothebrainofanAlzheimer’spatient.Manyresearchgroupsareexaminingthecausesofthesehallmarksofthe
disease.
One form of the disease is usually caused by mutations in one of three known genes. This rare form of early
onset Alzheimer’s disease affects fewer than five percent of patients with the disease and causes dementia
beginningbetweentheagesof30and60.Themoreprevalent,late-onsetformofthediseaselikelyalsohasa
genetic component. One particular gene, apolipoprotein E (APOE) has a variant (E4) that increases a carrier’s
likelihoodofgettingthedisease.Manyothergeneshavebeenidentifiedthatmightbeinvolvedinthepathology.
Visit this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/alzheimers) for video links discussing genetics and
Alzheimer’s disease.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1108
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1097
Unfortunately, there is no cure for Alzheimer’s disease. Current treatments focus on managing the symptoms
of the disease. Because decrease in the activity of cholinergic neurons (neurons that use the neurotransmitter
acetylcholine) is common in Alzheimer’s disease, several drugs used to treat the disease work by increasing
acetylcholine neurotransmission, often by inhibiting the enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine in the synaptic
cleft. Other clinical interventions focus on behavioral therapies like psychotherapy, sensory therapy, and
cognitive exercises. Since Alzheimer’s disease appears to hijack the normal aging process, research into
prevention is prevalent. Smoking, obesity, and cardiovascular problems may be risk factors for the disease, so
treatmentsforthosemayalsohelptopreventAlzheimer’sdisease.Somestudieshaveshownthatpeoplewho
remainintellectuallyactivebyplayinggames,reading,playingmusicalinstruments,andbeingsociallyactivein
later life have a reduced risk of developing the disease.
Figure 35.30 Compared to a normal brain (left), the brain from a patient with Alzheimer’s disease (right) shows
a dramatic neurodegeneration, particularly within the ventricles and hippocampus. (credit: modification of work by
“Garrando”/WikimediaCommonsbasedonoriginalimagesbyADEAR:"Alzheimer'sDiseaseEducationandReferral
Center, a service of the National Institute on Aging”)
Parkinson’s Disease
Like Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disease. It was first characterized by
JamesParkinsonin1817.Eachyear,50,000-60,000peopleintheUnitedStatesarediagnosedwiththedisease.
Parkinson’s disease causes the loss of dopamine neurons in the substantia nigra, a midbrain structure that
regulates movement. Loss of these neurons causes many symptoms including tremor (shaking of fingers or a
limb),slowedmovement,speechchanges,balanceandpostureproblems,andrigidmuscles.Thecombination
of these symptoms often causes a characteristic slow hunched shuffling walk, illustrated in Figure 35.31.
Patients with Parkinson’s disease can also exhibit psychological symptoms, such as dementia or emotional
problems.
Although some patients have a form of the disease known to be caused by a single mutation, for most
patientstheexactcausesofParkinson’sdiseaseremainunknown:thediseaselikelyresultsfromacombination
of genetic and environmental factors (similar to Alzheimer’s disease). Post-mortem analysis of brains from
Parkinson’spatientsshowsthepresenceofLewybodies—abnormalproteinclumps—indopaminergicneurons.
The prevalence of these Lewy bodies often correlates with the severity of the disease.
There is no cure for Parkinson’s disease, and treatment is focused on easing symptoms. One of the most
commonlyprescribeddrugsforParkinson’sisL-DOPA,whichisachemicalthatisconvertedintodopamineby
neurons in the brain. This conversion increases the overall level of dopamine neurotransmission and can help
compensate for the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra. Other drugs work by inhibiting the
enzyme that breaks down dopamine.
PAGE: 1109
1098 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Figure 35.31Parkinson’s patients often have a characteristic hunched walk.
Neurodevelopmental Disorders
Neurodevelopmental disorders occur when the development of the nervous system is disturbed. There are
several different classes of neurodevelopmental disorders. Some, like Down Syndrome, cause intellectual
deficits. Others specifically affect communication, learning, or the motor system. Some disorders like autism
spectrum disorder and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder have complex symptoms.
Autism
Autismspectrumdisorder(ASD)isaneurodevelopmentaldisorder.Itsseveritydiffersfrompersontoperson.
Estimates for the prevalence of the disorder have changed rapidly in the past few decades. Current estimates
suggestthatonein88childrenwilldevelopthedisorder.ASDisfourtimesmoreprevalentinmalesthanfemales.
This video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/autism) discusses possible reasons why there has been a recent
increase in the number of people diagnosed with autism.
A characteristic symptom of ASD is impaired social skills. Children with autism may have difficulty making and
maintaining eye contact and reading social cues. They also may have problems feeling empathy for others.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1110
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1099
OthersymptomsofASDincluderepetitivemotorbehaviors(suchasrockingbackandforth),preoccupationwith
specific subjects, strict adherence to certain rituals, and unusual language use. Up to 30 percent of patients
with ASD develop epilepsy, and patients with some forms of the disorder (like Fragile X) also have intellectual
disability.Becauseitisaspectrumdisorder,otherASDpatientsareveryfunctionalandhavegood-to-excellent
language skills. Many of these patients do not feel that they suffer from a disorder and instead think that their
brains just process information differently.
Except for some well-characterized, clearly genetic forms of autism (like Fragile X and Rett’s Syndrome), the
causes of ASD are largely unknown. Variants of several genes correlate with the presence of ASD, but for
any given patient, many different mutations in different genes may be required for the disease to develop. At
a general level, ASD is thought to be a disease of “incorrect” wiring. Accordingly, brains of some ASD patients
lackthesamelevelofsynapticpruningthatoccursinnon-affectedpeople.Inthe1990s,aresearchpaperlinked
autismtoacommonvaccinegiventochildren.Thispaperwasretractedwhenitwasdiscoveredthattheauthor
falsified data, and follow-up studies showed no connection between vaccines and autism.
Treatment for autism usually combines behavioral therapies and interventions, along with medications to treat
other disorders common to people with autism (depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder). Although
early interventions can help mitigate the effects of the disease, there is currently no cure for ASD.
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD)
Approximately three to five percent of children and adults are affected by attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD). Like ASD, ADHD is more prevalent in males than females. Symptoms of the disorder
include inattention (lack of focus), executive functioning difficulties, impulsivity, and hyperactivity beyond what
is characteristic of the normal developmental stage. Some patients do not have the hyperactive component
of symptoms and are diagnosed with a subtype of ADHD: attention deficit disorder (ADD). Many people
with ADHD also show comorbitity, in that they develop secondary disorders in addition to ADHD. Examples
includedepressionorobsessivecompulsivedisorder(OCD).Figure35.32providessomestatisticsconcerning
comorbidity with ADHD.
ThecauseofADHDisunknown,althoughresearchpointstoadelayanddysfunctioninthedevelopmentofthe
prefrontalcortexanddisturbancesinneurotransmission.Accordingtostudiesoftwins,thedisorderhasastrong
geneticcomponent.Thereareseveralcandidategenesthatmaycontributetothedisorder,butnodefinitivelinks
have been discovered. Environmental factors, including exposure to certain pesticides, may also contribute to
the development of ADHD in some patients. Treatment for ADHD often involves behavioral therapies and the
prescription of stimulant medications, which paradoxically cause a calming effect in these patients.
Figure 35.32 Many people with ADHD have one or more other neurological disorders. (credit “chart design and
illustration”:modificationofworkbyLeighCoriale;credit“data”:Drs.BiedermanandFaraone,MassachusettsGeneral
Hospital).
PAGE: 1111
1100 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
Neurologist
Neurologists are physicians who specialize in disorders of the nervous system. They diagnose and treat
disorderssuchasepilepsy,stroke,dementia,nervoussysteminjuries,Parkinson’sdisease,sleepdisorders,
and multiple sclerosis. Neurologists are medical doctors who have attended college, medical school, and
completed three to four years of neurology residency.
Whenexamininganewpatient,aneurologisttakesafullmedicalhistoryandperformsacompletephysical
exam.Thephysicalexamcontainsspecifictasksthatareusedtodeterminewhatareasofthebrain,spinal
cord,orperipheralnervoussystemmaybedamaged.Forexample,tocheckwhetherthehypoglossalnerve
isfunctioningcorrectly,theneurologistwillaskthepatienttomovehisorhertongueindifferentways.Ifthe
patient does not have full control over tongue movements, then the hypoglossal nerve may be damaged
ortheremaybealesioninthebrainstemwherethecellbodiesoftheseneuronsreside(ortherecouldbe
damage to the tongue muscle itself).
Neurologists have other tools besides a physical exam they can use to diagnose particular problems
in the nervous system. If the patient has had a seizure, for example, the neurologist can use
electroencephalography(EEG), whichinvolvestapingelectrodestothescalptorecordbrainactivity,totry
todeterminewhichbrainregionsareinvolvedintheseizure.Insuspectedstrokepatients,aneurologistcan
use a computerized tomography (CT) scan, which is a type of X-ray, to look for bleeding in the brain or a
possible brain tumor. To treat patients with neurological problems, neurologists can prescribe medications
or refer the patient to a neurosurgeon for surgery.
This website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/neurologic_exam) allows you to see the different tests a
neurologist might use to see what regions of the nervous system may be damaged in a patient.
Mental Illnesses
Mentalillnessesarenervoussystemdisordersthatresultinproblemswiththinking,mood,orrelatingwithother
people. These disorders are severe enough to affect a person’s quality of life and often make it difficult for
peopletoperformtheroutinetasksofdailyliving.Debilitatingmentaldisordersplagueapproximately12.5million
Americans(about1in17people)atanannualcostofmorethan$300billion.Thereareseveraltypesofmental
disorders including schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder, anxiety disorders and phobias, post-
traumaticstressdisorders,andobsessive-compulsivedisorder(OCD),amongothers.TheAmericanPsychiatric
AssociationpublishestheDiagnosticandStatisticalManualofMentalDisorders(orDSM),whichdescribesthe
symptomsrequiredforapatienttobediagnosedwithaparticularmentaldisorder.Eachnewlyreleasedversion
oftheDSMcontainsdifferentsymptomsandclassificationsasscientistslearnmoreaboutthesedisorders,their
causes, and how they relate to each other. A more detailed discussion of two mental illnesses—schizophrenia
and major depression—is given below.
Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a serious and often debilitating mental illness affecting one percent of people in the United
States. Symptoms of the disease include the inability to differentiate between reality and imagination,
inappropriate and unregulated emotional responses, difficulty thinking, and problems with social situations.
Peoplewithschizophreniacansufferfromhallucinationsandhearvoices;theymayalsosufferfromdelusions.
Patientsalsohaveso-called“negative”symptomslikeaflattenedemotionalstate,lossofpleasure,andlossof
basicdrives.Manyschizophrenicpatientsarediagnosedintheirlateadolescenceorearly20s.Thedevelopment
ofschizophreniaisthoughttoinvolvemalfunctioningdopaminergicneuronsandmayalsoinvolveproblemswith
glutamatesignaling.Treatmentforthediseaseusuallyrequiresantipsychoticmedicationsthatworkbyblocking
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1112
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1101
dopamine receptors and decreasing dopamine neurotransmission in the brain. This decrease in dopamine can
causeParkinson’sdisease-likesymptomsinsomepatients.Whilesomeclassesofantipsychoticscanbequite
effective at treating the disease, they are not a cure, and most patients must remain medicated for the rest of
their lives.
Depression
Major depression affects approximately 6.7 percent of the adults in the United States each year and is one
of the most common mental disorders. To be diagnosed with major depressive disorder, a person must have
experienced a severely depressed mood lasting longer than two weeks along with other symptoms including
a loss of enjoyment in activities that were previously enjoyed, changes in appetite and sleep schedules,
difficultyconcentrating,feelingsofworthlessness,andsuicidalthoughts.Theexactcausesofmajordepression
are unknown and likely include both genetic and environmental risk factors. Some research supports the
“classic monoamine hypothesis,” which suggests that depression is caused by a decrease in norepinephrine
and serotonin neurotransmission. One argument against this hypothesis is the fact that some antidepressant
medications cause an increase in norepinephrine and serotonin release within a few hours of beginning
treatment—but clinical results of these medications are not seen until weeks later. This has led to alternative
hypotheses: for example, dopamine may also be decreased in depressed patients, or it may actually be
an increase in norepinephrine and serotonin that causes the disease, and antidepressants force a feedback
loop that decreases this release. Treatments for depression include psychotherapy, electroconvulsive therapy,
deep-brain stimulation, and prescription medications. There are several classes of antidepressant medications
that work through different mechanisms. For example, monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors) block
the enzyme that degrades many neurotransmitters (including dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine), resulting
in increased neurotransmitter in the synaptic cleft. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) block the
reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic neuron. This blockage results in an increase in serotonin in the
synaptic cleft. Other types of drugs such as norepinephrine-dopamine reuptake inhibitors and norepinephrine-
serotonin reuptake inhibitors are also used to treat depression.
Other Neurological Disorders
There are several other neurological disorders that cannot be easily placed in the above categories. These
include chronic pain conditions, cancers of the nervous system, epilepsy disorders, and stroke. Epilepsy and
stroke are discussed below.
Epilepsy
EstimatessuggestthatuptothreepercentofpeopleintheUnitedStateswillbediagnosedwithepilepsyintheir
lifetime.Whilethereareseveraldifferenttypesofepilepsy,allarecharacterizedbyrecurrentseizures.Epilepsy
itself can be a symptom of a brain injury, disease, or other illness. For example, people who have intellectual
disability or ASD can experience seizures, presumably because the developmental wiring malfunctions that
causedtheirdisordersalsoputthematriskforepilepsy.Formanypatients,however,thecauseoftheirepilepsy
isneveridentifiedandislikelytobeacombinationofgeneticandenvironmentalfactors.Often,seizurescanbe
controlledwithanticonvulsantmedications.However,forveryseverecases,patientsmayundergobrainsurgery
to remove the brain area where seizures originate.
Stroke
Astrokeresultswhenbloodfailstoreachaportionofthebrainforalongenoughtimetocausedamage.Without
theoxygensuppliedbybloodflow,neuronsinthisbrainregiondie.Thisneuronaldeathcancausemanydifferent
symptoms—dependingonthebrainareaaffected—includingheadache,muscleweaknessorparalysis,speech
disturbances, sensory problems, memory loss, and confusion. Stroke is often caused by blood clots and can
also be caused by the bursting of a weak blood vessel. Strokes are extremely common and are the third most
common cause of death in the United States. On average one person experiences a stroke every 40 seconds
intheUnitedStates. Approximately75percentofstrokesoccurinpeopleolderthan65.Riskfactorsforstroke
includehighbloodpressure,diabetes,highcholesterol,andafamilyhistoryofstroke.Smokingdoublestherisk
ofstroke.Becauseastrokeisamedicalemergency,patientswithsymptomsofastrokeshouldimmediatelygo
to the emergency room, where they can receive drugs that will dissolve any clot that may have formed. These
drugs will not work if the stroke was caused by a burst blood vessel or if the stroke occurred more than three
hours before arriving at the hospital. Treatment following a stroke can include blood pressure medication (to
prevent future strokes) and (sometimes intense) physical therapy.
PAGE: 1113
1102 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
KEY TERMS
acetylcholine neurotransmitter released by neurons in the central nervous system and peripheral nervous
system
action potential self-propagating momentary change in the electrical potential of a neuron (or muscle)
membrane
Alzheimer’s disease neurodegenerative disorder characterized by problems with memory and thinking
amygdala structure within the limbic system that processes fear
arachnoid mater spiderweb-like middle layer of the meninges that cover the central nervous system
astrocyte glial cell in the central nervous system that provide nutrients, extracellular buffering, and structural
support for neurons; also makes up the blood-brain barrier
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by difficulty
maintaining attention and controlling impulses
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by impaired social interaction
and communication abilities
autonomic nervous system part of the peripheral nervous system that controls bodily functions
axon tube-like structure that propagates a signal from a neuron’s cell body to axon terminals
axon hillock electrically sensitive structure on the cell body of a neuron that integrates signals from multiple
neuronal connections
axon terminal structure on the end of an axon that can form a synapse with another neuron
basal ganglia interconnectedcollectionsofcellsinthebrainthatareinvolvedinmovementandmotivation;also
known as basal nuclei
basal nuclei see basal ganglia
brainstem portion of the brain that connects with the spinal cord; controls basic nervous system functions like
breathing, heart rate, and swallowing
cerebellum brain structure involved in posture, motor coordination, and learning new motor actions
cerebral cortex outermost sheet of brain tissue; involved in many higher-order functions
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) clear liquid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord and fills the ventricles and
central canal; acts as a shock absorber and circulates material throughout the brain and spinal cord
choroid plexus spongy tissue within ventricles that produces cerebrospinal fluid
cingulate gyrus helps regulate emotions and pain; thought to directly drive the body’s conscious response to
unpleasant experiences
corpus callosum thick fiber bundle that connects the cerebral hemispheres
cranial nerve sensory and/or motor nerve that emanates from the brain
dendrite structure that extends away from the cell body to receive messages from other neurons
depolarization change in the membrane potential to a less negative value
dura mater tough outermost layer that covers the central nervous system
ependymal cell that lines fluid-filled ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord; involved in
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1114
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1103
production of cerebrospinal fluid
epilepsy neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures
excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) depolarization of a postsynaptic membrane caused by
neurotransmitter molecules released from a presynaptic cell
frontal lobe partofthecerebralcortexthatcontainsthemotorcortexandareasinvolvedinplanning,attention,
and language
glia (also, glial cells) cells that provide support functions for neurons
gyrus (plural: gyri) ridged protrusions in the cortex
hippocampus brain structure in the temporal lobe involved in processing memories
hyperpolarization change in the membrane potential to a more negative value
hypothalamus brain structure that controls hormone release and body homeostasis
inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP) hyperpolarization of a postsynaptic membrane caused by
neurotransmitter molecules released from a presynaptic cell
limbic system connected brain areas that process emotion and motivation
long-term depression (LTD) prolonged decrease in synaptic coupling between a pre- and postsynaptic cell
long-term potentiation (LTP) prolonged increase in synaptic coupling between a pre-and postsynaptic cell
major depression mental illness characterized by prolonged periods of sadness
membrane potential difference in electrical potential between the inside and outside of a cell
meninge membrane that covers and protects the central nervous system
microglia glia that scavenge and degrade dead cells and protect the brain from invading microorganisms
myelin fatty substance produced by glia that insulates axons
neurodegenerative disorder nervous system disorder characterized by the progressive loss of neurological
functioning, usually caused by neuron death
neuron specialized cell that can receive and transmit electrical and chemical signals
nodes of Ranvier gaps in the myelin sheath where the signal is recharged
norepinephrine neurotransmitter and hormone released by activation of the sympathetic nervous system
occipital lobe part of the cerebral cortex that contains visual cortex and processes visual stimuli
oligodendrocyte glial cell that myelinates central nervous system neuron axons
parasympathetic nervous system division of autonomic nervous system that regulates visceral functions
during rest and digestion
parietal lobe part of the cerebral cortex involved in processing touch and the sense of the body in space
Parkinson’s disease neurodegenerative disorder that affects the control of movement
pia mater thin membrane layer directly covering the brain and spinal cord
proprioception sense about how parts of the body are oriented in space
radial glia glia that serve as scaffolds for developing neurons as they migrate to their final destinations
PAGE: 1115
1104 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
refractory period periodafteranactionpotentialwhenitismoredifficultorimpossibleforanactionpotentialto
befired;causedbyinactivationofsodiumchannelsandactivationofadditionalpotassiumchannelsofthe
membrane
saltatory conduction “jumping” of an action potential along an axon from one node of Ranvier to the next
satellite glia glial cell that provides nutrients and structural support for neurons in the peripheral nervous
system
schizophrenia mentaldisordercharacterizedbytheinabilitytoaccuratelyperceivereality;patientsoftenhave
difficulty thinking clearly and can suffer from delusions
Schwann cell glial cell that creates myelin sheath around a peripheral nervous system neuron axon
sensory-somatic nervous system system of sensory and motor nerves
somatosensation sense of touch
spinal cord thick fiber bundle that connects the brain with peripheral nerves; transmits sensory and motor
information; contains neurons that control motor reflexes
spinal nerve nerve projecting between skin or muscle and spinal cord
sulcus (plural: sulci) indents or “valleys” in the cortex
summation process of multiple presynaptic inputs creating EPSPs around the same time for the postsynaptic
neuron to be sufficiently depolarized to fire an action potential
sympathetic nervous system division of autonomic nervous system activated during stressful “fight or flight”
situations
synapse junction between two neurons where neuronal signals are communicated
synaptic cleft space between the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes
synaptic vesicle spherical structure that contains a neurotransmitter
temporal lobe partofthecerebralcortexthatprocessesauditoryinput;partsofthetemporallobeareinvolved
in speech, memory, and emotion processing
thalamus brain area that relays sensory information to the cortex
threshold of excitation level of depolarization needed for an action potential to fire
ventricle cavity within brain that contains cerebrospinal fluid
CHAPTER SUMMARY
35.1Neurons and Glial Cells
The nervous system is made up of neurons and glia. Neurons are specialized cells that are capable of sending
electrical as well as chemical signals. Most neurons contain dendrites, which receive these signals, and axons
that send signals to other neurons or tissues. There are four main types of neurons: unipolar, bipolar,
multipolar, and pseudounipolar neurons. Glia are non-neuronal cells in the nervous system that support
neuronal development and signaling. There are several types of glia that serve different functions.
35.2How Neurons Communicate
Neurons have charged membranes because there are different concentrations of ions inside and outside of the
cell. Voltage-gated ion channels control the movement of ions into and out of a neuron. When a neuronal
membrane is depolarized to at least the threshold of excitation, an action potential is fired. The action potential
is then propagated along a myelinated axon to the axon terminals. In a chemical synapse, the action potential
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1116
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1105
causes release of neurotransmitter molecules into the synaptic cleft. Through binding to postsynaptic receptors,
the neurotransmitter can cause excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials by depolarizing or
hyperpolarizing, respectively, the postsynaptic membrane. In electrical synapses, the action potential is directly
communicated to the postsynaptic cell through gap junctions—large channel proteins that connect the pre-and
postsynaptic membranes. Synapses are not static structures and can be strengthened and weakened. Two
mechanisms of synaptic plasticity are long-term potentiation and long-term depression.
35.3The Central Nervous System
The vertebrate central nervous system contains the brain and the spinal cord, which are covered and protected
by three meninges. The brain contains structurally and functionally defined regions. In mammals, these include
the cortex (which can be broken down into four primary functional lobes: frontal, temporal, occipital, and
parietal), basal ganglia, thalamus, hypothalamus, limbic system, cerebellum, and brainstem—although
structures in some of these designations overlap. While functions may be primarily localized to one structure in
the brain, most complex functions, like language and sleep, involve neurons in multiple brain regions. The
spinal cord is the information superhighway that connects the brain with the rest of the body through its
connections with peripheral nerves. It transmits sensory and motor input and also controls motor reflexes.
35.4The Peripheral Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system contains both the autonomic and sensory-somatic nervous systems. The
autonomic nervous system provides unconscious control over visceral functions and has two divisions: the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. The sympathetic nervous system is activated in stressful
situations to prepare the animal for a “fight or flight” response. The parasympathetic nervous system is active
during restful periods. The sensory-somatic nervous system is made of cranial and spinal nerves that transmit
sensory information from skin and muscle to the CNS and motor commands from the CNS to the muscles.
35.5Nervous System Disorders
Some general themes emerge from the sampling of nervous system disorders presented above. The causes
for most disorders are not fully understood—at least not for all patients—and likely involve a combination of
nature (genetic mutations that become risk factors) and nurture (emotional trauma, stress, hazardous chemical
exposure). Because the causes have yet to be fully determined, treatment options are often lacking and only
address symptoms.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 35.3Which of the following statements is 3.Figure 35.26Which of the following statements is
false? false?
a. The soma is the cell body of a nerve cell. a. The parasympathetic pathway is
b. Myelin sheath provides an insulating layer to responsible for relaxing the body, while the
the dendrites. sympathetic pathway is responsible for
c. Axons carry the signal from the soma to the preparing for an emergency.
target. b. Most preganglionic neurons in the
d. Dendrites carry the signal to the soma. sympathetic pathway originate in the spinal
cord.
2.Figure 35.11Potassium channel blockers, such as
c. Slowing of the heartbeat is a
amiodarone and procainamide, which are used to
parasympathetic response.
treat abnormal electrical activity in the heart, called
d. Parasympathetic neurons are responsible
cardiac dysrhythmia, impede the movement of K+
for releasing norepinephrine on the target
through voltage-gated K+ channels. Which part of the
organ, while sympathetic neurons are
action potential would you expect potassium
responsible for releasing acetylcholine.
channels to affect?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Neurons contain ________, which can receive a. axons
signals from other neurons. b. mitochondria
c. dendrites
d. Golgi bodies
PAGE: 1117
1106 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
5.A(n) ________ neuron has one axon and one hemispheres.
dendrite extending directly from the cell body. a. limbic system
b. corpus callosum
a. unipolar c. cerebellum
b. bipolar d. pituitary
c. multipolar
14.Neurons in the ________ control motor reflexes.
d. pseudounipolar
6.Glia that provide myelin for neurons in the brain a. thalamus
are called ________. b. spinal cord
a. Schwann cells c. parietal lobe
b. oligodendrocytes d. hippocampus
c. microglia
th
15.Phineas Gage was a 19 century railroad worker
d. astrocytes
who survived an accident that drove a large iron rod
7.Meningitis is a viral or bacterial infection of the through his head. If the injury resulted in him
brain. Which cell type is the first to have its function becoming temperamental and capricious what part of
disrupted during meningitis? his brain was damaged?
a. astrocytes a. frontal lobe
b. microglia b. hippocampus
c. neurons c. parietal lobe
d. satellite glia d. temporal lobe
8.For a neuron to fire an action potential, its 16.Activation of the sympathetic nervous system
membrane must reach ________. causes:
a. hyperpolarization a. increased blood flow into the skin
b. the threshold of excitation b. a decreased heart rate
c. the refractory period c. an increased heart rate
d. inhibitory postsynaptic potential d. increased digestion
9.After an action potential, the opening of additional 17.Where are parasympathetic preganglionic cell
voltage-gated ________ channels and the bodies located?
inactivation of sodium channels, cause the a. cerebellum
membrane to return to its resting membrane b. brainstem
potential. c. dorsal root ganglia
a. sodium d. skin
b. potassium
18.________ is released by motor nerve endings
c. calcium
onto muscle.
d. chloride
a. Acetylcholine
10.What is the term for protein channels that b. Norepinephrine
connect two neurons at an electrical synapse? c. Dopamine
d. Serotonin
a. synaptic vesicles
19.Parkinson’s disease is a caused by the
b. voltage-gated ion channels
degeneration of neurons that release ________.
c. gap junction protein
d. sodium-potassium exchange pumps
a. serotonin
11.Which of the following molecules isnotinvolved b. dopamine
in the maintenance of the resting membrane c. glutamate
potential? d. norepinephrine
a. potassium cations
20.________ medications are often used to treat
b. ATP
patients with ADHD.
c. voltage-gated ion channels
a. Tranquilizer
d. calcium cations
b. Antibiotic
12.The ________ lobe contains the visual cortex. c. Stimulant
d. Anti-seizure
a. frontal
21.Strokes are often caused by ________.
b. parietal
c. temporal
d. occipital
13.The ________ connects the two cerebral
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1118
Chapter 35 | The Nervous System 1107
a. neurodegeneration 23.Why do many patients with neurodevelopmental
b. blood clots or burst blood vessels disorders develop secondary disorders?
c. seizures a. Their genes predispose them to
d. viruses schizophrenia.
b. Stimulant medications cause new
22.Why is it difficult to identify the cause of many
behavioral disorders.
nervous system disorders?
c. Behavioral therapies only improve
a. The genes associated with the diseases are
neurodevelopmental disorders.
not known.
d. Dysfunction in the brain can affect many
b. There are no obvious defects in brain
aspects of the body.
structure.
c. The onset and display of symptoms varies
between patients.
d. all of the above
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
24.How are neurons similar to other cells? How are the disease.
they unique?
33.What are the main differences between the
25.Multiple sclerosis causes demyelination of axons sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the
in the brain and spinal cord. Why is this problematic? autonomic nervous system?
26.Many neurons have only a single axon, but many 34.What are the main functions of the sensory-
terminals at the end of the axon. How does this end somatic nervous system?
structure of the axon support its function?
35.Describe how the sensory-somatic nervous
27.How does myelin aid propagation of an action system reacts by reflex to a person touching
potential along an axon? How do the nodes of something hot. How does this allow for rapid
Ranvier help this process? responses in potentially dangerous situations?
28.What are the main steps in chemical 36.Scientists have suggested that the autonomic
neurotransmission? nervous system is not well-adapted to modern
human life. How is the sympathetic nervous system
29.Describe how long-term potentiation can lead to a
an ineffective response to the everyday challenges
nicotine addiction.
faced by modern humans?
30.What methods can be used to determine the
37.What are the main symptoms of Alzheimer’s
function of a particular brain region?
disease?
31.What are the main functions of the spinal cord?
38.What are possible treatments for patients with
32.Alzheimer’s disease involves three of the four major depression?
lobes of the brain. Identify one of the involved lobes
and describe the lobe’s symptoms associated with
PAGE: 1119
1108 Chapter 35 | The Nervous System
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1120
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1109
36 | SENSORY SYSTEMS
Figure36.1Thissharkusesitssensesofsight,vibration(lateral-linesystem),andsmelltohunt,butitalsorelieson
itsabilitytosensetheelectricfieldsofprey,asensenotpresentinmostlandanimals.(credit:modificationofworkby
Hermanus Backpackers Hostel, South Africa)
Chapter Outline
36.1:Sensory Processes
36.2:Somatosensation
36.3:Taste and Smell
36.4:Hearing and Vestibular Sensation
36.5:Vision
Introduction
Inmoreadvancedanimals,thesensesareconstantlyatwork,makingtheanimalawareofstimuli—suchaslight,
or sound, or the presence of a chemical substance in the external environment—and monitoring information
about the organism’s internal environment. All bilaterally symmetric animals have a sensory system, and the
development of any species’ sensory system has been driven by natural selection; thus, sensory systems
differamongspeciesaccordingtothedemandsoftheirenvironments.Theshark,unlikemostfishpredators,is
electrosensitive—that is, sensitive to electrical fields produced by other animals in its environment. While it is
helpful to this underwater predator, electrosensitivity is a sense not found in most land animals.
36.1 | Sensory Processes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the general and special senses in humans
• Describe three important steps in sensory perception
• Explain the concept of just-noticeable difference in sensory perception
Senses provide information about the body and its environment. Humans have five special senses: olfaction
(smell),gustation(taste),equilibrium(balanceandbodyposition),vision,andhearing.Additionally,wepossess
PAGE: 1121
1110 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
general senses, also called somatosensation, which respond to stimuli like temperature, pain, pressure, and
vibration. Vestibular sensation, which is an organism’s sense of spatial orientation and balance,
proprioception (position of bones, joints, and muscles), and the sense of limb position that is used to track
kinesthesia (limb movement) are part of somatosensation. Although the sensory systems associated with
these senses are very different, all share a common function: to convert a stimulus (such as light, or sound,
or the position of the body) into an electrical signal in the nervous system. This process is called sensory
transduction.
There are two broad types of cellular systems that perform sensory transduction. In one, a neuron works with
a sensory receptor, a cell, or cell process that is specialized to engage with and detect a specific stimulus.
Stimulation of the sensory receptor activates the associated afferent neuron, which carries information about
thestimulustothecentralnervoussystem.Inthesecondtypeofsensorytransduction,asensorynerveending
respondstoastimulusintheinternalorexternalenvironment:thisneuronconstitutesthesensoryreceptor.Free
nerveendingscanbestimulatedbyseveraldifferentstimuli,thusshowinglittlereceptorspecificity.Forexample,
pain receptors in your gums and teeth may be stimulated by temperature changes, chemical stimulation, or
pressure.
Reception
The first step in sensation is reception, which is the activation of sensory receptors by stimuli such as
mechanical stimuli (being bent or squished, for example), chemicals, or temperature. The receptor can then
respond to the stimuli. The region in space in which a given sensory receptor can respond to a stimulus, be it
farawayorincontactwiththebody,isthatreceptor’sreceptivefield.Thinkforamomentaboutthedifferences
in receptive fields for the different senses. For the sense of touch, a stimulus must come into contact with the
body. For the sense of hearing, a stimulus can be a moderate distance away (some baleen whale sounds can
propagate for many kilometers). For vision, a stimulus can be very far away; for example, the visual system
perceives light from stars at enormous distances.
Transduction
Themostfundamentalfunctionofasensorysystemisthetranslationofasensorysignaltoanelectricalsignal
in the nervous system. This takes place at the sensory receptor, and the change in electrical potential that is
produced is called the receptor potential. How is sensory input, such as pressure on the skin, changed to a
receptor potential? In this example, a type of receptor called a mechanoreceptor (as shown in Figure 36.2)
possesses specialized membranes that respond to pressure. Disturbance of these dendrites by compressing
them or bending them opens gated ion channels in the plasma membrane of the sensory neuron, changing
its electrical potential. Recall that in the nervous system, a positive change of a neuron’s electrical potential
(also called the membrane potential), depolarizes the neuron. Receptor potentials are graded potentials: the
magnitude of these graded (receptor) potentials varies with the strength of the stimulus. If the magnitude of
depolarization is sufficient (that is, if membrane potential reaches a threshold), the neuron will fire an action
potential.Inmostcases,thecorrectstimulusimpingingonasensoryreceptorwilldrivemembranepotentialina
positive direction, although for some receptors, such as those in the visual system, this is not always the case.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1122
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1111
Figure36.2(a)Mechanosensitiveionchannelsaregatedionchannelsthatrespondtomechanicaldeformationofthe
plasmamembrane.Amechanosensitivechannelisconnectedtotheplasmamembraneandthecytoskeletonbyhair-
liketethers.Whenpressurecausestheextracellularmatrixtomove,thechannelopens,allowingionstoenterorexit
thecell.(b)Stereociliainthehumanearareconnectedtomechanosensitiveionchannels.Whenasoundcausesthe
stereocilia to move, mechanosensitive ion channels transduce the signal to the cochlear nerve.
Sensory receptors for different senses are very different from each other, and they are specialized according
tothetypeofstimulustheysense:theyhavereceptorspecificity.Forexample,touchreceptors,lightreceptors,
andsoundreceptorsareeachactivatedbydifferentstimuli.Touchreceptorsarenotsensitivetolightorsound;
theyaresensitiveonlytotouchorpressure.However,stimulimaybecombinedathigherlevelsinthebrain,as
happens with olfaction, contributing to our sense of taste.
Encoding and Transmission of Sensory Information
Four aspects of sensory information are encoded by sensory systems: the type of stimulus, the location of the
stimulusinthereceptivefield,thedurationofthestimulus,andtherelativeintensityofthestimulus.Thus,action
potentialstransmittedoverasensoryreceptor’safferentaxonsencodeonetypeofstimulus,andthissegregation
ofthesensesispreservedinothersensorycircuits.Forexample,auditoryreceptorstransmitsignalsovertheir
own dedicated system, and electrical activity in the axons of the auditory receptors will be interpreted by the
brain as an auditory stimulus—a sound.
The intensity of a stimulus is often encoded in the rate of action potentials produced by the sensory receptor.
Thus, an intense stimulus will produce a more rapid train of action potentials, and reducing the stimulus will
likewise slow the rate of production of action potentials. A second way in which intensity is encoded is by the
numberofreceptorsactivated.Anintensestimulusmightinitiateactionpotentialsinalargenumberofadjacent
receptors, while a less intense stimulus might stimulate fewer receptors. Integration of sensory information
begins as soon as the information is received in the CNS, and the brain will further process incoming signals.
PAGE: 1123
1112 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Perception
Perceptionisanindividual’sinterpretationofasensation.Althoughperceptionreliesontheactivationofsensory
receptors,perceptionhappensnotatthelevelofthesensoryreceptor,butathigherlevelsinthenervoussystem,
inthebrain.Thebraindistinguishessensorystimulithroughasensorypathway:actionpotentialsfromsensory
receptorstravelalongneuronsthatarededicatedtoaparticularstimulus.Theseneuronsarededicatedtothat
particular stimulus and synapse with particular neurons in the brain or spinal cord.
Allsensorysignals,exceptthosefromtheolfactorysystem,aretransmittedthoughthecentralnervoussystem
andareroutedtothethalamusandtotheappropriateregionofthecortex.Recallthatthethalamusisastructure
in the forebrain that serves as a clearinghouse and relay station for sensory (as well as motor) signals. When
thesensorysignalexitsthethalamus,itisconductedtothespecificareaofthecortex(Figure 36.3)dedicated
to processing that particular sense.
How are neural signals interpreted? Interpretation of sensory signals between individuals of the same species
is largely similar, owing to the inherited similarity of their nervous systems; however, there are some individual
differences. A good example of this is individual tolerances to a painful stimulus, such as dental pain, which
certainly differ.
Figure36.3Inhumans,withtheexceptionofolfaction,allsensorysignalsareroutedfromthe(a)thalamusto(b)final
processing regions in the cortex of the brain. (credit b: modification of work by Polina Tishina)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1124
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1113
Just-Noticeable Difference
It is easy to differentiate between a one-pound bag of rice and a two-pound bag of rice. There is a one-
pounddifference,andonebagistwiceasheavyastheother.However,woulditbeaseasytodifferentiate
between a 20- and a 21-pound bag?
Question:Whatisthesmallestdetectibleweightdifferencebetweenaone-poundbagofriceandalarger
bag? What isthe smallest detectible difference between a20-pound bag and alarger bag? In both cases,
atwhatweightsarethedifferencesdetected?Thissmallestdetectibledifferenceinstimuliisknownasthe
just-noticeable difference (JND).
Background: Research background literature on JND and on Weber’s Law, a description of a proposed
mathematical relationship between the overall magnitude of the stimulus and the JND. You will be testing
JNDofdifferentweightsofriceinbags.Chooseaconvenientincrementthatistobesteppedthroughwhile
testing.Forexample,youcouldchoose10percentincrementsbetweenoneandtwopounds(1.1,1.2,1.3,
1.4, and so on) or 20 percent increments (1.2, 1.4, 1.6, and 1.8).
Hypothesis: Develop a hypothesis about JND in terms of percentage of the whole weight being tested
(suchas“theJNDbetweenthetwosmallbagsandbetweenthetwolargebagsisproportionallythesame,”
or “. . . is not proportionally the same.”) So, for the first hypothesis, if the JND between the one-pound
bag and a larger bag is 0.2 pounds (that is, 20 percent; 1.0 pound feels the same as 1.1 pounds, but 1.0
pound feels less than 1.2 pounds), then the JND between the 20-pound bag and a larger bag will also be
20 percent. (So, 20 pounds feels the same as 22 pounds or 23 pounds, but 20 pounds feels less than 24
pounds.)
Test the hypothesis: Enlist 24 participants, and split them into two groups of 12. To set up the
demonstration, assuming a 10 percent increment was selected, have the first group be the one-pound
group. As a counter-balancing measure against a systematic error, however, six of the first group will
compare one pound to two pounds, and step down in weight (1.0 to 2.0, 1.0 to 1.9, and so on), while the
othersixwillstepup(1.0to1.1,1.0to1.2,andsoon).Applythesameprincipletothe20-poundgroup(20
to40,20to38,andsoon,and20to22,20to24,andsoon).Giventhelargedifferencebetween20and40
pounds,youmaywishtouse30poundsasyourlargerweight.Inanycase,usetwoweightsthatareeasily
detectable as different.
Record the observations: Record the data in a table similar to the table below. For the one-pound and
20-poundgroups(baseweights)recordaplussign(+)foreachparticipantthatdetectsadifferencebetween
thebaseweightandthestepweight.Recordaminussign(-)foreachparticipantthatfindsnodifference.If
one-tenth steps were not used, then replace the steps in the “Step Weight” columns with the step you are
using.
Results of JND Testing (+ = difference; – = no difference)
Step Weight One pound 20 pounds Step Weight
1.1 22
1.2 24
1.3 26
1.4 28
1.5 30
1.6 32
1.7 34
1.8 36
PAGE: 1125
1114 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Results of JND Testing (+ = difference; – = no difference)
Step Weight One pound 20 pounds Step Weight
1.9 38
2.0 40
Table 36.1
Analyzethedata/reporttheresults:Whatstepweightdidallparticipantsfindtobeequalwithone-pound
base weight? What about the 20-pound group?
Draw a conclusion: Did the data support the hypothesis? Are the final weights proportionally the same?
If not, why not? Do the findings adhere to Weber’s Law? Weber’s Law states that the concept that a just-
noticeable difference in a stimulus is proportional to the magnitude of the original stimulus.
36.2 | Somatosensation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe four important mechanoreceptors in human skin
• Describe the topographical distribution of somatosensory receptors between glabrous and hairy skin
• Explain why the perception of pain is subjective
Somatosensation is a mixed sensory category and includes all sensation received from the skin and mucous
membranes, as well from as the limbs and joints. Somatosensation is also known as tactile sense, or more
familiarly, as the sense of touch. Somatosensation occurs all over the exterior of the body and at some interior
locations as well. A variety of receptor types—embedded in the skin, mucous membranes, muscles, joints,
internal organs, and cardiovascular system—play a role.
Recallthattheepidermisistheoutermostlayerofskininmammals.Itisrelativelythin,iscomposedofkeratin-
filled cells, and has no blood supply. The epidermis serves as a barrier to water and to invasion by pathogens.
Below this, the much thicker dermis contains blood vessels, sweat glands, hair follicles, lymph vessels, and
lipid-secretingsebaceousglands(Figure36.4).Belowtheepidermisanddermisisthesubcutaneoustissue,or
hypodermis, the fatty layer that contains blood vessels, connective tissue, and the axons of sensory neurons.
The hypodermis, which holds about 50 percent of the body’s fat, attaches the dermis to the bone and muscle,
and supplies nerves and blood vessels to the dermis.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1126
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1115
Figure36.4Mammalianskinhasthreelayers:anepidermis,adermis,andahypodermis.(credit:modificationofwork
by Don Bliss, National Cancer Institute)
Somatosensory Receptors
Sensoryreceptorsareclassifiedintofivecategories:mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, proprioceptors, pain
receptors, and chemoreceptors. These categories are based on the nature of stimuli each receptor class
transduces.Whatiscommonlyreferredtoas“touch”involvesmorethanonekindofstimulusandmorethanone
kindofreceptor.Mechanoreceptorsintheskinaredescribedasencapsulated(thatis,surroundedbyacapsule)
or unencapsulated (a group that includes free nerve endings). A free nerve ending, as its name implies, is an
unencapsulateddendriteofasensoryneuron.Freenerveendingsarethemostcommonnerveendingsinskin,
andtheyextendintothemiddleoftheepidermis.Freenerveendingsaresensitivetopainfulstimuli,tohotand
cold, and to light touch. They are slow to adjust to a stimulus and so are less sensitive to abrupt changes in
stimulation.
There are three classes of mechanoreceptors: tactile, proprioceptors, and baroreceptors. Mechanoreceptors
sense stimuli due to physical deformation of their plasma membranes. They contain mechanically gated ion
channels whose gates open or close in response to pressure, touch, stretching, and sound.” There are four
primary tactile mechanoreceptors in human skin: Merkel’s disks, Meissner’s corpuscles, Ruffini endings, and
Pacinian corpuscles; two are located toward the surface of the skin and two are located deeper. A fifth type of
mechanoreceptor, Krause end bulbs, are found only in specialized regions. Merkel’s disks (shown in Figure
36.5) are found in the upper layers of skin near the base of the epidermis, both in skin that has hair and on
glabrous skin, that is, the hairless skin found on the palms and fingers, the soles of the feet, and the lips of
humans and other primates. Merkel’s disks are densely distributed in the fingertips and lips. They are slow-
adapting,encapsulatednerveendings,andtheyrespondtolighttouch.Lighttouch,alsoknownasdiscriminative
touch,isalightpressurethatallowsthelocationofastimulustobepinpointed.ThereceptivefieldsofMerkel’s
disksaresmallwithwell-definedborders.Thatmakesthemfinelysensitivetoedgesandtheycomeintousein
tasks such as typing on a keyboard.
PAGE: 1127
1116 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure 36.5 Four of the primary mechanoreceptors in human skin are shown. Merkel’s disks, which are
unencapsulated,respondtolighttouch.Meissner’scorpuscles,Ruffiniendings,Paciniancorpuscles,andKrause
end bulbs are all encapsulated. Meissner’s corpuscles respond to touch and low-frequency vibration. Ruffini
endingsdetectstretch,deformationwithinjoints,andwarmth.Paciniancorpusclesdetecttransientpressureand
high-frequency vibration. Krause end bulbs detect cold.
Which of the following statements about mechanoreceptors is false?
a. Pacinian corpuscles are found in both glabrous and hairy skin.
b. Merkel’s disks are abundant on the fingertips and lips.
c. Ruffini endings are encapsulated mechanoreceptors.
d. Meissner’s corpuscles extend into the lower dermis.
Meissner’scorpuscles,(showninFigure36.6)alsoknownastactilecorpuscles,arefoundintheupperdermis,
but they project into the epidermis. They, too, are found primarily in the glabrous skin on the fingertips and
eyelids. They respond to fine touch and pressure, but they also respond to low-frequency vibration or flutter.
Theyarerapidlyadapting,fluid-filled,encapsulatedneuronswithsmall,well-definedbordersandareresponsive
to fine details. Like Merkel’s disks, Meissner’s corpuscles are not as plentiful in the palms as they are in the
fingertips.
Figure 36.6 Meissner corpuscles in the fingertips, such as the one viewed here using bright field light microscopy,
allowfortouchdiscriminationoffinedetail.(credit:modificationofworkby"Wbensmith"/WikimediaCommons;scale-
bar data from Matt Russell)
Deeperintheepidermis,nearthebase,areRuffiniendings,whicharealsoknownasbulbouscorpuscles.They
arefoundinbothglabrousandhairyskin.Theseareslow-adapting,encapsulatedmechanoreceptorsthatdetect
skinstretchanddeformationswithinjoints,sotheyprovidevaluablefeedbackforgrippingobjectsandcontrolling
fingerpositionandmovement.Thus,theyalsocontributetoproprioceptionandkinesthesia.Ruffiniendingsalso
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1128
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1117
detectwarmth.Notethatthesewarmthdetectorsaresituateddeeperintheskinthanarethecolddetectors.Itis
not surprising, then, that humans detect cold stimuli before they detect warm stimuli.
Paciniancorpuscles(seeninFigure36.7)arelocateddeepinthedermisofbothglabrousandhairyskinand
arestructurallysimilartoMeissner’scorpuscles;theyarefoundintheboneperiosteum,jointcapsules,pancreas
andotherviscera,breast,andgenitals.Theyarerapidlyadaptingmechanoreceptorsthatsensedeeptransient
(butnotprolonged)pressureandhigh-frequencyvibration.Pacinianreceptorsdetectpressureandvibrationby
beingcompressed,stimulatingtheirinternaldendrites.TherearefewerPaciniancorpusclesandRuffiniendings
in skin than there are Merkel’s disks and Meissner’s corpuscles.
Figure36.7Paciniancorpuscles,suchasthesevisualizedusingbrightfieldlightmicroscopy,detectpressure(touch)
and high-frequency vibration. (credit: modification of work by Ed Uthman; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Inproprioception,proprioceptiveandkinestheticsignalstravelthroughmyelinatedafferentneuronsrunningfrom
the spinal cord to the medulla. Neurons are not physically connected, but communicate via neurotransmitters
secretedintosynapsesor“gaps”betweencommunicatingneurons.Onceinthemedulla,theneuronscontinue
carrying the signals to the thalamus.
Muscle spindles are stretch receptors that detect the amount of stretch, or lengthening of muscles. Related
to these are Golgi tendon organs, which are tension receptors that detect the force of muscle contraction.
Proprioceptiveandkinestheticsignalscomefromlimbs.Unconsciousproprioceptivesignalsrunfromthespinal
cord to the cerebellum, the brain region that coordinates muscle contraction, rather than to the thalamus, like
most other sensory information.
Baroreceptors detect pressure changes in an organ. They are found in the walls of the carotid artery and the
aorta where they monitor blood pressure, and in the lungs where they detect the degree of lung expansion.
Stretch receptors are found at various sites in the digestive and urinary systems.
Inadditiontothesetwotypesofdeeperreceptors,therearealsorapidlyadaptinghairreceptors,whicharefound
onnerveendingsthatwraparoundthebaseofhairfollicles.Thereareafewtypesofhairreceptorsthatdetect
slowandrapidhairmovement,andtheydifferintheirsensitivitytomovement.Somehairreceptorsalsodetect
skin deflection, and certain rapidly adapting hair receptors allow detection of stimuli that have not yet touched
the skin.
Integration of Signals from Mechanoreceptors
The configuration of the different types of receptors working in concert in human skin results in a very refined
sense of touch. The nociceptive receptors—those that detect pain—are located near the surface. Small, finely
calibrated mechanoreceptors—Merkel’s disks and Meissner’s corpuscles—are located in the upper layers
and can precisely localize even gentle touch. The large mechanoreceptors—Pacinian corpuscles and Ruffini
endings—are located in the lower layers and respond to deeper touch. (Consider that the deep pressure
that reaches those deeper receptors would not need to be finely localized.) Both the upper and lower layers
of the skin hold rapidly and slowly adapting receptors. Both primary somatosensory cortex and secondary
cortical areas are responsible for processing the complex picture of stimuli transmitted from the interplay of
mechanoreceptors.
PAGE: 1129
1118 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Density of Mechanoreceptors
The distribution of touch receptors in human skin is not consistent over the body. In humans, touch receptors
are less dense in skin covered with any type of hair, such as the arms, legs, torso, and face. Touch receptors
are denser in glabrous skin (the type found on human fingertips and lips, for example), which is typically more
sensitive and is thicker than hairy skin (4 to 5 mm versus 2 to 3 mm).
How is receptor density estimated in a human subject? The relative density of pressure receptors in different
locations on the body can be demonstrated experimentally using a two-point discrimination test. In this
demonstration, two sharp points, such as two thumbtacks, are brought into contact with the subject’s skin
(thoughnothardenoughtocausepainorbreaktheskin).Thesubjectreportsifheorshefeelsonepointortwo
points.Ifthetwopointsarefeltasonepoint,itcanbeinferredthatthetwopointsarebothinthereceptivefield
of a single sensory receptor. If two points are felt as two separate points, each is in the receptive field of two
separatesensoryreceptors.Thepointscouldthenbemovedcloserandretesteduntilthesubjectreportsfeeling
only one point, and the size of the receptive field of a single receptor could be estimated from that distance.
Thermoreception
InadditiontoKrauseendbulbsthatdetectcoldandRuffiniendingsthatdetectwarmth,therearedifferenttypes
of cold receptors on some free nerve endings: thermoreceptors, located in the dermis, skeletal muscles, liver,
andhypothalamus,thatareactivatedbydifferenttemperatures.Theirpathwaysintothebrainrunfromthespinal
cord through the thalamus to the primary somatosensory cortex. Warmth and cold information from the face
travels through one of the cranial nerves to the brain. You know from experience that a tolerably cold or hot
stimulus can quickly progress to a much more intense stimulus that is no longer tolerable. Any stimulus that is
toointensecanbeperceivedaspainbecausetemperaturesensationsareconductedalongthesamepathways
that carry pain sensations.
Pain
Painisthenamegiventonociception,whichistheneuralprocessingofinjuriousstimuliinresponsetotissue
damage.Painiscausedbytruesourcesofinjury,suchascontactwithaheatsourcethatcausesathermalburn
or contact with a corrosive chemical. But pain also can be caused by harmless stimuli that mimic the action of
damaging stimuli, such as contact with capsaicins, the compounds that cause peppers to taste hot and which
areusedinself-defensepepperspraysandcertaintopicalmedications.Pepperstaste“hot”becausetheprotein
receptors that bind capsaicin open the same calcium channels that are activated by warm receptors.
Nociception starts at the sensory receptors, but pain, inasmuch as it is the perception of nociception, does not
start until it is communicated to the brain. There are several nociceptive pathways to and through the brain.
Most axons carrying nociceptive information into the brain from the spinal cord project to the thalamus (as do
other sensoryneurons)andtheneuralsignalundergoesfinal processingintheprimarysomatosensory cortex.
Interestingly, one nociceptive pathway projects not to the thalamus but directly to the hypothalamus in the
forebrain,whichmodulatesthecardiovascularandneuroendocrinefunctionsoftheautonomicnervoussystem.
Recall that threatening—or painful—stimuli stimulate the sympathetic branch of the visceral sensory system,
readying a fight-or-flight response.
View this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/nociceptive) that animates the five phases of nociceptive
pain.(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66404/1.3/#eip-
id8192636)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1130
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1119
36.3 | Taste and Smell
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain in what way smell and taste stimuli differ from other sensory stimuli
• Identify the five primary tastes that can be distinguished by humans
• Explain in anatomical terms why a dog’s sense of smell is more acute than a human’s
Taste, also called gustation, and smell, also called olfaction, are the most interconnected senses in that both
involve molecules of the stimulus entering the body and bonding to receptors. Smell lets an animal sense the
presence of food or other animals—whether potential mates, predators, or prey—or other chemicals in the
environmentthatcanimpacttheirsurvival.Similarly,thesenseoftasteallowsanimalstodiscriminatebetween
types of foods. While the value of a sense of smell is obvious, what is the value of a sense of taste? Different
tastingfoodshavedifferentattributes,bothhelpfulandharmful.Forexample,sweet-tastingsubstancestendto
behighlycaloric,whichcouldbenecessaryforsurvivalinleantimes.Bitternessisassociatedwithtoxicity,and
sourness is associated with spoiled food. Salty foods are valuable in maintaining homeostasis by helping the
body retain water and by providing ions necessary for cells to function.
Tastes and Odors
Bothtasteandodorstimuliaremoleculestakeninfromtheenvironment.Theprimarytastesdetectedbyhumans
aresweet,sour,bitter,salty,andumami.Thefirstfourtastesneedlittleexplanation.Theidentificationofumami
as a fundamental taste occurred fairly recently—it was identified in 1908 by Japanese scientist Kikunae Ikeda
while he worked with seaweed broth, but it was not widely accepted as a taste that could be physiologically
distinguished until many years later. The taste of umami, also known as savoriness, is attributable to the taste
oftheaminoacidL-glutamate.Infact,monosodiumglutamate,orMSG,isoftenusedincookingtoenhancethe
savorytasteofcertainfoods.Whatistheadaptivevalueofbeingabletodistinguishumami?Savorysubstances
tend to be high in protein.
All odors that we perceive are molecules in the air we breathe. If a substance does not release molecules
into the air from its surface, it has no smell. And if a human or other animal does not have a receptor that
recognizes a specific molecule, then that molecule has no smell. Humans have about 350 olfactory receptor
subtypes that work in various combinations to allow usto sense about 10,000 different odors. Compare that to
mice,forexample,whichhaveabout1,300olfactoryreceptortypes,andthereforeprobablysensemoreodors.
Both odors and tastes involve molecules that stimulate specific chemoreceptors. Although humans commonly
distinguish taste as one sense and smell as another, they work together to create the perception of flavor. A
person’s perception of flavor is reduced if he or she has congested nasal passages.
Reception and Transduction
Odorants (odor molecules) enter the nose and dissolve in the olfactory epithelium, the mucosa at the back of
thenasalcavity(asillustratedinFigure36.8).Theolfactoryepitheliumisacollectionofspecializedolfactory
2
receptors in the back of the nasal cavity that spans an area about 5 cm in humans. Recall that sensory cells
areneurons.Anolfactoryreceptor,whichisadendriteofaspecializedneuron,respondswhenitbindscertain
moleculesinhaledfromtheenvironmentbysendingimpulsesdirectlytotheolfactorybulbofthebrain.Humans
haveabout12millionolfactoryreceptors,distributedamonghundredsofdifferentreceptortypesthatrespondto
differentodors.Twelvemillionseemslikealargenumberofreceptors,butcomparethattootheranimals:rabbits
haveabout100million,mostdogshaveabout1billion,andbloodhounds—dogsselectivelybredfortheirsense
ofsmell—haveabout4billion.Theoverallsizeoftheolfactoryepitheliumalsodiffersbetweenspecies,withthat
of bloodhounds, for example, being many times larger than that of humans.
Olfactory neurons are bipolar neurons (neurons with two processes from the cell body). Each neuron has a
single dendrite buried in the olfactory epithelium, and extending from this dendrite are 5 to 20 receptor-laden,
hair-likeciliathattrapodorantmolecules.Thesensoryreceptorsontheciliaareproteins,anditisthevariations
intheiraminoacidchainsthatmakethereceptorssensitivetodifferentodorants.Eacholfactorysensoryneuron
has only one type of receptor on its cilia, and the receptors are specialized to detect specific odorants, so
the bipolar neurons themselves are specialized. When an odorant binds with a receptor that recognizes it, the
PAGE: 1131
1120 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
sensoryneuronassociatedwiththereceptorisstimulated.Olfactorystimulationistheonlysensoryinformation
that directly reaches the cerebral cortex, whereas other sensations are relayed through the thalamus.
Figure 36.8 In the human olfactory system, (a) bipolar olfactory neurons extend from (b) the olfactory epithelium,
whereolfactoryreceptorsarelocated, totheolfactorybulb.(credit:modification ofworkbyPatrickJ.Lynch,medical
illustrator; C. Carl Jaffe, MD, cardiologist)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1132
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1121
Pheromones
A pheromone is a chemical released by an animal that affects the behavior or physiology of animals
of the same species. Pheromonal signals can have profound effects on animals that inhale them, but
pheromones apparently are not consciously perceived in the same way as other odors. There are several
differenttypesofpheromones,whicharereleasedinurineorasglandularsecretions.Certainpheromones
are attractants to potential mates, others are repellants to potential competitors of the same sex, and still
others play roles in mother-infant attachment. Some pheromones can also influence the timing of puberty,
modify reproductive cycles, and even prevent embryonic implantation. While the roles of pheromones in
manynonhumanspeciesareimportant,pheromoneshavebecomelessimportantinhumanbehaviorover
evolutionary time compared to their importance to organisms with more limited behavioral repertoires.
Thevomeronasalorgan(VNO,orJacobson’sorgan)isatubular,fluid-filled,olfactoryorganpresentinmany
vertebrateanimalsthatsitsadjacenttothenasalcavity.Itisverysensitivetopheromonesandisconnected
to the nasal cavity by a duct. When molecules dissolve in the mucosa of the nasal cavity, they then enter
the VNO where the pheromone molecules among them bind with specialized pheromone receptors. Upon
exposure to pheromones from their own species or others, many animals, including cats, may display the
flehmenresponse(showninFigure36.9),acurlingoftheupperlipthathelpspheromonemoleculesenter
the VNO.
Pheromonalsignalsaresent,nottothemainolfactorybulb,buttoadifferentneuralstructurethatprojects
directly to the amygdala (recall that the amygdala is a brain center important in emotional reactions, such
as fear). The pheromonal signal then continues to areas of the hypothalamus that are key to reproductive
physiology and behavior. While some scientists assert that the VNO is apparently functionally vestigial in
humans,eventhoughthereisasimilarstructurelocatednearhumannasalcavities,othersareresearching
it as a possible functional system that may, for example, contribute to synchronization of menstrual cycles
in women living in close proximity.
Figure36.9Theflehmenresponseinthistigerresultsinthecurlingoftheupperlipandhelpsairbornepheromone
molecules enter the vomeronasal organ. (credit: modification of work by "chadh"/Flickr)
Taste
Detecting a taste (gustation) is fairly similar to detecting an odor (olfaction), given that both taste and smell
rely on chemical receptors being stimulated by certain molecules. The primary organ of taste is the taste bud.
A taste bud is a cluster of gustatory receptors (taste cells) that are located within the bumps on the tongue
called papillae (singular: papilla) (illustrated in Figure 36.11). There are several structurally distinct papillae.
Filiform papillae, which are located across the tongue, are tactile, providing friction that helps the tongue move
substances,andcontainnotastecells.Incontrast,fungiformpapillae,whicharelocatedmainlyontheanterior
two-thirds of the tongue, each contain one to eight taste buds and also have receptors for pressure and
temperature. The large circumvallate papillae contain up to 100 taste buds and form a V near the posterior
margin of the tongue.
PAGE: 1133
1122 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure36.10(a)Foliate,circumvallate,andfungiformpapillaearelocatedondifferentregionsofthetongue.(b)Foliate
papillaeareprominentprotrusionsonthislightmicrograph.(credita:modificationofworkbyNCI;scale-bardatafrom
Matt Russell)
In addition to those two types of chemically and mechanically sensitive papillae are foliate papillae—leaf-like
papillaelocatedinparallelfoldsalongtheedgesandtowardthebackofthetongue,asseenintheFigure36.10
micrograph. Foliate papillae contain about 1,300 taste buds within their folds. Finally, there are circumvallate
papillae, which are wall-like papillae in the shape of an inverted “V” at the back of the tongue. Each of these
papillae is surrounded by a groove and contains about 250 taste buds.
Eachtastebud’stastecellsarereplacedevery10to14days.Theseareelongatedcellswithhair-likeprocesses
called microvilli at the tips that extend into the taste bud pore (illustrated in Figure 36.11). Food molecules (
tastants)aredissolvedinsaliva,andtheybindwithandstimulatethereceptorsonthemicrovilli.Thereceptors
for tastants are located across the outer portion and front of the tongue, outside of the middle area where the
filiform papillae are most prominent.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1134
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1123
Figure 36.11 Pores in the tongue allow tastants to enter taste pores in the tongue. (credit: modification of work by
Vincenzo Rizzo)
In humans, there are five primary tastes, and each taste has only one corresponding type of receptor. Thus,
likeolfaction, eachreceptorisspecifictoitsstimulus(tastant). Transductionofthefivetasteshappensthrough
different mechanisms that reflect the molecular composition of the tastant. A salty tastant (containing NaCl)
+
provides the sodium ions (Na ) that enter the taste neurons and excite them directly. Sour tastants are acids
and belong to the thermoreceptor protein family. Binding of an acid or other sour-tasting molecule triggers a
+
change in the ion channel and these increase hydrogen ion (H ) concentrations in the taste neurons, thus
depolarizingthem.Sweet,bitter,andumamitastantsrequireaG-proteincoupledreceptor.Thesetastantsbind
to their respective receptors, thereby exciting the specialized neurons associated with them.
Bothtastingabilitiesandsenseofsmellchangewithage.Inhumans,thesensesdeclinedramaticallybyage50
and continue to decline. A child may find a food to be too spicy, whereas an elderly person may find the same
food to be bland and unappetizing.
View thisanimation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/taste)that shows how the sense of taste works.
PAGE: 1135
1124 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Smell and Taste in the Brain
Olfactory neurons project from the olfactory epithelium to the olfactory bulb as thin, unmyelinated axons. The
olfactory bulb is composed of neural clusters called glomeruli, and each glomerulus receives signals from
one type of olfactory receptor, so each glomerulus is specific to one odorant. From glomeruli, olfactory signals
travel directly to the olfactory cortex and then to the frontal cortex and the thalamus. Recall that this is a
differentpathfrommostothersensoryinformation,whichissentdirectlytothethalamusbeforeendingupinthe
cortex. Olfactory signals also travel directly to the amygdala, thereafter reaching the hypothalamus, thalamus,
and frontal cortex. The last structure that olfactory signals directly travel to is a cortical center in the temporal
lobe structure important in spatial, autobiographical, declarative, and episodic memories. Olfaction is finally
processed by areas of the brain that deal with memory, emotions, reproduction, and thought.
Taste neurons project from taste cells in the tongue, esophagus, and palate to the medulla, in the brainstem.
Fromthemedulla,tastesignalstraveltothethalamusandthentotheprimarygustatorycortex.Informationfrom
different regions of the tongue is segregated in the medulla, thalamus, and cortex.
36.4 | Hearing and Vestibular Sensation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the relationship of amplitude and frequency of a sound wave to attributes of sound
• Trace the path of sound through the auditory system to the site of transduction of sound
• Identify the structures of the vestibular system that respond to gravity
Audition,orhearing,isimportanttohumansandtootheranimalsformanydifferentinteractions.Itenablesan
organism to detect and receive information about danger, such as an approaching predator, and to participate
incommunalexchangeslikethoseconcerningterritoriesormating.Ontheotherhand,althoughitisphysically
linked to the auditory system, the vestibular system is not involved in hearing. Instead, an animal’s vestibular
system detects its own movement, both linear and angular acceleration and deceleration, and balance.
Sound
Auditorystimuliaresoundwaves,whicharemechanical,pressurewavesthatmovethroughamedium,suchas
air or water. There are no sound waves in a vacuum since there are no air molecules to move in waves. The
speedofsoundwavesdiffers,basedonaltitude,temperature,andmedium,butatsealevelandatemperature
of 20º C (68º F), sound waves travel in the air at about 343 meters per second.
Asistrueforallwaves,therearefourmaincharacteristicsofasoundwave:frequency,wavelength,period,and
amplitude. Frequency is the number of waves per unit of time, and in sound is heard as pitch. High-frequency
(≥15.000Hz) sounds are higher-pitched (short wavelength) than low-frequency (long wavelengths; ≤100Hz)
sounds.Frequencyismeasuredincyclespersecond,andforsound,themostcommonlyusedunitishertz(Hz),
orcyclespersecond.Mosthumanscanperceivesoundswithfrequenciesbetween30and20,000Hz.Women
are typically better at hearing high frequencies, but everyone’s ability to hear high frequencies decreases with
age. Dogs detect up to about 40,000 Hz; cats, 60,000 Hz; bats, 100,000 Hz; and dolphins 150,000 Hz, and
American shad (Alosa sapidissima), a fish, can hear 180,000 Hz. Those frequencies above the human range
are calledultrasound.
Amplitude, or the dimension of a wave from peak to trough, in sound is heard as volume and is illustrated
in Figure 36.12. The sound waves of louder sounds have greater amplitude than those of softer sounds. For
sound,volumeismeasuredindecibels(dB).Thesoftestsoundthatahumancanhearisthezeropoint.Humans
speak normally at 60 decibels.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1136
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1125
Figure36.12Forsoundwaves,wavelengthcorrespondstopitch.Amplitudeofthewavecorrespondstovolume.The
sound wave shown with a dashed line is softer in volume than the sound wave shown with a solid line. (credit: NIH)
Reception of Sound
In mammals, sound waves are collected by the external, cartilaginous part of the ear called the pinna, then
travel through the auditory canal and cause vibration of the thin diaphragm called the tympanum or ear drum,
theinnermostpartoftheouterear(illustratedinFigure36.13).Interiortothetympanumisthemiddleear.The
middleearholdsthreesmallbonescalledtheossicles,whichtransferenergyfromthemovingtympanumtothe
inner ear. The three ossicles are the malleus (also known as the hammer), the incus (the anvil), and stapes
(thestirrup).Theaptlynamedstapeslooksverymuchlikeastirrup.Thethreeossiclesareuniquetomammals,
and each plays a role in hearing. The malleus attaches at three points to the interior surface of the tympanic
membrane.Theincusattachesthemalleustothestapes.Inhumans,thestapesisnotlongenoughtoreachthe
tympanum.Ifwedidnothavethemalleusandtheincus,thenthevibrationsofthetympanumwouldneverreach
theinnerear.Thesebonesalsofunctiontocollectforceandamplifysounds.Theearossiclesarehomologous
tobonesinafishmouth:thebonesthatsupportgillsinfisharethoughttobeadaptedforuseinthevertebrate
ear over evolutionary time. Many animals (frogs, reptiles, and birds, for example) use the stapes of the middle
ear to transmit vibrations to the middle ear.
PAGE: 1137
1126 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure36.13Soundtravelsthroughtheoutereartothemiddleear,whichisboundedonitsexteriorbythetympanic
membrane.Themiddleearcontainsthreebonescalledossiclesthattransferthesoundwavetotheovalwindow,the
exteriorboundaryoftheinnerear.TheorganofCorti,whichistheorganofsoundtransduction,liesinsidethecochlea.
Transduction of Sound
Vibratingobjects,suchasvocalcords,createsoundwavesorpressurewavesintheair.Whenthesepressure
waves reach the ear, the ear transduces this mechanical stimulus (pressure wave) into a nerve impulse
(electrical signal) that the brain perceives as sound. The pressure waves strike the tympanum, causing it to
vibrate. The mechanical energy from the moving tympanum transmits the vibrations to the three bones of the
middle ear. The stapes transmits the vibrations to a thin diaphragm called the oval window, which is the
outermost structure of the inner ear. The structures of the inner ear are found in the labyrinth, a bony, hollow
structurethatisthemostinteriorportionoftheear.Here,theenergyfromthesoundwaveistransferredfromthe
stapesthroughtheflexibleovalwindowandtothefluidofthecochlea.Thevibrationsoftheovalwindowcreate
pressurewavesinthefluid(perilymph)insidethecochlea.Thecochlea isawhorledstructure,liketheshellof
asnail,anditcontainsreceptorsfortransductionofthemechanicalwaveintoanelectricalsignal(asillustrated
inFigure36.14).Insidethecochlea,thebasilarmembraneisamechanicalanalyzerthatrunsthelengthofthe
cochlea, curling toward the cochlea’s center.
The mechanical properties of the basilar membrane change along its length, such that it is thicker, tauter, and
narrowerattheoutsideofthewhorl(wherethecochleaislargest),andthinner,floppier,andbroadertowardthe
apex, or center, of the whorl (where the cochlea is smallest). Different regions of the basilar membrane vibrate
accordingtothefrequencyofthesoundwaveconductedthroughthefluidinthecochlea.Forthesereasons,the
fluid-filled cochlea detects different wave frequencies (pitches) at different regions of the membrane. When the
soundwavesinthecochlearfluidcontactthebasilarmembrane,itflexesbackandforthinawave-likefashion.
Above the basilar membrane is thetectorial membrane.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1138
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1127
Figure 36.14 A sound wave causes the tympanic membrane to vibrate. This vibration is amplified as it moves
acrossthemalleus,incus,andstapes.Theamplifiedvibrationispickedupbytheovalwindowcausingpressure
wavesinthefluid ofthescalavestibuli andscalatympani. Thecomplexity ofthepressurewavesisdetermined
by the changes in amplitude and frequency of the sound waves entering the ear.
Cochlearimplantscanrestorehearinginpeoplewhohaveanonfunctionalcochlea.Theimplantconsistsof
amicrophonethatpicksupsound.Aspeechprocessorselectssoundsintherangeofhumanspeech,and
atransmitterconvertsthesesoundstoelectricalimpulses,whicharethensenttotheauditorynerve.Which
of the following types of hearing loss would not be restored by a cochlear implant?
a. Hearing loss resulting from absence or loss of hair cells in the organ of Corti.
b. Hearing loss resulting from an abnormal auditory nerve.
c. Hearing loss resulting from fracture of the cochlea.
d. Hearing loss resulting from damage to bones of the middle ear.
ThesiteoftransductionisintheorganofCorti(spiralorgan).Itiscomposedofhaircellsheldinplaceabovethe
basilar membrane like flowers projecting up from soil, with their exposed short, hair-like stereocilia contacting
or embedded in the tectorial membrane above them. The inner hair cells are the primary auditory receptors
and exist in a single row, numbering approximately 3,500. The stereocilia from inner hair cells extend into
small dimples on the tectorial membrane’s lower surface. The outer hair cells are arranged in three or four
rows. They number approximately 12,000, and they function to fine tune incoming sound waves. The longer
stereociliathatprojectfromtheouterhaircellsactuallyattachtothetectorialmembrane.Allofthestereociliaare
mechanoreceptors, and when bent by vibrations they respond by opening a gated ion channel (refer to Figure
36.15). As a result, the hair cell membrane is depolarized, and a signal is transmitted to the chochlear nerve.
Intensity (volume) of sound is determined by how many hair cells at a particular location are stimulated.
PAGE: 1139
1128 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure 36.15 The hair cell is a mechanoreceptor with an array of stereocilia emerging from its apical surface. The
stereociliaaretetheredtogetherbyproteinsthatopenionchannelswhenthearrayisbenttowardthetallestmember
of their array, and closed when the array is bent toward the shortest member of their array.
The hair cells are arranged on the basilar membrane in an orderly way. The basilar membrane vibrates in
different regions, according to the frequency of the sound waves impinging on it. Likewise, the hair cells that
layaboveitaremostsensitivetoaspecificfrequencyofsoundwaves.Haircellscanrespondtoasmallrange
of similar frequencies, but they require stimulation of greater intensity to fire at frequencies outside of their
optimal range. The difference in response frequency between adjacent inner hair cells is about 0.2 percent.
Compare that to adjacent piano strings, which are about six percent different. Place theory, which is the model
for how biologists think pitch detection works in the human ear, states that high frequency sounds selectively
vibratethebasilarmembraneoftheinnerearneartheentranceport(theovalwindow).Lowerfrequenciestravel
fartheralongthemembranebeforecausingappreciableexcitationofthemembrane.Thebasicpitch-determining
mechanismisbasedonthelocationalongthemembranewherethehaircellsarestimulated.Theplacetheoryis
thefirststeptowardanunderstandingofpitchperception.Consideringtheextremepitchsensitivityofthehuman
ear, it is thought that there must be some auditory “sharpening” mechanism to enhance the pitch resolution.
Whensoundwavesproducefluidwavesinsidethecochlea,thebasilarmembraneflexes,bendingthestereocilia
that attach to the tectorial membrane. Their bending results in action potentials in the hair cells, and auditory
information travels along the neural endings of the bipolar neurons of the hair cells (collectively, the auditory
nerve) to the brain. When the hairs bend, they release an excitatory neurotransmitter at a synapse with a
sensoryneuron,whichthenconductsactionpotentialstothecentralnervoussystem.Thecochlearbranchofthe
vestibulocochlearcranialnervesendsinformationonhearing.Theauditorysystemisveryrefined,andthereis
somemodulationor“sharpening”builtin.Thebraincansendsignalsbacktothecochlea,resultinginachange
of length in the outer hair cells, sharpening or dampening the hair cells’ response to certain frequencies.
Watchananimation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/hearing)ofsoundenteringtheouterear,movingthrough
the ear structure, stimulating cochlear nerve impulses, and eventually sending signals to the temporal lobe.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1140
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1129
Higher Processing
The inner hair cells are most important for conveying auditory information to the brain. About 90 percent of the
afferent neurons carry information from inner hair cells, with each hair cell synapsing with 10 or so neurons.
Outer hair cells connect to only 10 percent of the afferent neurons, and each afferent neuron innervates many
haircells.Theafferent,bipolarneuronsthatconveyauditoryinformationtravelfromthecochleatothemedulla,
throughtheponsandmidbraininthebrainstem,finallyreachingtheprimaryauditorycortexinthetemporallobe.
Vestibular Information
Thestimuliassociatedwiththevestibularsystemarelinearacceleration(gravity)andangularaccelerationand
deceleration. Gravity, acceleration, and deceleration are detected by evaluating the inertia on receptive cells
in the vestibular system. Gravity is detected through head position. Angular acceleration and deceleration are
expressed through turning or tilting of the head.
The vestibular system has some similarities with the auditory system. It utilizes hair cells just like the auditory
system,butitexcitesthemindifferentways.Therearefivevestibularreceptororgansintheinnerear:theutricle,
thesaccule,andthreesemicircularcanals.Together,theymakeupwhat’sknownasthevestibularlabyrinththat
isshowninFigure36.16.Theutricleandsacculerespondtoaccelerationinastraightline,suchasgravity.The
roughly30,000haircellsintheutricleand16,000haircellsinthesacculeliebelowagelatinouslayer,withtheir
stereocilia projecting into the gelatin. Embedded in this gelatin are calcium carbonate crystals—like tiny rocks.
Whentheheadistilted,thecrystalscontinuetobepulledstraightdownbygravity,butthenewangleofthehead
causesthegelatintoshift,therebybendingthestereocilia.Thebendingofthestereociliastimulatestheneurons,
andtheysignaltothebrainthattheheadistilted,allowingthemaintenanceofbalance.Itisthevestibularbranch
of the vestibulocochlear cranial nerve that deals with balance.
Figure 36.16The structure of the vestibular labyrinth is shown. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
The fluid-filled semicircular canals are tubular loops set at oblique angles. They are arranged in three spatial
planes. The base of each canal has a swelling that contains a cluster of hair cells. The hairs project into a
gelatinouscapcalledthecupulaandmonitorangularaccelerationanddecelerationfromrotation.Theywouldbe
stimulatedbydrivingyourcararoundacorner,turningyourhead,orfallingforward.Onecanallieshorizontally,
whiletheothertwolieatabout45degreeanglestothehorizontalaxis,asillustratedinFigure36.16.Whenthe
brain processes input from all three canals together, it can detect angular acceleration or deceleration in three
dimensions.Whentheheadturns,thefluidinthecanalsshifts,therebybendingstereociliaandsendingsignals
tothebrain.Uponcessationacceleratingordecelerating—orjustmoving—themovementofthefluidwithinthe
canalsslowsorstops.Forexample,imagineholdingaglassofwater.Whenmovingforward,watermaysplash
backwards onto the hand, and when motion has stopped, water may splash forward onto the fingers. While in
motion,thewatersettlesintheglassanddoesnotsplash.Notethatthecanalsarenotsensitivetovelocityitself,
but to changes in velocity, so moving forward at 60mph with your eyes closed would not give the sensation of
movement, but suddenly accelerating or braking would stimulate the receptors.
Higher Processing
Hair cells from the utricle, saccule, and semicircular canals also communicate through bipolar neurons to
the cochlear nucleus in the medulla. Cochlear neurons send descending projections to the spinal cord and
PAGE: 1141
1130 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
ascending projections to the pons, thalamus, and cerebellum. Connections to the cerebellum are important
for coordinated movements. There are also projections to the temporal cortex, which account for feelings of
dizziness;projectionstoautonomicnervoussystemareasinthebrainstem,whichaccountformotionsickness;
and projections to the primary somatosensory cortex, which monitors subjective measurements of the external
world and self-movement. People with lesions in the vestibular area of the somatosensory cortex see vertical
objects in the world as being tilted. Finally, the vestibular signals project to certain optic muscles to coordinate
eye and head movements.
Clickthroughthisinteractivetutorial(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ear_anatomy)toreviewthepartsofthe
ear and how they function to process sound.
36.5 | Vision
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how electromagnetic waves differ from sound waves
• Trace the path of light through the eye to the point of the optic nerve
• Explain tonic activity as it is manifested in photoreceptors in the retina
Visionistheabilitytodetectlightpatternsfromtheoutsideenvironmentandinterpretthemintoimages.Animals
are bombarded with sensory information, and the sheer volume of visual information can be problematic.
Fortunately,thevisualsystemsofspecieshaveevolvedtoattendtothemost-importantstimuli.Theimportance
of vision to humans is further substantiated by the fact that about one-third of the human cerebral cortex is
dedicated to analyzing and perceiving visual information.
Light
As with auditory stimuli, light travels in waves. The compression waves that compose sound must travel in a
medium—a gas, a liquid, or a solid. In contrast, light is composed of electromagnetic waves and needs no
medium; light can travel in a vacuum (Figure 36.17). The behavior of light can be discussed in terms of the
behaviorofwavesandalsointermsofthebehaviorofthefundamentalunitoflight—apacketofelectromagnetic
radiationcalledaphoton.Aglanceattheelectromagneticspectrumshowsthatvisiblelightforhumansisjusta
small slice of the entire spectrum, which includes radiation that we cannot see as light because it is below the
frequency of visible red light and above the frequency of visible violet light.
Certain variables are important when discussing perception of light. Wavelength (which varies inversely with
frequency) manifests itself as hue. Light at the red end of the visible spectrum has longer wavelengths (and is
lowerfrequency),whilelightatthevioletendhasshorterwavelengths(andishigherfrequency).Thewavelength
of light is expressed in nanometers (nm); one nanometer is one billionth of a meter. Humans perceive light
thatrangesbetweenapproximately380nmand740nm.Someotheranimals,though,candetectwavelengths
outside of the human range. For example, bees see near-ultraviolet light in order to locate nectar guides on
flowers, and some non-avian reptiles sense infrared light (heat that prey gives off).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1142
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1131
Figure36.17Intheelectromagneticspectrum,visiblelightliesbetween380nmand740nm.(credit:modificationof
work by NASA)
Wave amplitude is perceived as luminous intensity, or brightness. The standard unit of intensity of light is the
candela, which is approximately the luminous intensity of one common candle.
Light waves travel 299,792 km per second in a vacuum, (and somewhat slower in various media such as air
and water), and those waves arrive at the eye as long (red), medium (green), and short (blue) waves. What is
termed “white light” is light that is perceived as white by the human eye. This effect is produced by light that
stimulatesequallythecolorreceptorsinthehumaneye.Theapparentcolorofanobjectisthecolor(orcolors)
thattheobjectreflects.Thusaredobjectreflectstheredwavelengthsinmixed(white)lightandabsorbsallother
wavelengths of light.
Anatomy of the Eye
The photoreceptive cells of the eye, where transduction of light to nervous impulses occurs, are located in the
retina (shown in Figure 36.18) on the inner surface of the back of the eye. But light does not impinge on
the retina unaltered. It passes through other layers that process it so that it can be interpreted by the retina
(Figure 36.18b). The cornea, the front transparent layer of the eye, and the crystalline lens, a transparent
convexstructurebehindthecornea,bothrefract(bend)lighttofocustheimageontheretina.Theiris,whichis
conspicuous as the colored part of the eye, is a circular muscular ring lying between the lens and cornea that
regulatestheamountoflightenteringtheeye.Inconditionsofhighambientlight,theiriscontracts,reducingthe
size of the pupil at its center. In conditions of low light, the iris relaxes and the pupil enlarges.
PAGE: 1143
1132 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure 36.18(a) The human eye is shown in cross section. (b) A blowup shows the layers of the retina.
Which of the following statements about the human eye is false?
a. Rods detect color, while cones detect only shades of gray.
b. When light enters the retina, it passes the ganglion cells and bipolar cells before reaching
photoreceptors at the rear of the eye.
c. The iris adjusts the amount of light coming into the eye.
d. The cornea is a protective layer on the front of the eye.
The main function of the lens is to focus light on the retina and fovea centralis. The lens is dynamic, focusing
andre-focusinglightastheeyerestsonnearandfarobjectsinthevisualfield.Thelensisoperatedbymuscles
thatstretchitflatorallowittothicken,changingthefocallengthoflightcomingthroughittofocusitsharplyon
theretina.Withagecomesthelossoftheflexibilityofthelens,andaformoffarsightednesscalledpresbyopia
results. Presbyopia occurs because the image focuses behind the retina. Presbyopia is a deficit similar to a
differenttypeoffarsightednesscalledhyperopiacausedbyaneyeballthatistooshort.Forbothdefects,images
in the distance are clear but images nearby are blurry. Myopia (nearsightedness) occurs when an eyeball is
elongated and the image focus falls in front of the retina. In this case, images in the distance are blurry but
images nearby are clear.
There are two types of photoreceptors in the retina: rods and cones, named for their general appearance as
illustrated in Figure 36.19. Rods are strongly photosensitive and are located in the outer edges of the retina.
Theydetectdimlightandareusedprimarilyforperipheralandnighttimevision.Conesareweaklyphotosensitive
and are located near the center of the retina. They respond to bright light, and their primary role is in daytime,
color vision.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1144
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1133
Figure36.19Rodsandconesarephotoreceptorsintheretina.Rodsrespondinlowlightandcandetectonlyshades
ofgray.Conesrespondinintenselightandareresponsibleforcolorvision.(credit:modificationofworkbyPiotrSliwa)
The fovea is the region in the center back of the eye that is responsible for acute vision. The fovea has a high
densityofcones.Whenyoubringyourgazetoanobjecttoexamineitintentlyinbrightlight,theeyesorientso
thattheobject’simagefallsonthefovea.However,whenlookingatastarinthenightskyorotherobjectindim
light, the object can be better viewed by the peripheral vision because it is the rods at the edges of the retina,
ratherthantheconesatthecenter,thatoperatebetterinlowlight.Inhumans,conesfaroutnumberrodsinthe
fovea.
Review the anatomical structure (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/eye_diagram) of the eye, clicking on each
part to practice identification.
Transduction of Light
The rods and cones are the site of transduction of light to a neural signal. Both rods and cones contain
photopigments.Invertebrates,themainphotopigment,rhodopsin,hastwomainparts(Figure36.20):anopsin,
which is a membrane protein (in the form of a cluster of α-helices that span the membrane), and retinal—a
moleculethatabsorbslight.Whenlighthitsaphotoreceptor,itcausesashapechangeintheretinal,alteringits
structurefromabent(cis)formofthemoleculetoitslinear(trans)isomer.Thisisomerizationofretinalactivates
+
therhodopsin, starting acascadeofeventsthat endswiththeclosingofNa channelsinthemembraneofthe
PAGE: 1145
1134 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
photoreceptor.Thus,unlikemostothersensoryneurons(whichbecomedepolarizedbyexposuretoastimulus)
visual receptors become hyperpolarized and thus driven away from threshold (Figure 36.21).
Figure36.20(a)Rhodopsin,thephotoreceptorinvertebrates,hastwoparts:thetrans-membraneproteinopsin,and
retinal.Whenlightstrikesretinal,itchangesshapefrom(b)acistoatransform.ThesignalispassedtoaG-protein
called transducin, triggering a series of downstream events.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1146
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1135
Figure 36.21 When light strikes rhodopsin, the G-protein transducin is activated, which in turn activates
phosphodiesterase. Phosphodiesterase converts cGMP to GMP, thereby closing sodium channels. As a result, the
membrane becomes hyperpolarized. The hyperpolarized membrane does not release glutamate to the bipolar cell.
Trichromatic Coding
There are three types of cones (with different photopsins), and they differ in the wavelength to which they are
mostresponsive,asshowninFigure36.22.Someconesaremaximallyresponsivetoshortlightwavesof420
nm, so they are called S cones (“S” for “short”); others respond maximally to waves of 530 nm (M cones, for
“medium”);athirdgrouprespondsmaximallytolightoflongerwavelengths,at560nm(L,or“long”cones).With
onlyonetypeofcone,colorvisionwouldnotbepossible,andatwo-cone(dichromatic)systemhaslimitations.
Primates use a three-cone (trichromatic) system, resulting in full color vision.
The color we perceive is a result of the ratio of activity of our three types of cones. The colors of the visual
spectrum, running from long-wavelength light to short, are red (700 nm), orange (600 nm), yellow (565 nm),
green(497nm),blue(470nm),indigo(450nm),andviolet(425nm).Humanshaveverysensitiveperceptionof
colorandcandistinguishabout500levelsofbrightness,200differenthues,and20stepsofsaturation,orabout
2 million distinct colors.
PAGE: 1147
1136 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
Figure36.22Humanrodcellsandthedifferenttypesofconecellseachhaveanoptimalwavelength.However,there
is considerable overlap in the wavelengths of light detected.
Retinal Processing
Visualsignalsleavetheconesandrods,traveltothebipolarcells,andthentoganglioncells.Alargedegreeof
processing of visual information occurs in the retina itself, before visual information is sent to the brain.
Photoreceptors in the retina continuously undergo tonic activity. That is, they are always slightly active even
whennotstimulatedbylight.Inneuronsthatexhibittonicactivity,theabsenceofstimulimaintainsafiringrateat
abaseline;whilesomestimuliincreasefiringratefromthebaseline,andotherstimulidecreasefiringrate.Inthe
absenceoflight,thebipolarneuronsthatconnectrodsandconestoganglioncellsarecontinuouslyandactively
inhibitedbytherodsandcones.Exposureoftheretinatolighthyperpolarizestherodsandconesandremoves
theirinhibitionofbipolarcells.Thenowactivebipolarcellsinturnstimulatetheganglioncells,whichsendaction
potentialsalongtheiraxons(whichleavetheeyeastheopticnerve).Thus,thevisualsystemreliesonchangein
retinalactivity,ratherthantheabsenceorpresenceofactivity,toencodevisualsignalsforthebrain.Sometimes
horizontalcellscarrysignalsfromonerodorconetootherphotoreceptorsandtoseveralbipolarcells.Whena
rodorconestimulatesahorizontalcell,thehorizontalcellinhibitsmoredistantphotoreceptorsandbipolarcells,
creatinglateralinhibition.Thisinhibitionsharpensedgesandenhancescontrastintheimagesbymakingregions
receiving light appear lighter and dark surroundings appear darker. Amacrine cells can distribute information
from one bipolar cell to many ganglion cells.
Youcandemonstratethisusinganeasydemonstrationto“trick”yourretinaandbrainaboutthecolorsyouare
observinginyourvisualfield.LookfixedlyatFigure36.23forabout45seconds.Thenquicklyshiftyourgazeto
a sheet of blank white paper or a white wall. You should see an afterimage of the Norwegian flag in its correct
colors.Atthispoint,closeyoureyesforamoment,thenreopenthem,lookingagainatthewhitepaperorwall;
the afterimage of the flag should continue to appear as red, white, and blue. What causes this? According to
an explanation called opponent process theory, as you gazed fixedly at the green, black, and yellow flag, your
retinalganglioncellsthatrespondpositivelytogreen,black,andyellowincreasedtheirfiringdramatically.When
youshiftedyourgazetotheneutralwhiteground,theseganglioncellsabruptlydecreasedtheiractivityandthe
brain interpreted this abrupt downshift as if the ganglion cells were responding now to their “opponent” colors:
red,white,andblue,respectively,inthevisualfield.Oncetheganglioncellsreturntotheirbaselineactivitystate,
the false perception of color will disappear.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1148
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1137
Figure 36.23 View this flag to understand how retinal processing works. Stare at the center of the flag (indicated by
the white dot) for 45 seconds, and then quickly look at a white background, noticing how colors appear.
Higher Processing
The myelinated axons of ganglion cells make up the optic nerves. Within the nerves, different axons carry
differentqualitiesofthevisualsignal.Someaxonsconstitutethemagnocellular(bigcell)pathway,whichcarries
informationaboutform,movement,depth,anddifferencesinbrightness.Otheraxonsconstitutetheparvocellular
(smallcell)pathway,whichcarriesinformationoncolorandfinedetail.Somevisualinformationprojectsdirectly
back into the brain, while other information crosses to the opposite side of the brain. This crossing of optical
pathwaysproducesthedistinctiveopticchiasma(Greek,for“crossing”)foundatthebaseofthebrainandallows
us to coordinate information from both eyes.
Once in the brain, visual information is processed in several places, and its routes reflect the complexity and
importance of visual information to humans and other animals. One route takes the signals to the thalamus,
which serves as the routing station for all incoming sensory impulses except olfaction. In the thalamus,
the magnocellular and parvocellular distinctions remain intact, and there are different layers of the thalamus
dedicated to each. When visual signals leave the thalamus, they travel to the primary visual cortex at the rear
of the brain. From the visual cortex, the visual signals travel in two directions. One stream that projects to the
parietal lobe, in the side of the brain, carries magnocellular (“where”) information. A second stream projects to
the temporal lobe and carries both magnocellular (“where”) and parvocellular (“what”) information.
Anotherimportantvisualrouteisapathwayfromtheretinatothesuperiorcolliculusinthemidbrain,whereeye
movementsarecoordinatedandintegratedwithauditoryinformation.Finally,thereisthepathwayfromtheretina
to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. The SCN is a cluster of cells that is considered
tobethebody’sinternalclock,whichcontrolsourcircadian(day-long)cycle.TheSCNsendsinformationtothe
pineal gland, which is important in sleep/wake patterns and annual cycles.
Viewthisinteractivepresentation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sense_of_sight)toreviewwhatyouhave
learned about how vision functions.
PAGE: 1149
1138 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
KEY TERMS
audition sense of hearing
basilar membrane stiff structure in the cochlea that indirectly anchors auditory receptors
bipolar neuron neuron with two processes from the cell body, typically in opposite directions
candela (cd) unit of measurement of luminous intensity (brightness)
circadian describes a time cycle about one day in length
cochlea whorled structure that contains receptors for transduction of the mechanical wave into an electrical
signal
cone weakly photosensitive, chromatic, cone-shaped neuron in the fovea of the retina that detects bright light
and is used in daytime color vision
cornea transparent layer over the front of the eye that helps focus light waves
fovea regioninthecenteroftheretinawithahighdensityofphotoreceptorsandwhichisresponsibleforacute
vision
free nerve ending ending of an afferent neuron that lacks a specialized structure for detection of sensory
stimuli; some respond to touch, pain, or temperature
glabrous describesthenon-hairyskinfoundonpalmsandfingers,solesoffeet,andlipsofhumansandother
primates
glomerulus intheolfactorybulb,oneofthetwoneuralclustersthatreceivessignalsfromonetypeofolfactory
receptor
Golgi tendon organ muscular proprioceptive tension receptor that provides the sensory component of the
Golgi tendon reflex
gustation sense of taste
hyperopia (also,farsightedness)visualdefectinwhichtheimagefocusfallsbehindtheretina,therebymaking
images in the distance clear, but close-up images blurry
incus (also, anvil) second of the three bones of the middle ear
inner ear innermost part of the ear; consists of the cochlea and the vestibular system
iris pigmented, circular muscle at the front of the eye that regulates the amount of light entering the eye
kinesthesia sense of body movement
labyrinth bony, hollow structure that is the most internal part of the ear; contains the sites of transduction of
auditory and vestibular information
lens transparent, convex structure behind the cornea that helps focus light waves on the retina
malleus (also, hammer) first of the three bones of the middle ear
mechanoreceptor sensoryreceptormodifiedtorespondtomechanicaldisturbancesuchasbeingbent,touch,
pressure, motion, and sound
Meissner’s corpuscle (also,tactilecorpuscle)encapsulated,rapidly-adaptingmechanoreceptorintheskinthat
responds to light touch
Merkel's disk unencapsulated, slowly-adapting mechanoreceptor in the skin that responds to touch
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1150
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1139
middle ear part of the hearing apparatus that functions to transfer energy from the tympanum to the oval
window of the inner ear
muscle spindle proprioceptive stretch receptor that lies within a muscle and that shortens the muscle to an
optimal length for efficient contraction
myopia (also,nearsightedness)visualdefectinwhichtheimagefocusfallsinfrontoftheretina,therebymaking
images in the distance blurry, but close-up images clear
nociception neural processing of noxious (such as damaging) stimuli
odorant airborne molecule that stimulates an olfactory receptor
olfaction sense of smell
olfactory bulb neural structure in the vertebrate brain that receives signals from olfactory receptors
olfactory epithelium specialized tissue in the nasal cavity where olfactory receptors are located
olfactory receptor dendrite of a specialized neuron
organ of Corti in the basilar membrane, the site of the transduction of sound, a mechanical wave, to a neural
signal
ossicle one of the three bones of the middle ear
outer ear partoftheearthatconsistsofthepinna,earcanal,andtympanumandwhichconductssoundwaves
into the middle ear
oval window thin diaphragm between the middle and inner ears that receives sound waves from contact with
the stapes bone of the middle ear
Pacinian corpuscle encapsulated mechanoreceptor in the skin that responds to deep pressure and vibration
papilla one of the small bump-like projections from the tongue
perception individual interpretation of a sensation; a brain function
pheromone substance released by an animal that can affect the physiology or behavior of other animals
pinna cartilaginous outer ear
presbyopia visual defect in which the image focus falls behind the retina, thereby making images in the
distance clear, but close-up images blurry; caused by age-based changes in the lens
proprioception sense of limb position; used to track kinesthesia
pupil small opening though which light enters
reception receipt of a signal (such as light or sound) by sensory receptors
receptive field region in space in which a stimulus can activate a given sensory receptor
receptor potential membrane potential in a sensory receptor in response to detection of a stimulus
retina layer of photoreceptive and supporting cells on the inner surface of the back of the eye
rhodopsin main photopigment in vertebrates
rod stronglyphotosensitive,achromatic,cylindricalneuronintheouteredgesoftheretinathatdetectsdimlight
and is used in peripheral and nighttime vision
Ruffini ending (also, bulbous corpuscle) slowly-adapting mechanoreceptor in the skin that responds to skin
PAGE: 1151
1140 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
stretch and joint position
semicircular canal one of three half-circular, fluid-filled tubes in the vestibular labyrinth that monitors angular
acceleration and deceleration
sensory receptor specializedneuronorothercellsassociatedwithaneuronthatismodifiedtoreceivespecific
sensory input
sensory transduction conversion of a sensory stimulus into electrical energy in the nervous system by a
change in the membrane potential
stapes (also, stirrup) third of the three bones of the middle ear
stereocilia in the auditory system, hair-like projections from hair cells that help detect sound waves
superior colliculus paired structure in the top of the midbrain, which manages eye movements and auditory
integration
suprachiasmatic nucleus cluster of cells in the hypothalamus that plays a role in the circadian cycle
tastant food molecule that stimulates gustatory receptors
taste bud clusters of taste cells
tectorial membrane cochlear structure that lies above the hair cells and participates in the transduction of
sound at the hair cells
tonic activity in a neuron, slight continuous activity while at rest
tympanum (also, tympanic membrane or ear drum) thin diaphragm between the outer and middle ears
ultrasound sound frequencies above the human detectable ceiling of approximately 20,000 Hz
umami one of the five basic tastes, which is described as “savory” and which may be largely the taste of L-
glutamate
vestibular sense sense of spatial orientation and balance
vision sense of sight
CHAPTER SUMMARY
36.1Sensory Processes
A sensory activation occurs when a physical or chemical stimulus is processed into a neural signal (sensory
transduction) by a sensory receptor. Perception is an individual interpretation of a sensation and is a brain
function. Humans have special senses: olfaction, gustation, equilibrium, and hearing, plus the general senses
of somatosensation.
Sensory receptors are either specialized cells associated with sensory neurons or the specialized ends of
sensory neurons that are a part of the peripheral nervous system, and they are used to receive information
about the environment (internal or external). Each sensory receptor is modified for the type of stimulus it
detects. For example, neither gustatory receptors nor auditory receptors are sensitive to light. Each sensory
receptor is responsive to stimuli within a specific region in space, which is known as that receptor’s receptive
field. The most fundamental function of a sensory system is the translation of a sensory signal to an electrical
signal in the nervous system.
All sensory signals, except those from the olfactory system, enter the central nervous system and are routed to
the thalamus. When the sensory signal exits the thalamus, it is conducted to the specific area of the cortex
dedicated to processing that particular sense.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1152
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1141
36.2Somatosensation
Somatosensation includes all sensation received from the skin and mucous membranes, as well as from the
limbs and joints. Somatosensation occurs all over the exterior of the body and at some interior locations as
well, and a variety of receptor types, embedded in the skin and mucous membranes, play a role.
There are several types of specialized sensory receptors. Rapidly adapting free nerve endings detect
nociception, hot and cold, and light touch. Slowly adapting, encapsulated Merkel’s disks are found in fingertips
and lips, and respond to light touch. Meissner’s corpuscles, found in glabrous skin, are rapidly adapting,
encapsulated receptors that detect touch, low-frequency vibration, and flutter. Ruffini endings are slowly
adapting, encapsulated receptors that detect skin stretch, joint activity, and warmth. Hair receptors are rapidly
adapting nerve endings wrapped around the base of hair follicles that detect hair movement and skin
deflection. Finally, Pacinian corpuscles are encapsulated, rapidly adapting receptors that detect transient
pressure and high-frequency vibration.
36.3Taste and Smell
There are five primary tastes in humans: sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami. Each taste has its own receptor
type that responds only to that taste. Tastants enter the body and are dissolved in saliva. Taste cells are located
within taste buds, which are found on three of the four types of papillae in the mouth.
Regarding olfaction, there are many thousands of odorants, but humans detect only about 10,000. Like taste
receptors, olfactory receptors are each responsive to only one odorant. Odorants dissolve in nasal mucosa,
where they excite their corresponding olfactory sensory cells. When these cells detect an odorant, they send
their signals to the main olfactory bulb and then to other locations in the brain, including the olfactory cortex.
36.4Hearing and Vestibular Sensation
Audition is important for territory defense, predation, predator defense, and communal exchanges. The
vestibular system, which is not auditory, detects linear acceleration and angular acceleration and deceleration.
Both the auditory system and vestibular system use hair cells as their receptors.
Auditory stimuli are sound waves. The sound wave energy reaches the outer ear (pinna, canal, tympanum),
and vibrations of the tympanum send the energy to the middle ear. The middle ear bones shift and the stapes
transfers mechanical energy to the oval window of the fluid-filled inner ear cochlea. Once in the cochlea, the
energy causes the basilar membrane to flex, thereby bending the stereocilia on receptor hair cells. This
activates the receptors, which send their auditory neural signals to the brain.
The vestibular system has five parts that work together to provide the sense of direction, thus helping to
maintain balance. The utricle and saccule measure head orientation: their calcium carbonate crystals shift
when the head is tilted, thereby activating hair cells. The semicircular canals work similarly, such that when the
head is turned, the fluid in the canals bends stereocilia on hair cells. The vestibular hair cells also send signals
to the thalamus and to the somatosensory cortex, but also to the cerebellum, the structure above the brainstem
that plays a large role in timing and coordination of movement.
36.5Vision
Vision is the only photo responsive sense. Visible light travels in waves and is a very small slice of the
electromagnetic radiation spectrum. Light waves differ based on their frequency (wavelength = hue) and
amplitude (intensity = brightness).
In the vertebrate retina, there are two types of light receptors (photoreceptors): cones and rods. Cones, which
are the source of color vision, exist in three forms—L, M, and S—and they are differentially sensitive to different
wavelengths. Cones are located in the retina, along with the dim-light, achromatic receptors (rods). Cones are
found in the fovea, the central region of the retina, whereas rods are found in the peripheral regions of the
retina.
Visual signals travel from the eye over the axons of retinal ganglion cells, which make up the optic nerves.
Ganglion cells come in several versions. Some ganglion cell axons carry information on form, movement,
depth, and brightness, while other axons carry information on color and fine detail. Visual information is sent to
the superior colliculi in the midbrain, where coordination of eye movements and integration of auditory
information takes place. Visual information is also sent to the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the
hypothalamus, which plays a role in the circadian cycle.
PAGE: 1153
1142 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 36.5Which of the following statements a. Hearing loss resulting from absence or loss
about mechanoreceptors is false? of hair cells in the organ of Corti.
a. Pacini corpuscles are found in both glabrous b. Hearing loss resulting from an abnormal
and hairy skin. auditory nerve.
b. Merkel’s disks are abundant on the c. Hearing loss resulting from fracture of the
fingertips and lips. cochlea.
c. Ruffini endings are encapsulated d. Hearing loss resulting from damage to
mechanoreceptors. bones of the middle ear.
d. Meissner’s corpuscles extend into the lower
3.Figure 36.18Which of the following statements
dermis.
about the human eye is false?
2.Figure 36.14Cochlear implants can restore a. Rods detect color, while cones detect only
hearing in people who have a nonfunctional cochlea. shades of gray.
The implant consists of a microphone that picks up b. When light enters the retina, it passes the
sound. A speech processor selects sounds in the ganglion cells and bipolar cells before
range of human speech, and a transmitter converts reaching photoreceptors at the rear of the
these sounds to electrical impulses, which are then eye.
sent to the auditory nerve. Which of the following c. The iris adjusts the amount of light coming
types of hearing loss would not be restored by a into the eye.
cochlear implant? d. The cornea is a protective layer on the front
of the eye.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Where does perception occur? a. Meissner’s corpuscles; hairy
a. spinal cord b. Merkel’s disks; glabrous
b. cerebral cortex c. hair receptors; hairy
c. receptors d. Krause end bulbs; hairy
d. thalamus
9.If you were to burn your epidermis, what receptor
5.If a person’s cold receptors no longer convert cold type would you most likely burn?
stimuli into sensory signals, that person has a a. free nerve endings
problem with the process of ________. b. Ruffini endings
a. reception c. Pacinian corpuscle
b. transmission d. hair receptors
c. perception
10.Many diabetic patients are warned by their
d. transduction
doctors to test their glucose levels by pricking the
6.After somatosensory transduction, the sensory sides of their fingers rather than the pads. Pricking
signal travels through the brain as a(n) _____ signal. the sides avoids stimulating which receptor?
a. electrical a. Krause end bulbs
b. pressure b. Meissner’s corpuscles
c. optical c. Ruffini ending
d. thermal d. Nociceptors
7.Many people experience motion sickness while 11.Which of the following has the fewest taste
traveling in a car. This sensation results from receptors?
contradictory inputs arising from which senses? a. fungiform papillae
b. circumvallate papillae
a. Proprioception and Kinesthesia c. foliate papillae
b. Somatosensation and Equilibrium d. filiform papillae
c. Gustation and Vibration
12.How many different taste molecules do taste cells
d. Vision and Vestibular System
each detect?
8._____ are found only in _____ skin, and detect a. one
skin deflection. b. five
c. ten
d. It depends on the spot on the tongue.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1154
Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems 1143
13.Salty foods activate the taste cells by _____. a. The hair cells in the semicircular canals will
be constantly activated.
a. exciting the taste cell directly b. The hair cells in the semicircular canals will
b. causing hydrogen ions to enter the cell now be stimulated by gravity.
c. causing sodium channels to close c. The utricle will no longer recognize
d. binding directly to the receptors acceleration.
d. There will be too much volume in the
14.All sensory signals except _____ travel to the
semicircular canals for them to detect
_____ in the brain before the cerebral cortex.
motion.
a. vision; thalamus 20.Why do people over 55 often need reading
b. olfaction; thalamus glasses?
c. vision; cranial nerves a. Their cornea no longer focuses correctly.
d. olfaction; cranial nerves b. Their lens no longer focuses correctly.
c. Their eyeball has elongated with age,
15.How is the ability to recognize the umami taste an
causing images to focus in front of their
evolutionary advantage?
retina.
a. Umami identifies healthy foods that are low
d. Their retina has thinned with age, making
in salt and sugar.
vision more difficult.
b. Umami enhances the flavor of bland foods.
c. Umami identifies foods that might contain 21.Why is it easier to see images at night using
essential amino acids. peripheral, rather than the central, vision?
d. Umami identifies foods that help maintain a. Cones are denser in the periphery of the
electrolyte balance. retina.
b. Bipolar cells are denser in the periphery of
16.In sound, pitch is measured in _____, and
the retina.
volume is measured in _____.
c. Rods are denser in the periphery of the
a. nanometers (nm); decibels (dB)
retina.
b. decibels (dB); nanometers (nm)
d. The optic nerve exits at the periphery of the
c. decibels (dB); hertz (Hz)
retina.
d. hertz (Hz); decibels (dB)
22.A person catching a ball must coordinate her
17.Auditory hair cells are indirectly anchored to the
head and eyes. What part of the brain is helping to
_____.
do this?
a. basilar membrane
a. hypothalamus
b. oval window
b. pineal gland
c. tectorial membrane
c. thalamus
d. ossicles
d. superior colliculus
18.Which of the following are found both in the
23.A satellite is launched into space, but explodes
auditory system and the vestibular system?
after exiting the Earth’s atmosphere. Which
a. basilar membrane
statement accurately reflects the observations made
b. hair cells
by an astronaut on a space walk outside the
c. semicircular canals
International Space Station during the explosion?
d. ossicles
19.Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo is a a. The astronaut would see the explosion, but
disorder where some of the calcium carbonate would not hear a boom.
crystals in the utricle migrate into the semicircular b. The astronaut will not sense the explosion.
canals. Why does this condition cause periods of c. The astronaut will see the explosion, and
dizziness? then hear the boom.
d. The astronaut will feel the concussive force
of the explosion, but will not see it.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
24.If a person sustains damage to axons leading stimulus affect the just-noticeable difference in the
from sensory receptors to the central nervous perception of that stimulus?
system, which step or steps of sensory perception
26.Describe the difference in the localization of the
will be affected?
sensory receptors for general and special senses in
25.In what way does the overall magnitude of a humans.
PAGE: 1155
1144 Chapter 36 | Sensory Systems
27.What can be inferred about the relative sizes of 32.How would a rise in altitude likely affect the
the areas of cortex that process signals from skin not speed of a sound transmitted through air? Why?
densely innervated with sensory receptors and skin
33.How might being in a place with less gravity than
that is densely innervated with sensory receptors?
Earth has (such as Earth’s moon) affect vestibular
28.Many studies have demonstrated that women are sensation, and why?
able to tolerate the same painful stimuli for longer
34.How does the structure of the ear allow a person
than men. Why don’t all people experience pain the
to determine where a sound originates?
same way?
35.How could the pineal gland, the brain structure
29.From the perspective of the recipient of the
that plays a role in annual cycles, use visual
signal, in what ways do pheromones differ from other
information from the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the
odorants?
hypothalamus?
30.What might be the effect on an animal of not
36.How is the relationship between photoreceptors
being able to perceive taste?
and bipolar cells different from other sensory
31.A few recent cancer detection studies have used receptors and adjacent cells?
trained dogs to detect lung cancer in urine samples.
37.Cataracts, the medical condition where the lens
What is the hypothesis behind this study? Why are
of the eye becomes cloudy, are a leading cause of
dogs a better choice of detectors in this study than
blindness. Describe how developing a cataract would
humans?
change the path of light through the eye.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1156
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1145
37 | THE ENDOCRINE
SYSTEM
Figure37.1Theprocessofamphibianmetamorphosis,asseeninthetadpole-to-frogstagesshownhere,isdrivenby
hormones. (credit "tadpole": modification of work by Brian Gratwicke)
Chapter Outline
37.1:Types of Hormones
37.2:How Hormones Work
37.3:Regulation of Body Processes
37.4:Regulation of Hormone Production
37.5:Endocrine Glands
Introduction
An animal’s endocrine system controls body processes through the production, secretion, and regulation of
hormones, which serve as chemical “messengers” functioning in cellular and organ activity and, ultimately,
maintaining the body’s homeostasis. The endocrine system plays a role in growth, metabolism, and sexual
development.Inhumans,commonendocrinesystemdiseasesincludethyroiddiseaseanddiabetesmellitus.In
organismsthatundergometamorphosis,theprocessiscontrolledbytheendocrinesystem.Thetransformation
from tadpole to frog, for example, is complex and nuanced to adapt to specific environments and ecological
circumstances.
37.1 | Types of Hormones
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the different types of hormones
• Explain their role in maintaining homeostasis
Maintaining homeostasis within the body requires the coordination of many different systems and organs.
Communication between neighboring cells, and between cells and tissues in distant parts of the body, occurs
throughthereleaseofchemicalscalledhormones.Hormonesarereleasedintobodyfluids(usuallyblood)that
carrythesechemicalstotheirtargetcells.Atthetargetcells,whicharecellsthathaveareceptorforasignalor
ligandfromasignalcell, the hormoneselicit aresponse. The cells, tissues, andorgansthat secrete hormones
makeuptheendocrinesystem.Examplesofglandsoftheendocrinesystemincludetheadrenalglands,which
produce hormones such as epinephrine and norepinephrine that regulate responses to stress, and the thyroid
gland, which produces thyroid hormones that regulate metabolic rates.
Althoughtherearemanydifferenthormonesinthehumanbody,theycanbedividedintothreeclassesbasedon
their chemical structure: lipid-derived, amino acid-derived, and peptide (peptide and proteins) hormones. One
PAGE: 1157
1146 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
of the key distinguishing features of lipid-derived hormones is that they can diffuse across plasma membranes
whereas the amino acid-derived and peptide hormones cannot.
Lipid-Derived Hormones (or Lipid-soluble Hormones)
Mostlipidhormonesarederivedfromcholesterolandthusarestructurallysimilartoit,asillustratedinFigure
37.2.The primaryclassof lipidhormonesinhumansisthe steroid hormones. Chemically,these hormonesare
usuallyketonesoralcohols;theirchemicalnameswillendin“-ol”foralcoholsor“-one”forketones.Examplesof
steroidhormonesincludeestradiol,whichisanestrogen,orfemalesexhormone,andtestosterone,whichisan
androgen,ormalesexhormone.Thesetwohormonesarereleasedbythefemaleandmalereproductiveorgans,
respectively.Othersteroidhormonesincludealdosteroneandcortisol,whicharereleasedbytheadrenalglands
alongwithsomeothertypesofandrogens.Steroidhormonesareinsolubleinwater,andtheyaretransportedby
transport proteins in blood. As a result, they remain in circulation longer than peptide hormones. For example,
cortisolhasahalf-lifeof60to90minutes,whileepinephrine,anaminoacidderived-hormone,hasahalf-lifeof
approximately one minute.
Figure37.2Thestructuresshownhererepresent(a)cholesterol,plusthesteroidhormones(b)testosteroneand(c)
estradiol.
Amino Acid-Derived Hormones
The amino acid-derived hormones are relatively small molecules that are derived from the amino acids
tyrosine and tryptophan, shown in Figure 37.3. If a hormone is amino acid-derived, its chemical name will
end in “-ine”. Examples of amino acid-derived hormones include epinephrine and norepinephrine, which are
synthesized in the medulla of the adrenal glands, and thyroxine, which is produced by the thyroid gland. The
pineal gland in the brain makes and secretes melatonin which regulates sleep cycles.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1158
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1147
Figure 37.3 (a) The hormone epinephrine, which triggers the fight-or-flight response, is derived from the amino acid
tyrosine. (b) The hormone melatonin, which regulates circadian rhythms, is derived from the amino acid tryptophan.
Peptide Hormones
Thestructureofpeptidehormonesisthatofapolypeptidechain(chainofaminoacids).Thepeptidehormones
include molecules that are short polypeptide chains, such as antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin produced in
the brain and released into the blood in the posterior pituitary gland. This class also includes small proteins,
like growth hormones produced by the pituitary, and large glycoproteins such as follicle-stimulating hormone
produced by the pituitary.Figure 37.4illustrates these peptide hormones.
Secreted peptides like insulin are stored within vesicles in the cells that synthesize them. They are then
releasedinresponsetostimulisuchashighbloodglucoselevelsinthecaseofinsulin.Aminoacid-derivedand
polypeptide hormones are water-soluble and insoluble in lipids. These hormones cannot pass through plasma
membranes of cells; therefore, their receptors are found on the surface of the target cells.
Figure37.4Thestructuresofpeptidehormones(a)oxytocin,(b)growthhormone,and(c)follicle-stimulatinghormone
are shown. These peptide hormones are much larger than those derived from cholesterol or amino acids.
PAGE: 1159
1148 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
Endocrinologist
An endocrinologist is a medical doctor who specializes in treating disorders of the endocrine glands,
hormone systems, and glucose and lipid metabolic pathways. An endocrine surgeon specializes in the
surgical treatment of endocrine diseases and glands. Some of the diseases that are managed by
endocrinologists: disorders of the pancreas (diabetes mellitus), disorders of the pituitary (gigantism,
acromegaly, and pituitary dwarfism), disorders of the thyroid gland (goiter and Graves’ disease), and
disorders of the adrenal glands (Cushing’s disease and Addison’s disease).
Endocrinologistsarerequiredtoassesspatientsanddiagnoseendocrinedisordersthroughextensiveuseof
laboratorytests. Manyendocrinediseasesarediagnosedusingteststhatstimulateorsuppressendocrine
organ functioning. Blood samples are then drawn to determine the effect of stimulating or suppressing an
endocrine organ on the production of hormones. For example, to diagnose diabetes mellitus, patients are
required to fast for 12 to 24 hours. They are then given a sugary drink, which stimulates the pancreas to
produceinsulintodecreasebloodglucoselevels.Abloodsampleistakenonetotwohoursafterthesugar
drink is consumed. If the pancreas is functioning properly, the blood glucose level will be within a normal
range. Another example is the A1C test, which can be performed during blood screening. The A1C test
measuresaveragebloodglucoselevelsoverthepasttwotothreemonthsbyexamininghowwelltheblood
glucose is being managed over a long time.
Once a disease has been diagnosed, endocrinologists can prescribe lifestyle changes and/or medications
to treat the disease. Some cases of diabetes mellitus can be managed by exercise, weight loss, and a
healthydiet;inothercases,medicationsmayberequiredtoenhanceinsulinrelease.Ifthediseasecannot
be controlled by these means, the endocrinologist may prescribe insulin injections.
Inadditiontoclinicalpractice,endocrinologistsmayalsobeinvolvedinprimaryresearchanddevelopment
activities. For example, ongoing islet transplant research is investigating how healthy pancreas islet cells
may be transplanted into diabetic patients. Successful islet transplants may allow patients to stop taking
insulin injections.
37.2 | How Hormones Work
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how hormones work
• Discuss the role of different types of hormone receptors
Hormonesmediatechangesintargetcellsbybindingtospecifichormonereceptors.Inthisway,eventhough
hormones circulate throughout the body and come into contact with many different cell types, they only affect
cells that possess the necessary receptors. Receptors for a specific hormone may be found on many different
cells or may be limited to a small number of specialized cells. For example, thyroid hormones act on many
differenttissuetypes,stimulatingmetabolicactivitythroughoutthebody.Cellscanhavemanyreceptorsforthe
same hormone but often also possess receptors for different types of hormones. The number of receptors that
respond to a hormone determines the cell’s sensitivity to that hormone, and the resulting cellular response.
Additionally,thenumberofreceptorsthatrespondtoahormonecanchangeovertime,resultinginincreasedor
decreased cell sensitivity. In up-regulation, the number of receptors increases in response to rising hormone
levels,makingthecellmoresensitivetothehormoneandallowingformorecellularactivity.Whenthenumberof
receptors decreases in response to rising hormone levels, calleddown-regulation, cellular activity is reduced.
Receptor binding alters cellular activity and results in an increase or decrease in normal body processes.
Dependingonthelocationoftheproteinreceptoronthetargetcellandthechemicalstructureofthehormone,
hormones can mediate changes directly by binding to intracellular hormone receptors and modulating gene
transcription, or indirectly by binding to cell surface receptors and stimulating signaling pathways.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1160
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1149
Intracellular Hormone Receptors
Lipid-derived (soluble) hormones such as steroid hormones diffuse across the membranes of the endocrine
cell. Once outside the cell, they bind to transport proteins that keep them soluble in the bloodstream. At the
targetcell,thehormonesarereleasedfromthecarrierproteinanddiffuseacrossthelipidbilayeroftheplasma
membrane of cells. The steroid hormones pass through the plasma membrane of a target cell and adhere
to intracellular receptors residing in the cytoplasm or in the nucleus. The cell signaling pathways induced by
the steroid hormones regulate specific genes on the cell's DNA. The hormones and receptor complex act as
transcription regulators by increasing or decreasing the synthesis of mRNA molecules of specific genes. This,
in turn, determines the amount of corresponding protein that is synthesized by altering gene expression. This
protein can be used either to change the structure of the cell or to produce enzymes that catalyze chemical
reactions. In this way, the steroid hormone regulates specific cell processes as illustrated inFigure 37.5.
Figure 37.5 An intracellular nuclear receptor (NR) is located in the cytoplasm bound to a heat shock protein
(HSP). Upon hormone binding, the receptor dissociates from the heat shock protein and translocates to the
nucleus. In the nucleus, the hormone-receptor complex binds to a DNA sequence called a hormone response
element (HRE), which triggers gene transcription and translation. The corresponding protein product can then
mediate changes in cell function.
Heat shock proteins (HSP) are so named because they help refold misfolded proteins. In response to
increased temperature (a “heat shock”), heat shock proteins are activated by release from the NR/HSP
complex.Atthesametime,transcriptionofHSPgenesisactivated.Whydoyouthinkthecellrespondsto
a heat shock by increasing the activity of proteins that help refold misfolded proteins?
Other lipid-soluble hormones that are not steroid hormones, such as vitamin D and thyroxine, have receptors
locatedinthenucleus.Thehormonesdiffuseacrossboththeplasmamembraneandthenuclearenvelope,then
bind to receptors in the nucleus. The hormone-receptor complex stimulates transcription of specific genes.
Plasma Membrane Hormone Receptors
Amino acid derived hormones and polypeptide hormones are not lipid-derived (lipid-soluble) and therefore
cannot diffuse through the plasma membrane of cells. Lipid insoluble hormones bind to receptors on the outer
surface of the plasma membrane, via plasma membrane hormone receptors. Unlike steroid hormones, lipid
insoluble hormones do not directly affect the target cell because they cannot enter the cell and act directly on
DNA. Binding of these hormones to a cell surface receptor results in activation of a signaling pathway; this
triggersintracellularactivityandcarriesoutthespecificeffectsassociatedwiththehormone.Inthisway,nothing
PAGE: 1161
1150 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
passesthroughthecellmembrane;thehormonethatbindsatthesurfaceremainsatthesurfaceofthecellwhile
theintracellularproductremainsinsidethecell.Thehormonethatinitiatesthesignalingpathwayiscalledafirst
messenger, which activates a second messenger in the cytoplasm, as illustrated inFigure 37.6.
Figure37.6Theaminoacid-derivedhormonesepinephrineandnorepinephrinebindtobeta-adrenergicreceptorson
the plasma membrane of cells. Hormone binding to receptor activates a G-protein, which in turn activates adenylyl
cyclase, converting ATP to cAMP. cAMP is a second messenger that mediates a cell-specific response. An enzyme
called phosphodiesterase breaks down cAMP, terminating the signal.
OneveryimportantsecondmessengeriscyclicAMP(cAMP).Whenahormonebindstoitsmembranereceptor,
a G-protein that is associated with the receptor is activated; G-proteins are proteins separate from receptors
thatarefoundinthecellmembrane.Whenahormoneisnotboundtothereceptor,theG-proteinisinactiveand
is bound to guanosine diphosphate, or GDP. When a hormone binds to the receptor, the G-protein is activated
bybindingguanosinetriphosphate, orGTP,inplaceofGDP.After binding,GTP ishydrolysedbytheG-protein
into GDP and becomes inactive.
TheactivatedG-proteininturnactivatesamembrane-boundenzymecalledadenylylcyclase.Adenylylcyclase
catalyzes the conversion of ATP to cAMP. cAMP, in turn, activates a group of proteins called protein kinases,
which transfer a phosphate group from ATP to a substrate molecule in a process called phosphorylation. The
phosphorylationofasubstratemoleculechangesitsstructuralorientation,therebyactivatingit.Theseactivated
molecules can then mediate changes in cellular processes.
Theeffectofahormoneisamplifiedasthesignalingpathwayprogresses.Thebindingofahormoneatasingle
receptorcausestheactivationofmanyG-proteins,whichactivatesadenylylcyclase.Eachmoleculeofadenylyl
cyclasethentriggerstheformationofmanymoleculesofcAMP.Furtheramplificationoccursasproteinkinases,
once activated by cAMP, can catalyze many reactions. In this way, a small amount of hormone can trigger the
formationofalargeamountofcellularproduct.Tostophormoneactivity,cAMPisdeactivatedbythecytoplasmic
enzyme phosphodiesterase, or PDE. PDE is always present in the cell and breaks down cAMP to control
hormone activity, preventing overproduction of cellular products.
The specific response of a cell to a lipid insoluble hormone depends on the type of receptors that are present
onthecellmembraneandthesubstratemoleculespresentinthecellcytoplasm.Cellularresponsestohormone
binding of a receptor include altering membrane permeability and metabolic pathways, stimulating synthesis of
proteins and enzymes, and activating hormone release.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1162
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1151
37.3 | Regulation of Body Processes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how hormones regulate the excretory system
• Discuss the role of hormones in the reproductive system
• Describe how hormones regulate metabolism
• Explain the role of hormones in different diseases
Hormones have a wide range of effects and modulate many different body processes. The key regulatory
processes that will be examined here are those affecting the excretory system, the reproductive system,
metabolism, blood calcium concentrations, growth, and the stress response.
Hormonal Regulation of the Excretory System
Maintaining a proper water balance in the body is important to avoid dehydration or over-hydration
(hyponatremia). The water concentration of the body is monitored by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus,
which detect the concentration of electrolytes in the extracellular fluid. The concentration of electrolytes in the
blood rises when there is water loss caused by excessive perspiration, inadequate water intake, or low blood
volume due to blood loss. An increase in blood electrolyte levels results in a neuronal signal being sent from
theosmoreceptorsinhypothalamicnuclei.Thepituitaryglandhastwocomponents:anteriorandposterior.The
anterior pituitary is composed of glandular cells that secrete protein hormones. The posterior pituitary is an
extension of the hypothalamus. It is composed largely of neurons that are continuous with the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus produces a polypeptide hormone known as antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which is
transported to and released from the posterior pituitary gland. The principal action of ADH is to regulate the
amount of water excreted by the kidneys. As ADH (which is also known as vasopressin) causes direct water
reabsorption from the kidney tubules, salts and wastes are concentrated in what will eventually be excreted as
urine. The hypothalamus controls the mechanisms of ADH secretion, either by regulating blood volume or the
concentration of water in the blood. Dehydration or physiological stress can cause an increase of osmolarity
above300mOsm/L,whichinturn,raisesADHsecretionandwaterwillberetained,causinganincreaseinblood
pressure. ADH travels in the bloodstream to the kidneys. Once at the kidneys, ADH changes the kidneys to
becomemorepermeabletowaterbytemporarilyinsertingwaterchannels,aquaporins,intothekidneytubules.
Watermovesoutofthekidneytubulesthroughtheaquaporins,reducingurinevolume.Thewaterisreabsorbed
into the capillaries lowering blood osmolarity back toward normal. As blood osmolarity decreases, a negative
feedback mechanism reduces osmoreceptor activity in the hypothalamus, and ADH secretion is reduced. ADH
release can be reduced by certain substances, including alcohol, which can cause increased urine production
and dehydration.
ChronicunderproductionofADHoramutationintheADHreceptorresultsindiabetesinsipidus.Iftheposterior
pituitarydoesnotreleaseenoughADH,watercannotberetainedbythekidneysandislostasurine.Thiscauses
increasedthirst,butwatertakeninislostagainandmustbecontinuallyconsumed.Iftheconditionisnotsevere,
dehydration may not occur, but severe cases can lead to electrolyte imbalances due to dehydration.
Anotherhormoneresponsibleformaintainingelectrolyteconcentrationsinextracellularfluidsisaldosterone,a
steroid hormone that is produced by the adrenal cortex. In contrast to ADH, which promotes the reabsorption
+
of water to maintain proper water balance, aldosterone maintains proper water balance by enhancing Na
+
reabsorptionandK secretionfromextracellularfluidofthecellsinkidneytubules.Becauseitisproducedinthe
+ +
cortexoftheadrenalglandandaffectstheconcentrationsofmineralsNa andK ,aldosteroneisreferredtoas
amineralocorticoid,acorticosteroidthataffectsionandwaterbalance.Aldosteronereleaseisstimulatedbya
decrease in blood sodium levels, blood volume, or blood pressure, or an increase in blood potassium levels. It
+ +
also prevents the loss of Na from sweat, saliva, and gastric juice. The reabsorption of Na also results in the
osmotic reabsorption of water, which alters blood volume and blood pressure.
Aldosteroneproductioncanbestimulatedbylowbloodpressure,whichtriggersasequenceofchemicalrelease,
as illustrated in Figure 37.7. When blood pressure drops, the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS)
is activated. Cells in the juxtaglomerular apparatus, which regulates the functions of the nephrons of the
PAGE: 1163
1152 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
kidney, detect this and release renin. Renin, an enzyme, circulates in the blood and reacts with a plasma
protein produced by the liver called angiotensinogen. When angiotensinogen is cleaved by renin, it produces
angiotensin I, which is then converted into angiotensin II in the lungs. Angiotensin II functions as a hormone
+
and then causes the release of the hormone aldosterone by the adrenal cortex, resulting in increased Na
reabsorption, water retention, and an increase in blood pressure. Angiotensin II in addition to being a potent
vasoconstrictoralsocausesanincreaseinADHandincreasedthirst,bothofwhichhelptoraisebloodpressure.
Figure 37.7 ADH and aldosterone increase blood pressure and volume. Angiotensin II stimulates release of these
hormones. Angiotensin II, in turn, is formed when renin cleaves angiotensinogen. (credit: modification of work by
Mikael Häggström)
Hormonal Regulation of the Reproductive System
Regulationofthereproductivesystemisaprocessthatrequirestheactionofhormonesfromthepituitarygland,
the adrenal cortex, and the gonads. During puberty in both males and females, the hypothalamus produces
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which stimulates the production and release of follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from the anterior pituitary gland. These hormones regulate the
gonads (testes in males and ovaries in females) and therefore are called gonadotropins. In both males and
females, FSH stimulates gamete production and LH stimulates production of hormones by the gonads. An
increase in gonad hormone levels inhibits GnRH production through a negative feedback loop.
Regulation of the Male Reproductive System
In males, FSH stimulates the maturation of sperm cells. FSH production is inhibited by the hormone inhibin,
which is released by the testes. LH stimulates production of the sex hormones ( androgens) by the interstitial
cells of the testes and therefore is also called interstitial cell-stimulating hormone.
Themostwidelyknownandrogeninmalesistestosterone.Testosteronepromotestheproductionofspermand
masculinecharacteristics.Theadrenalcortexalsoproducessmallamountsoftestosteroneprecursor,although
the role of this additional hormone production is not fully understood.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1164
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1153
The Dangers of Synthetic Hormones
Figure 37.8 Professional baseball player Jason Giambi publically admitted to, and apologized for, his use of
anabolic steroids supplied by a trainer. (credit: Bryce Edwards)
Some athletes attempt to boost their performance by using artificial hormones that enhance muscle
performance. Anabolic steroids, a form of the male sex hormone testosterone, are one of the most widely
known performance-enhancing drugs. Steroids are used to help build muscle mass. Other hormones that
areusedtoenhanceathleticperformanceincludeerythropoietin,whichtriggerstheproductionofredblood
cells, and human growth hormone, which can help in building muscle mass. Most performance enhancing
drugs are illegal for nonmedical purposes. They are also banned by national and international governing
bodiesincludingtheInternationalOlympicCommittee,theU.S.OlympicCommittee,theNationalCollegiate
Athletic Association, the Major League Baseball, and the National Football League.
The side effects of synthetic hormones are often significant and nonreversible, and in some cases, fatal.
Androgens produce several complications such as liver dysfunctions and liver tumors, prostate gland
enlargement,difficultyurinating,prematureclosureofepiphysealcartilages,testicularatrophy,infertility,and
immunesystemdepression.Thephysiologicalstraincausedbythesesubstancesisoftengreaterthanwhat
thebodycanhandle,leadingtounpredictableanddangerouseffectsandlinkingtheirusetoheartattacks,
strokes, and impaired cardiac function.
Regulation of the Female Reproductive System
In females, FSH stimulates development of egg cells, called ova, which develop in structures called follicles.
Follicle cells produce the hormone inhibin, which inhibits FSH production. LH also plays a role in the
development of ova, induction of ovulation, and stimulation of estradiol and progesterone production by the
ovaries,asillustratedinFigure37.9.Estradiolandprogesteronearesteroidhormonesthatpreparethebodyfor
pregnancy.Estradiolproducessecondarysexcharacteristicsinfemales,whilebothestradiolandprogesterone
regulate the menstrual cycle.
PAGE: 1165
1154 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
Figure 37.9 Hormonal regulation of the female reproductive system involves hormones from the hypothalamus,
pituitary, and ovaries.
In addition to producing FSH and LH, the anterior portion of the pituitary gland also produces the hormone
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1166
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1155
prolactin (PRL) in females. Prolactin stimulates the production of milk by the mammary glands following
childbirth. Prolactin levels are regulated by the hypothalamic hormones prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH)
and prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH), which is now known to be dopamine. PRH stimulates the release of
prolactin and PIH inhibits it.
The posterior pituitary releases the hormone oxytocin, which stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth.
The uterine smooth muscles are not very sensitive to oxytocin until late in pregnancy when the number of
oxytocinreceptorsintheuteruspeaks.Stretchingoftissuesintheuterusandcervixstimulatesoxytocinrelease
during childbirth. Contractions increase in intensity as blood levels of oxytocin rise via a positive feedback
mechanismuntilthebirthiscomplete.Oxytocinalsostimulatesthecontractionofmyoepithelialcellsaroundthe
milk-producingmammaryglands.Asthesecellscontract,milkisforcedfromthesecretoryalveoliintomilkducts
andisejectedfromthebreastsinmilkejection(“let-down”)reflex.Oxytocinreleaseisstimulatedbythesuckling
of an infant, which triggers the synthesis of oxytocin in the hypothalamus and its release into circulation at the
posterior pituitary.
Hormonal Regulation of Metabolism
Bloodglucoselevelsvarywidelyoverthecourseofadayasperiodsoffoodconsumptionalternatewithperiods
offasting.Insulinandglucagonarethetwohormonesprimarilyresponsibleformaintaininghomeostasisofblood
glucose levels. Additional regulation is mediated by the thyroid hormones.
Regulation of Blood Glucose Levels by Insulin and Glucagon
Cellsofthebodyrequirenutrientsinordertofunction,andthesenutrientsareobtainedthroughfeeding.Inorder
tomanagenutrientintake,storingexcessintakeandutilizingreserveswhennecessary,thebodyuseshormones
tomoderateenergystores.Insulinisproducedbythebetacellsofthepancreas,whicharestimulatedtorelease
insulinasbloodglucoselevelsrise(forexample,afteramealisconsumed).Insulinlowersbloodglucoselevels
byenhancingtherateofglucoseuptakeandutilizationbytargetcells,whichuseglucoseforATPproduction.It
also stimulates the liver to convert glucose to glycogen, which is then stored by cells for later use. Insulin also
increases glucose transport into certain cells, such as muscle cells and the liver. This results from an insulin-
mediatedincreaseinthenumberofglucosetransporterproteinsincellmembranes,whichremoveglucosefrom
circulationbyfacilitateddiffusion.Asinsulinbindstoitstargetcellviainsulinreceptorsandsignaltransduction,it
triggersthecelltoincorporateglucosetransportproteinsintoitsmembrane.Thisallowsglucosetoenterthecell,
whereitcanbeusedasanenergysource.However,thisdoesnotoccurinallcells:somecells,includingthose
in the kidneys and brain, can access glucose without the use of insulin. Insulin also stimulates the conversion
of glucose to fat in adipocytes and the synthesis of proteins. These actions mediated by insulin cause blood
glucoseconcentrationstofall,calledahypoglycemic“lowsugar”effect,whichinhibitsfurtherinsulinreleasefrom
beta cells through a negative feedback loop.
This animation describes the role of insulin and the pancreas in diabetes. (This multimedia resource
will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66629/1.3/#eip-id1171750017253)
Impaired insulin function can lead to a condition called diabetes mellitus, the main symptoms of which are
illustrated in Figure 37.10. This can be caused by low levels of insulin production by the beta cells of the
pancreas,orbyreducedsensitivityoftissuecellstoinsulin.Thispreventsglucosefrombeingabsorbedbycells,
causinghighlevelsofbloodglucose,orhyperglycemia(highsugar).Highbloodglucoselevelsmakeitdifficult
forthekidneystorecoveralltheglucosefromnascenturine,resultinginglucosebeinglostinurine.Highglucose
levelsalsoresultinlesswaterbeingreabsorbedbythekidneys,causinghighamountsofurinetobeproduced;
this may result in dehydration. Over time, high blood glucose levels can cause nerve damage to the eyes and
peripheral body tissues, as well as damage to the kidneys and cardiovascular system. Oversecretion of insulin
can cause hypoglycemia, low blood glucose levels. This causes insufficient glucose availability to cells, often
leading to muscle weakness, and can sometimes cause unconsciousness or death if left untreated.
PAGE: 1167
1156 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
Figure 37.10The main symptoms of diabetes are shown. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Whenbloodglucoselevelsdeclinebelownormallevels,forexamplebetweenmealsorwhenglucoseisutilized
rapidlyduringexercise,thehormoneglucagonisreleasedfromthealphacellsofthepancreas.Glucagonraises
bloodglucoselevels,elicitingwhatiscalledahyperglycemiceffect,bystimulatingthebreakdownofglycogento
glucoseinskeletalmusclecellsandlivercellsinaprocesscalledglycogenolysis.Glucosecanthenbeutilized
asenergybymusclecellsandreleasedintocirculationbythelivercells.Glucagonalsostimulatesabsorptionof
aminoacidsfromthebloodbytheliver,whichthenconvertsthemtoglucose.Thisprocessofglucosesynthesis
iscalledgluconeogenesis.Glucagonalsostimulatesadiposecellstoreleasefattyacidsintotheblood.These
actionsmediatedbyglucagonresultinanincreaseinbloodglucoselevelstonormalhomeostaticlevels.Rising
blood glucose levels inhibit further glucagon release by the pancreas via a negative feedback mechanism. In
this way, insulin and glucagon work together to maintain homeostatic glucose levels, as shown inFigure 37.11.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1168
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1157
Figure 37.11Insulin and glucagon regulate blood glucose levels.
Pancreatic tumors may cause excess secretion of glucagon. Type I diabetes results from the failure of the
pancreas to produce insulin. Which of the following statement about these two conditions is true?
a. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will have the opposite effects on blood sugar levels.
b. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will both cause hyperglycemia.
c. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will both cause hypoglycemia.
d. Both pancreatic tumors and type I diabetes result in the inability of cells to take up glucose.
Regulation of Blood Glucose Levels by Thyroid Hormones
The basal metabolic rate, which is the amount of calories required by the body at rest, is determined by
two hormones produced by the thyroid gland: thyroxine, also known as tetraiodothyronine or T4, and
triiodothyronine, also known as T3. These hormones affect nearly every cell in the body except for the adult
brain, uterus, testes, blood cells, and spleen. They are transported across the plasma membrane of target
cells and bind to receptors on the mitochondria resulting in increased ATP production. In the nucleus, T3
and T4activate genes involved in energy production and glucose oxidation. This results in increased rates of
metabolism and body heat production, which is known as the hormone’s calorigenic effect.
T3 and T4 release from the thyroid gland is stimulated by thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is
producedbytheanteriorpituitary.TSHbindingatthereceptorsofthefollicleofthethyroidtriggerstheproduction
of T3 and T4 from a glycoprotein called thyroglobulin. Thyroglobulin is present in the follicles of the thyroid,
and is converted into thyroid hormones with the addition of iodine. Iodine is formed from iodide ions that are
activelytransportedintothethyroidfolliclefromthebloodstream.Aperoxidaseenzymethenattachestheiodine
tothetyrosineaminoacidfoundinthyroglobulin.T3hasthreeiodineionsattached,whileT4hasfouriodineions
attached. T3 and T4 are then released into the bloodstream, with T4 being released in much greater amounts
thanT3.AsT3ismoreactivethanT4andisresponsibleformostoftheeffects ofthyroidhormones, tissuesof
thebodyconvertT4toT3bytheremovalofaniodineion.MostofthereleasedT3andT4becomesattachedto
transportproteinsinthebloodstreamandisunabletocrosstheplasmamembraneofcells.Theseprotein-bound
moleculesareonlyreleasedwhenbloodlevelsoftheunattachedhormonebegintodecline.Inthisway,aweek’s
worthofreservehormoneismaintainedintheblood.IncreasedT3andT4levelsinthebloodinhibittherelease
of TSH, which results in lower T3and T4release from the thyroid.
The follicular cells of the thyroid require iodides (anions of iodine) in order to synthesize T3 and T4. Iodides
PAGE: 1169
1158 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
obtainedfromthedietareactivelytransportedintofolliclecellsresultinginaconcentrationthatisapproximately
30 times higher than in blood. The typical diet in North America provides more iodine than required due to the
addition of iodide to table salt. Inadequate iodine intake, which occurs in many developing countries, results in
aninabilitytosynthesizeT3andT4hormones.Thethyroidglandenlargesinaconditioncalledgoiter,whichis
causedbyoverproductionofTSHwithouttheformationofthyroidhormone.Thyroglobuliniscontainedinafluid
calledcolloid,andTSHstimulationresultsinhigherlevelsofcolloidaccumulationinthethyroid.Intheabsence
ofiodine,thisisnotconvertedtothyroidhormone,andcolloidbeginstoaccumulatemoreandmoreinthethyroid
gland, leading to goiter.
Disorders can arise from both the underproduction and overproduction of thyroid hormones. Hypothyroidism,
underproduction of the thyroid hormones, can cause a low metabolic rate leading to weight gain, sensitivity
to cold, and reduced mental activity, among other symptoms. In children, hypothyroidism can cause cretinism,
which can lead to mental retardation and growth defects. Hyperthyroidism, the overproduction of thyroid
hormones, can lead to an increased metabolic rate and its effects: weight loss, excess heat production,
sweating, and an increased heart rate. Graves’ disease is one example of a hyperthyroid condition.
Hormonal Control of Blood Calcium Levels
Regulation of blood calcium concentrations is important for generation of muscle contractions and nerve
impulses, which are electrically stimulated. If calcium levels get too high, membrane permeability to sodium
decreases and membranes become less responsive. If calcium levels get too low, membrane permeability to
sodium increases and convulsions or muscle spasms can result.
Blood calcium levels are regulated by parathyroid hormone (PTH), which is produced by the parathyroid
2+
glands, as illustrated in Figure 37.12. PTH is released in response to low blood Ca levels. PTH increases
2+
Ca levelsbytargetingtheskeleton,thekidneys,andtheintestine.Intheskeleton,PTHstimulatesosteoclasts,
2+
which causes bone to be reabsorbed, releasing Ca from bone into the blood. PTH also inhibits osteoblasts,
2+ 2+
reducingCa depositioninbone.Intheintestines,PTHincreasesdietaryCa absorption,andinthekidneys,
2+ 2+
PTHstimulatesreabsorptionoftheCA .WhilePTHactsdirectlyonthekidneystoincreaseCa reabsorption,
itseffectsontheintestineareindirect.PTHtriggerstheformationofcalcitriol,anactiveformofvitaminD,which
actsontheintestinestoincreaseabsorptionofdietarycalcium.PTHreleaseisinhibitedbyrisingbloodcalcium
levels.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1170
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1159
Figure 37.12 Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is released in response to low blood calcium levels. It increases blood
calcium levels by targeting the skeleton, the kidneys, and the intestine. (credit: modification of work by Mikael
Häggström)
Hyperparathyroidism results from an overproduction of parathyroid hormone. This results in excessive calcium
being removed from bones and introduced into blood circulation, producing structural weakness of the bones,
whichcanleadtodeformationandfractures,plusnervoussystemimpairmentduetohighbloodcalciumlevels.
Hypoparathyroidism,theunderproductionofPTH,resultsinextremelylowlevelsofbloodcalcium,whichcauses
impaired muscle function and may result in tetany (severe sustained muscle contraction).
The hormone calcitonin, which is produced by the parafollicular or C cells of the thyroid, has the opposite
effectonbloodcalciumlevelsasdoesPTH.Calcitonindecreasesbloodcalciumlevelsbyinhibitingosteoclasts,
stimulating osteoblasts, and stimulating calcium excretion by the kidneys. This results in calcium being added
to the bones to promote structural integrity. Calcitonin is most important in children (when it stimulates bone
growth), during pregnancy (when it reduces maternal bone loss), and during prolonged starvation (because it
reduces bone mass loss). In healthy nonpregnant, unstarved adults, the role of calcitonin is unclear.
Hormonal Regulation of Growth
Hormonalregulationisrequiredforthegrowthandreplicationofmostcellsinthebody.Growthhormone(GH),
produced by the anterior portion of the pituitary gland, accelerates the rate of protein synthesis, particularly in
skeletalmuscleandbones.Growthhormonehasdirectandindirectmechanismsofaction.Thefirstdirectaction
ofGHisstimulationoftriglyceridebreakdown(lipolysis)andreleaseintothebloodbyadipocytes.Thisresultsin
aswitchbymosttissuesfromutilizingglucoseasanenergysourcetoutilizingfattyacids.Thisprocessiscalled
a glucose-sparing effect. In another direct mechanism, GH stimulates glycogen breakdown in the liver; the
glycogenisthenreleasedintothebloodasglucose.Bloodglucoselevelsincreaseasmosttissuesareutilizing
fattyacidsinsteadofglucosefortheirenergyneeds.TheGHmediatedincreaseinbloodglucoselevelsiscalled
adiabetogenic effectbecause it is similar to the high blood glucose levels seen in diabetes mellitus.
The indirect mechanism of GH action is mediated by insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) or somatomedins,
which are a family of growth-promoting proteins produced by the liver, which stimulates tissue growth. IGFs
PAGE: 1171
1160 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
stimulatetheuptakeofaminoacidsfromtheblood,allowingtheformationofnewproteins,particularlyinskeletal
musclecells,cartilagecells,andothertargetcells,asshowninFigure37.13.Thisisespeciallyimportantafter
ameal,whenglucoseandaminoacidconcentrationlevelsarehighintheblood.GHlevelsareregulatedbytwo
hormones produced by the hypothalamus. GH release is stimulated by growth hormone-releasing hormone
(GHRH)and is inhibited bygrowth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GHIH), also called somatostatin.
Figure37.13Growthhormonedirectlyacceleratestherateofproteinsynthesisinskeletalmuscleandbones.Insulin-
likegrowthfactor1(IGF-1)isactivatedbygrowthhormoneandalsoallowsformationofnewproteinsinmusclecells
and bone. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
A balanced production of growth hormone is critical for proper development. Underproduction of GH in adults
doesnotappeartocauseanyabnormalities,butinchildrenitcanresultinpituitarydwarfism,inwhichgrowthis
reduced.Pituitarydwarfismischaracterizedbysymmetricbodyformation.Insomecases,individualsareunder
30 inches in height. Oversecretion of growth hormone can lead to gigantism in children, causing excessive
growth. In some documented cases, individuals can reach heights of over eight feet. In adults, excessive GH
canleadtoacromegaly,aconditioninwhichthereisenlargementofbonesintheface,hands,andfeetthatare
still capable of growth.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1172
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1161
Hormonal Regulation of Stress
Whenathreatordangerisperceived,thebodyrespondsbyreleasinghormonesthatwillreadyitforthe“fight-
or-flight” response. The effects of this response are familiar to anyone who has been in a stressful situation:
increased heart rate, dry mouth, and hair standing up.
Fight-or-Flight Response
Interactions of the endocrine hormones have evolved to ensure the body’s internal environment remains
stable.Stressorsarestimulithatdisrupthomeostasis.Thesympatheticdivisionofthevertebrateautonomic
nervous system has evolved the fight-or-flight response to counter stress-induced disruptions of
homeostasis. In the initial alarm phase, the sympathetic nervous system stimulates an increase in energy
levels through increased blood glucose levels. This prepares the body for physical activity that may be
required to respond to stress: to either fight for survival or to flee from danger.
However,somestresses,suchasillnessorinjury,canlastforalongtime.Glycogenreserves,whichprovide
energyintheshort-termresponsetostress,areexhaustedafterseveralhoursandcannotmeetlong-term
energyneeds.Ifglycogenreservesweretheonlyenergysourceavailable,neuralfunctioningcouldnotbe
maintainedoncethereservesbecamedepletedduetothenervoussystem’shighrequirementforglucose.
In this situation, the body has evolved a response to counter long-term stress through the actions of the
glucocorticoids,whichensurethatlong-termenergyrequirementscanbemet.Theglucocorticoidsmobilize
lipid and protein reserves, stimulate gluconeogenesis, conserve glucose for use by neural tissue, and
stimulatetheconservationofsaltsandwater.Themechanismstomaintainhomeostasisthataredescribed
herearethoseobservedinthehumanbody.However,thefight-or-flightresponseexistsinsomeforminall
vertebrates.
The sympathetic nervous system regulates the stress response via the hypothalamus. Stressful stimuli cause
the hypothalamus to signal the adrenal medulla (which mediates short-term stress responses) via nerve
impulses, and the adrenal cortex, which mediates long-term stress responses, via the hormone
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), which is produced by the anterior pituitary.
Short-term Stress Response
Whenpresentedwithastressfulsituation,thebodyrespondsbycallingforthereleaseofhormonesthatprovide
a burst of energy. The hormones epinephrine (also known as adrenaline) and norepinephrine (also known
as noradrenaline) are released by the adrenal medulla. How do these hormones provide a burst of energy?
Epinephrine and norepinephrine increase blood glucose levels by stimulating the liver and skeletal muscles to
break down glycogen and by stimulating glucose release by liver cells. Additionally, these hormones increase
oxygenavailabilitytocellsbyincreasingtheheartrateanddilatingthebronchioles.Thehormonesalsoprioritize
body function by increasing blood supply to essential organs such as the heart, brain, and skeletal muscles,
while restricting blood flow to organs not in immediate need, such as the skin, digestive system, and kidneys.
Epinephrine and norepinephrine are collectively called catecholamines.
WatchthisDiscoveryChannelanimation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/adrenaline)describingtheflight-or-
flight response.
Long-term Stress Response
Long-term stress response differs from short-term stress response. The body cannot sustain the bursts of
energymediatedbyepinephrineandnorepinephrineforlongtimes.Instead,otherhormonescomeintoplay.In
PAGE: 1173
1162 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
a long-term stress response, the hypothalamus triggers the release of ACTH from the anterior pituitary gland.
Theadrenalcortexisstimulated byACTHtoreleasesteroidhormonescalledcorticosteroids.Corticosteroids
turn on transcription of certain genes in the nuclei of target cells. They change enzyme concentrations in the
cytoplasmandaffectcellularmetabolism.Therearetwomaincorticosteroids:glucocorticoidssuchascortisol,
andmineralocorticoidssuchasaldosterone.Thesehormonestargetthebreakdownoffatintofattyacidsinthe
adipose tissue. The fatty acids are released into the bloodstream for other tissues to use for ATP production.
Theglucocorticoidsprimarilyaffectglucosemetabolismbystimulatingglucosesynthesis.Glucocorticoidsalso
have anti-inflammatory properties through inhibition of the immune system. For example, cortisone is used as
an anti-inflammatory medication; however, it cannot be used long term as it increases susceptibility to disease
due to its immune-suppressing effects.
Mineralocorticoidsfunctiontoregulateionandwaterbalanceofthebody.Thehormonealdosteronestimulates
the reabsorption of water and sodium ions in the kidney, which results in increased blood pressure and volume.
Hypersecretion of glucocorticoids can cause a condition known as Cushing’s disease, characterized by a
shiftingoffatstorageareasofthebody.Thiscancausetheaccumulationofadiposetissueinthefaceandneck,
andexcessiveglucoseintheblood.HyposecretionofthecorticosteroidscancauseAddison’sdisease,which
may result in bronzing of the skin, hypoglycemia, and low electrolyte levels in the blood.
37.4 | Regulation of Hormone Production
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how hormone production is regulated
• Discuss the different stimuli that control hormone levels in the body
Hormone production and release are primarily controlled by negative feedback. In negative feedback systems,
a stimulus elicits the release of a substance; once the substance reaches a certain level, it sends a signal that
stopsfurtherreleaseofthesubstance.Inthisway,theconcentrationofhormonesinbloodismaintainedwithin
a narrow range. For example, the anterior pituitary signals the thyroid to release thyroid hormones. Increasing
levels of these hormones in the blood then give feedback to the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary to inhibit
further signaling to the thyroid gland, as illustrated in Figure 37.14. There are three mechanisms by which
endocrine glands are stimulated to synthesize and release hormones: humoral stimuli, hormonal stimuli, and
neural stimuli.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1174
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1163
Figure37.14TheanteriorpituitarystimulatesthethyroidglandtoreleasethyroidhormonesT3andT4.Increasing
levels of these hormones in the blood results in feedback to the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary to inhibit
further signaling to the thyroid gland. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland is overactive. Hypothyroidism is a condition in
whichthethyroidglandisunderactive.Whichoftheconditionsarethefollowingtwopatientsmostlikelyto
have?
Patient A has symptoms including weight gain, cold sensitivity, low heart rate, and fatigue.
Patient B has symptoms including weight loss, profuse sweating, increased heart rate, and difficulty
sleeping.
Humoral Stimuli
The term “humoral” is derived from the term “humor,” which refers to bodily fluids such as blood. A humoral
stimulus refers to the control of hormone release in response to changes in extracellular fluids such as blood
ortheionconcentrationintheblood.Forexample,ariseinbloodglucoselevelstriggersthepancreaticrelease
ofinsulin.Insulincausesbloodglucoselevelstodrop,whichsignalsthepancreastostopproducinginsulinina
negative feedback loop.
Hormonal Stimuli
Hormonal stimuli refers tothe releaseofahormoneinresponsetoanother hormone. Anumberofendocrine
glandsreleasehormoneswhenstimulated byhormonesreleasedbyotherendocrineglands. Forexample, the
hypothalamusproduceshormonesthatstimulatetheanteriorportionofthepituitarygland.Theanteriorpituitary
PAGE: 1175
1164 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
in turn releases hormones that regulate hormone production by other endocrine glands. The anterior pituitary
releases the thyroid-stimulating hormone, which then stimulates the thyroid gland to produce the hormones T3
and T4. As blood concentrations of T3 and T4 rise, they inhibit both the pituitary and the hypothalamus in a
negative feedback loop.
Neural Stimuli
Insomecases,thenervoussystemdirectlystimulatesendocrineglandstoreleasehormones,whichisreferred
toasneuralstimuli.Recallthatinashort-termstressresponse,thehormonesepinephrineandnorepinephrine
areimportantforprovidingtheburstsofenergyrequiredforthebodytorespond.Here,neuronalsignalingfrom
the sympathetic nervous system directly stimulates the adrenal medulla to release the hormones epinephrine
and norepinephrine in response to stress.
37.5 | Endocrine Glands
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the role of different glands in the endocrine system
• Explain how the different glands work together to maintain homeostasis
Both the endocrine and nervous systems use chemical signals to communicate and regulate the body's
physiology. The endocrine system releases hormones that act on target cells to regulate development, growth,
energy metabolism, reproduction, and many behaviors. The nervous system releases neurotransmitters or
neurohormonesthatregulateneurons,musclecells,andendocrinecells.Becausetheneuronscanregulatethe
releaseofhormones,thenervousandendocrinesystemsworkinacoordinatedmannertoregulatethebody's
physiology.
Hypothalamic-Pituitary Axis
The hypothalamus in vertebrates integrates the endocrine and nervous systems. The hypothalamus is an
endocrineorganlocatedinthediencephalonofthebrain.Itreceivesinputfromthebodyandotherbrainareas
and initiates endocrine responses to environmental changes. The hypothalamus acts as an endocrine organ,
synthesizing hormones and transporting them along axons to the posterior pituitary gland. It synthesizes and
secretes regulatory hormonesthat control theendocrinecellsintheanterior pituitary gland. Thehypothalamus
contains autonomic centers that control endocrine cells in the adrenal medulla via neuronal control.
The pituitary gland, sometimes called the hypophysis or “master gland” is located at the base of the brain in
the sella turcica, a groove of the sphenoid bone of the skull, illustrated in Figure 37.15. It is attached to the
hypothalamusviaastalkcalledthepituitarystalk(orinfundibulum).Theanteriorportionofthepituitaryglandis
regulatedbyreleasingorrelease-inhibitinghormonesproducedbythehypothalamus,andtheposteriorpituitary
receivessignalsvianeurosecretorycellstoreleasehormonesproducedbythehypothalamus.Thepituitaryhas
twodistinctregions—theanteriorpituitaryandtheposteriorpituitary—whichbetweenthemsecreteninedifferent
peptide or protein hormones. The posterior lobe of the pituitary gland contains axons of the hypothalamic
neurons.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1176
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1165
Figure37.15Thepituitaryglandislocatedat(a)thebaseofthebrainand(b)connectedtothehypothalamusbythe
pituitary stalk. (credit a: modification of work by NCI; credit b: modification of work by Gray’s Anatomy)
Anterior Pituitary
The anterior pituitary gland, or adenohypophysis, is surrounded by a capillary network that extends from the
hypothalamus, down along the infundibulum, and to the anterior pituitary. This capillary network is a part of
the hypophyseal portal system that carries substances from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary and
hormonesfromtheanteriorpituitaryintothecirculatorysystem.Aportalsystemcarriesbloodfromonecapillary
network to another; therefore, the hypophyseal portal system allows hormones produced by the hypothalamus
to be carried directly to the anterior pituitary without first entering the circulatory system.
The anterior pituitary produces seven hormones: growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid-stimulating
hormone (TSH), melanin-stimulating hormone (MSH), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), and luteinizing hormone (LH). Anterior pituitary hormones are sometimes referred to as tropic
hormones, because they control the functioning of other organs. While these hormones are produced by the
anterior pituitary, their production is controlled by regulatory hormones produced by the hypothalamus. These
regulatory hormones can be releasing hormones or inhibiting hormones, causing more or less of the anterior
pituitaryhormonestobesecreted.Thesetravelfromthehypothalamusthroughthehypophysealportalsystem
to the anterior pituitary where they exert their effect. Negative feedback then regulates how much of these
regulatory hormones are released and how much anterior pituitary hormone is secreted.
Posterior Pituitary
The posterior pituitary is significantly different in structure from the anterior pituitary. It is a part of the brain,
extending down from the hypothalamus, and contains mostly nerve fibers and neuroglial cells, which support
axonsthatextendfromthehypothalamustotheposteriorpituitary.Theposteriorpituitaryandtheinfundibulum
together are referred to as the neurohypophysis.
Thehormonesantidiuretichormone(ADH),alsoknownasvasopressin,andoxytocinareproducedbyneurons
in the hypothalamus and transported within these axons along the infundibulum to the posterior pituitary. They
are released into the circulatory system via neural signaling from the hypothalamus. These hormones are
considered to be posterior pituitary hormones, even though they are produced by the hypothalamus, because
that is where they are released into the circulatory system. The posterior pituitary itself does not produce
hormones,butinsteadstoreshormonesproducedbythehypothalamusandreleasesthemintothebloodstream.
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just below the larynx and in front of the trachea, as shown in Figure
37.16. It is a butterfly-shaped gland with two lobes that are connected by the isthmus. It has a dark red color
duetoitsextensivevascularsystem.Whenthethyroidswellsduetodysfunction,itcanbefeltundertheskinof
the neck.
PAGE: 1177
1166 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
Figure 37.16This illustration shows the location of the thyroid gland.
The thyroid gland is made up of many spherical thyroid follicles, which are lined with a simple cuboidal
epithelium.Thesefolliclescontainaviscousfluid,calledcolloid,whichstorestheglycoproteinthyroglobulin,the
precursortothethyroidhormones.Thefolliclesproducehormonesthatcanbestoredinthecolloidorreleased
into the surrounding capillary network for transport to the rest of the body via the circulatory system.
Thyroidfolliclecellssynthesizethehormonethyroxine,whichisalsoknownasT4becauseitcontainsfouratoms
of iodine, and triiodothyronine, also known as T3 because it contains three atoms of iodine. Follicle cells are
stimulatedtoreleasestoredT3andT4bythyroidstimulatinghormone(TSH),whichisproducedbytheanterior
pituitary. These thyroid hormones increase the rates of mitochondrial ATP production.
A third hormone, calcitonin, is produced by parafollicular cells of the thyroid either releasing hormones or
inhibiting hormones. Calcitonin release is not controlled by TSH, but instead is released when calcium ion
concentrations in the blood rise. Calcitonin functions to help regulate calcium concentrations in body fluids.
It acts in the bones to inhibit osteoclast activity and in the kidneys to stimulate excretion of calcium. The
combination of these two events lowers body fluid levels of calcium.
Parathyroid Glands
Most people have four parathyroid glands; however, the number can vary from two to six. These glands are
located on the posterior surface of the thyroid gland, as shown in Figure 37.17. Normally, there is a superior
gland and an inferior gland associated with each of the thyroid’s two lobes. Each parathyroid gland is covered
by connective tissue and contains many secretory cells that are associated with a capillary network.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1178
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1167
Figure37.17Theparathyroidglandsarelocatedontheposteriorofthethyroidgland.(credit:modificationofworkby
NCI)
Theparathyroidglandsproduceparathyroidhormone(PTH).PTHincreasesbloodcalciumconcentrationswhen
2+
calcium ion levels fall below normal. PTH (1) enhances reabsorption of Ca by the kidneys, (2) stimulates
osteoclast activity and inhibits osteoblast activity, and (3) it stimulates synthesis and secretion of calcitriol by
2+
the kidneys, which enhances Ca absorption by the digestive system. PTH is produced by chief cells of the
2+
parathyroid. PTH and calcitonin work in opposition to one another to maintain homeostatic Ca levels in body
fluids.Anothertypeofcells,oxyphilcells,existintheparathyroidbuttheirfunctionisnotknown.Thesehormones
encourage bone growth, muscle mass, and blood cell formation in children and women.
Adrenal Glands
The adrenal glands are associated with the kidneys; one gland is located on top of each kidney as illustrated
in Figure 37.18. The adrenal glands consist of an outer adrenal cortex and an inner adrenal medulla. These
regions secrete different hormones.
Figure 37.18The location of the adrenal glands on top of the kidneys is shown. (credit: modification of work by NCI)
Adrenal Cortex
Theadrenalcortexismadeupoflayersofepithelialcellsandassociatedcapillarynetworks.Theselayersform
three distinct regions: an outer zona glomerulosa that produces mineralocorticoids, a middle zona fasciculata
that produces glucocorticoids, and an inner zona reticularis that produces androgens.
+
The main mineralocorticoid is aldosterone, which regulates the concentration of Na ions in urine, sweat,
PAGE: 1179
1168 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
pancreas, and saliva. Aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex is stimulated by a decrease in blood
concentrations of sodium ions, blood volume, or blood pressure, or by an increase in blood potassium levels.
The three main glucocorticoids are cortisol, corticosterone, and cortisone. The glucocorticoids stimulate the
synthesis of glucose and gluconeogenesis (converting a non-carbohydrate to glucose) by liver cells and they
promote the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue. These hormones increase blood glucose levels to
maintainlevelswithinanormalrangebetweenmeals.ThesehormonesaresecretedinresponsetoACTHand
levels are regulated by negative feedback.
Androgens are sex hormones that promote masculinity. They are produced in small amounts by the adrenal
cortexinbothmalesandfemales.Theydonotaffectsexualcharacteristicsandmaysupplementsexhormones
released from the gonads.
Adrenal Medulla
The adrenal medulla contains large, irregularly shaped cells that are closely associated with blood vessels.
These cells are innervated by preganglionic autonomic nerve fibers from the central nervous system.
The adrenal medulla contains two types of secretory cells: one that produces epinephrine (adrenaline) and
another that produces norepinephrine (noradrenaline). Epinephrine is the primary adrenal medulla hormone
accountingfor75to80percentofitssecretions.Epinephrineandnorepinephrineincreaseheartrate,breathing
rate, cardiac muscle contractions, blood pressure, and blood glucose levels. They also accelerate the
breakdown of glucose in skeletal muscles and stored fats in adipose tissue.
The release of epinephrine and norepinephrine is stimulated by neural impulses from the sympathetic nervous
system. Secretion of these hormones is stimulated by acetylcholine release from preganglionic sympathetic
fibers innervating the adrenal medulla. These neural impulses originate from the hypothalamus in response to
stress to prepare the body for the fight-or-flight response.
Pancreas
The pancreas, illustrated in Figure 37.19, is an elongated organ that is located between the stomach and
the proximal portion of the small intestine. It contains both exocrine cells that excrete digestive enzymes and
endocrine cells that release hormones. It is sometimes referred to as a heterocrine gland because it has both
endocrine and exocrine functions.
Figure 37.19 The pancreas is found underneath the stomach and points toward the spleen. (credit: modification of
work by NCI)
TheendocrinecellsofthepancreasformclusterscalledpancreaticisletsortheisletsofLangerhans,asvisible
in the micrograph shown in Figure 37.20. The pancreatic islets contain two primary cell types: alpha cells,
which produce the hormone glucagon, and beta cells, which produce the hormone insulin. These hormones
regulate blood glucose levels. As blood glucose levels decline, alpha cells release glucagon to raise the blood
glucoselevelsbyincreasingratesofglycogenbreakdownandglucosereleasebytheliver.Whenbloodglucose
levels rise, such as after a meal, beta cells release insulin to lower blood glucose levels by increasing the rate
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1180
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1169
of glucose uptake in most body cells, and by increasing glycogen synthesis in skeletal muscles and the liver.
Together, glucagon and insulin regulate blood glucose levels.
Figure 37.20 The islets of Langerhans are clusters of endocrine cells found in the pancreas; they stain lighter than
surrounding cells. (credit: modification of work by Muhammad T. Tabiin, Christopher P. White, Grant Morahan, and
Bernard E. Tuch; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Pineal Gland
The pineal gland produces melatonin. The rate of melatonin production is affected by the photoperiod.
Collaterals from the visual pathways innervate the pineal gland. During the day photoperiod, little melatonin
is produced; however, melatonin production increases during the dark photoperiod (night). In some mammals,
melatoninhasaninhibitoryaffectonreproductivefunctionsbydecreasingproductionandmaturationofsperm,
oocytes, and reproductive organs. Melatonin is an effective antioxidant, protecting the CNS from free radicals
such as nitric oxide and hydrogen peroxide. Lastly, melatonin is involved in biological rhythms, particularly
circadian rhythms such as the sleep-wake cycle and eating habits.
Gonads
The gonads—the male testes and female ovaries—produce steroid hormones. The testes produce androgens,
testosterone being the most prominent, which allow for the development of secondary sex characteristics and
the production of sperm cells. The ovaries produce estradiol and progesterone, which cause secondary sex
characteristics and prepare the body for childbirth.
Endocrine Glands and their Associated Hormones
Endocrine Associated
Effect
Gland Hormones
releasing and regulate hormone release from pituitary gland; produce oxytocin;
inhibiting hormones produce uterine contractions and milk secretion in females
Hypothalamus
antidiuretic hormone water reabsorption from kidneys; vasoconstriction to increase blood
(ADH) pressure
growth hormone
promotes growth of body tissues, protein synthesis; metabolic functions
(GH)
prolactin (PRL) promotes milk production
thyroid stimulating
Pituitary stimulates thyroid hormone release
hormone (TSH)
(Anterior)
adrenocorticotropic
stimulates hormone release by adrenal cortex, glucocorticoids
hormone (ACTH)
follicle-stimulating stimulates gamete production (both ova and sperm); secretion of
hormone (FSH) estradiol
Table 37.1
PAGE: 1181
1170 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
Endocrine Glands and their Associated Hormones
Endocrine Associated
Effect
Gland Hormones
luteinizing hormone stimulates androgen production by gonads; ovulation, secretion of
(LH) progesterone
melanocyte-
stimulates melanocytes of the skin increasing melanin pigment
stimulating hormone
production.
(MSH)
antidiuretic hormone
stimulates water reabsorption by kidneys
(ADH)
Pituitary
(Posterior) stimulates uterine contractions during childbirth; milk ejection;
oxytocin stimulates ductus deferens and prostate gland contraction during
emission
thyroxine,
stimulate and maintain metabolism; growth and development
triiodothyronine
Thyroid
calcitonin reduces blood Ca 2+ levels
parathyroid
Parathyroid increases blood Ca 2+ levels
hormone (PTH)
aldosterone increases blood Na + levels; increases K + secretion
Adrenal
cortisol,
(Cortex)
corticosterone, increase blood glucose levels; anti-inflammatory effects
cortisone
Adrenal epinephrine, stimulate fight-or-flight response; increase blood gluclose levels;
(Medulla) norepinephrine increase metabolic activities
insulin reduces blood glucose levels
Pancreas
glucagon increases blood glucose levels
Pineal gland melatonin regulates some biological rhythms and protects CNS from free radicals
regulate, promote, increase or maintain sperm production; male
Testes androgens
secondary sexual characteristics
estrogen promotes uterine lining growth; female secondary sexual characteristics
Ovaries
progestins promote and maintain uterine lining growth
Table 37.1
Organs with Secondary Endocrine Functions
Thereareseveralorganswhoseprimaryfunctionsarenon-endocrinebutthatalsopossessendocrinefunctions.
These include the heart, kidneys, intestines, thymus, gonads, and adipose tissue.
The heart possesses endocrine cells in the walls of the atria that are specialized cardiac muscle cells. These
cellsreleasethehormoneatrialnatriureticpeptide(ANP)inresponsetoincreasedbloodvolume.Highblood
volume causes the cells to be stretched, resulting in hormone release. ANP acts on the kidneys to reduce the
+ +
reabsorptionofNa ,causingNa andwatertobeexcretedintheurine.ANPalsoreducestheamountsofrenin
releasedbythekidneysandaldosteronereleasedbytheadrenalcortex,furtherpreventingtheretentionofwater.
+
Inthisway,ANPcausesareductioninbloodvolumeandbloodpressure,andreducestheconcentrationofNa
in the blood.
The gastrointestinal tract produces several hormones that aid in digestion. The endocrine cells are located in
themucosaoftheGItractthroughoutthestomachandsmallintestine.Someofthehormonesproducedinclude
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1182
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1171
gastrin, secretin, and cholecystokinin, which are secreted in the presence of food, and some of which act on
other organssuchasthepancreas, gallbladder,andliver.Theytrigger thereleaseofgastric juices, whichhelp
to break down and digest food in the GI tract.
While the adrenal glands associated with the kidneys are major endocrine glands, the kidneys themselves
also possess endocrine function. Renin is released in response to decreased blood volume or pressure and
is part of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system that leads to the release of aldosterone. Aldosterone then
+
causestheretentionofNa andwater,raisingbloodvolume.Thekidneysalsoreleasecalcitriol,whichaidsinthe
2+
absorptionofCa andphosphateions.Erythropoietin (EPO)isaproteinhormonethattriggerstheformation
of red blood cells in the bone marrow. EPO is released in response to low oxygen levels. Because red blood
cellsareoxygencarriers,increasedproductionresultsingreateroxygendeliverythroughoutthebody.EPOhas
been used by athletes to improve performance, as greater oxygen delivery to muscle cells allows for greater
endurance. Because red blood cells increase the viscosity of blood, artificially high levels of EPO can cause
severe health risks.
The thymus is found behind the sternum; it is most prominent in infants, becoming smaller in size through
adulthood.Thethymusproduceshormonesreferredtoasthymosins,whichcontributetothedevelopmentofthe
immune response.
Adipose tissue is a connective tissue found throughout the body. It produces the hormone leptin in response
to food intake. Leptin increases the activity of anorexigenic neurons and decreases that of orexigenic neurons,
producing a feeling of satiety after eating, thus affecting appetite and reducing the urge for further eating.
Leptin is also associated with reproduction. It must be present for GnRH and gonadotropin synthesis to occur.
Extremelythinfemalesmayenterpubertylate;however,ifadiposelevelsincrease,moreleptinwillbeproduced,
improving fertility.
PAGE: 1183
1172 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
KEY TERMS
acromegaly condition caused by overproduction of GH in adults
Addison’s disease disorder caused by the hyposecretion of corticosteroids
adenylate cyclase an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to cyclic AMP
adrenal cortex outer portion of adrenal glands that produces corticosteroids
adrenal gland endocrine glands associated with the kidneys
adrenal medulla inner portion of adrenal glands that produces epinephrine and norepinephrine
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) hormone released by the anterior pituitary, which stimulates the
adrenal cortex to release corticosteroids during the long-term stress response
aldosterone steroid hormone produced by the adrenal cortex that stimulates the reabsorption of Na + from
+
extracellular fluids and secretion of K
alpha cell endocrine cell of the pancreatic islets that produces the hormone glucagon
amino acid-derived hormone hormone derived from amino acids
androgen male sex hormone such as testosterone
anterior pituitary portion of the pituitary gland that produces six hormones; also called adenohypophysis
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) hormone produced by the hypothalamus and released by the posterior pituitary
that increases water reabsorption by the kidneys
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) hormone produced by the heart to reduce blood volume, pressure, and Na +
concentration
beta cell endocrine cell of the pancreatic islets that produces the hormone insulin
calcitonin hormoneproducedbytheparafollicularcellsofthethyroidglandthatfunctionstolowerbloodCa 2+
levels and promote bone growth
colloid fluid inside the thyroid gland that contains the glycoprotein thyroglobulin
corticosteroid hormone released by the adrenal cortex in response to long-term stress
cortisol glucocorticoid produced in response to stress
Cushing’s disease disorder caused by the hypersecretion of glucocorticoids
diabetes insipidus disorder caused by underproduction of ADH
diabetes mellitus disorder caused by low levels of insulin activity
diabetogenic effect effect of GH that causes blood glucose levels to rise similar to diabetes mellitus
down-regulation a decrease in the number of hormone receptors in response to increased hormone levels
endocrine gland gland that secretes hormones into the surrounding interstitial fluid, which then diffuse into
blood and are carried to various organs and tissues within the body
epinephrine hormone released by the adrenal medulla in response to a short term stress
erythropoietin (EPO) hormone produced by the kidneys to stimulate red blood cell production in the bone
marrow
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1184
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1173
estrogens agroupofsteroidhormones,includingestradiolandseveralothers,thatareproducedbytheovaries
and elicit secondary sex characteristics in females as well as control the maturation of the ova
first messenger the hormone that binds to a plasma membrane hormone receptor to trigger a signal
transduction pathway
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) hormone produced by the anterior pituitary that stimulates gamete
production
G-protein a membrane protein activated by the hormone first messenger to activate formation of cyclic AMP
gigantism condition caused by overproduction of GH in children
glucagon hormone produced by the alpha cells of the pancreas in response to low blood sugar; functions to
raise blood sugar levels
glucocorticoid corticosteroid that affects glucose metabolism
gluconeogenesis synthesis of glucose from amino acids
glucose-sparing effect effect of GH that causes tissues to use fatty acids instead of glucose as an energy
source
glycogenolysis breakdown of glycogen into glucose
goiter enlargement of the thyroid gland caused by insufficient dietary iodine levels
gonadotropin hormone that regulates the gonads, including FSH and LH
growth hormone (GH) hormone produced by the anterior pituitary that promotes protein synthesis and body
growth
growth hormone-inhibiting hormone (GHIH) hormone produced by the hypothalamus that inhibits growth
hormone production, also called somatostatin
growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) hormone released by the hypothalamus that triggers the
release of GH
hormonal stimuli release of a hormone in response to another hormone
hormone receptor the cellular protein that binds to a hormone
humoral stimuli controlofhormonereleaseinresponsetochangesinextracellularfluidssuchasbloodorthe
ion concentration in the blood
hyperglycemia high blood sugar level
hyperthyroidism overactivity of the thyroid gland
hypoglycemia low blood sugar level
hypophyseal portal system system of blood vessels that carries hormones from the hypothalamus to the
anterior pituitary
hypothyroidism underactivity of the thyroid gland
insulin hormoneproducedbythebetacellsofthepancreasinresponsetohighbloodglucoselevels;functions
to lower blood glucose levels
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) growth-promoting protein produced by the liver
intracellular hormone receptor a hormone receptor in the cytoplasm or nucleus of a cell
PAGE: 1185
1174 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
islets of Langerhans (pancreatic islets) endocrine cells of the pancreas
isthmus tissue mass that connects the two lobes of the thyroid gland
leptin hormone produced by adipose tissue that promotes feelings of satiety and reduces hunger
lipid-derived hormone hormone derived mostly from cholesterol
mineralocorticoid corticosteroid that affects ion and water balance
neural stimuli stimulation of endocrine glands by the nervous system
norepinephrine hormone released by the adrenal medulla in response to a short-term stress hormone
production by the gonads
osmoreceptor receptor in the hypothalamus that monitors the concentration of electrolytes in the blood
oxytocin hormonereleasedbytheposteriorpituitarytostimulateuterinecontractionsduringchildbirthandmilk
let-down in the mammary glands
pancreas organlocatedbetweenthestomachandthesmallintestinethatcontainsexocrineandendocrinecells
parafollicular cell thyroid cell that produces the hormone calcitonin
parathyroid gland gland located on the surface of the thyroid that produces parathyroid hormone
parathyroid hormone (PTH) hormone produced by the parathyroid glands in response to low blood Ca 2+
2+
levels; functions to raise blood Ca levels
peptide hormone hormone composed of a polypeptide chain
phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzyme that deactivates cAMP, stopping hormone activity
pituitary dwarfism condition caused by underproduction of GH in children
pituitary gland endocrineglandlocatedatthebaseofthebraincomposedofananteriorandposteriorregion;
also called hypophysis
pituitary stalk (also, infundibulum) stalk that connects the pituitary gland to the hypothalamus
plasma membrane hormone receptor a hormone receptor on the surface of the plasma membrane of a cell
posterior pituitary extension of the brain that releases hormones produced by the hypothalamus; along with
the infundibulum, it is also referred to as the neurohypophysis
prolactin (PRL) hormone produced by the anterior pituitary that stimulates milk production
prolactin-inhibiting hormone hormone produced by the hypothalamus that inhibits the release of prolactin
prolactin-releasing hormone hormone produced by the hypothalamus that stimulates the release of prolactin
renin enzyme produced by the juxtaglomerular apparatus of the kidneys that reacts with angiotensinogen to
cause the release of aldosterone
thymus glandlocatedbehindthesternumthatproducesthymosinhormonesthatcontributetothedevelopment
of the immune system
thyroglobulin glycoprotein found in the thyroid that is converted into thyroid hormone
thyroid gland endocrine gland located in the neck that produces thyroid hormones thyroxine and
triiodothyronine
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) hormoneproducedbytheanteriorpituitarythatcontrolsthereleaseofT3
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1186
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1175
and T4from the thyroid gland
thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine, T4) thyroidhormonecontaining4iodinesthatcontrolsthebasalmetabolicrate
triiodothyronine (T3) thyroid hormone containing 3 iodines that controls the basal metabolic rate
up-regulation an increase in the number of hormone receptors in response to increased hormone levels
CHAPTER SUMMARY
37.1Types of Hormones
There are three basic types of hormones: lipid-derived, amino acid-derived, and peptide. Lipid-derived
hormones are structurally similar to cholesterol and include steroid hormones such as estradiol and
testosterone. Amino acid-derived hormones are relatively small molecules and include the adrenal hormones
epinephrine and norepinephrine. Peptide hormones are polypeptide chains or proteins and include the pituitary
hormones, antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin), and oxytocin.
37.2How Hormones Work
Hormones cause cellular changes by binding to receptors on target cells. The number of receptors on a target
cell can increase or decrease in response to hormone activity. Hormones can affect cells directly through
intracellular hormone receptors or indirectly through plasma membrane hormone receptors.
Lipid-derived (soluble) hormones can enter the cell by diffusing across the plasma membrane and binding to
DNA to regulate gene transcription and to change the cell’s activities by inducing production of proteins that
affect, in general, the long-term structure and function of the cell. Lipid insoluble hormones bind to receptors on
the plasma membrane surface and trigger a signaling pathway to change the cell’s activities by inducing
production of various cell products that affect the cell in the short-term. The hormone is called a first messenger
and the cellular component is called a second messenger. G-proteins activate the second messenger (cyclic
AMP), triggering the cellular response. Response to hormone binding is amplified as the signaling pathway
progresses. Cellular responses to hormones include the production of proteins and enzymes and altered
membrane permeability.
37.3Regulation of Body Processes
Water levels in the body are controlled by antidiuretic hormone (ADH), which is produced in the hypothalamus
and triggers the reabsorption of water by the kidneys. Underproduction of ADH can cause diabetes insipidus.
+
Aldosterone, a hormone produced by the adrenal cortex of the kidneys, enhances Na reabsorption from the
extracellular fluids and subsequent water reabsorption by diffusion. The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
is one way that aldosterone release is controlled.
The reproductive system is controlled by the gonadotropins follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH), which are produced by the pituitary gland. Gonadotropin release is controlled by the
hypothalamic hormone gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). FSH stimulates the maturation of sperm cells
in males and is inhibited by the hormone inhibin, while LH stimulates the production of the androgen
testosterone. FSH stimulates egg maturation in females, while LH stimulates the production of estrogens and
progesterone. Estrogens are a group of steroid hormones produced by the ovaries that trigger the development
of secondary sex characteristics in females as well as control the maturation of the ova. In females, the pituitary
also produces prolactin, which stimulates milk production after childbirth, and oxytocin, which stimulates uterine
contraction during childbirth and milk let-down during suckling.
Insulin is produced by the pancreas in response to rising blood glucose levels and allows cells to utilize blood
glucose and store excess glucose for later use. Diabetes mellitus is caused by reduced insulin activity and
causes high blood glucose levels, or hyperglycemia. Glucagon is released by the pancreas in response to low
blood glucose levels and stimulates the breakdown of glycogen into glucose, which can be used by the body.
The body’s basal metabolic rate is controlled by the thyroid hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3).
The anterior pituitary produces thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), which controls the release of T3and T4from
the thyroid gland. Iodine is necessary in the production of thyroid hormone, and the lack of iodine can lead to a
condition called goiter.
2+
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is produced by the parathyroid glands in response to low blood Ca levels. The
PAGE: 1187
1176 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
2+
parafollicular cells of the thyroid produce calcitonin, which reduces blood Ca levels. Growth hormone (GH) is
produced by the anterior pituitary and controls the growth rate of muscle and bone. GH action is indirectly
mediated by insulin-like growth factors (IGFs). Short-term stress causes the hypothalamus to trigger the
adrenal medulla to release epinephrine and norepinephrine, which trigger the fight or flight response. Long-
term stress causes the hypothalamus to trigger the anterior pituitary to release adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), which causes the release of corticosteroids, glucocorticoids, and mineralocorticoids, from the adrenal
cortex.
37.4Regulation of Hormone Production
Hormone levels are primarily controlled through negative feedback, in which rising levels of a hormone inhibit
its further release. The three mechanisms of hormonal release are humoral stimuli, hormonal stimuli, and
neural stimuli. Humoral stimuli refers to the control of hormonal release in response to changes in extracellular
fluid levels or ion levels. Hormonal stimuli refers to the release of hormones in response to hormones released
by other endocrine glands. Neural stimuli refers to the release of hormones in response to neural stimulation.
37.5Endocrine Glands
The pituitary gland is located at the base of the brain and is attached to the hypothalamus by the infundibulum.
The anterior pituitary receives products from the hypothalamus by the hypophyseal portal system and produces
six hormones. The posterior pituitary is an extension of the brain and releases hormones (antidiuretic hormone
and oxytocin) produced by the hypothalamus.
The thyroid gland is located in the neck and is composed of two lobes connected by the isthmus. The thyroid is
made up of follicle cells that produce the hormones thyroxine and triiodothyronine. Parafollicular cells of the
thyroid produce calcitonin. The parathyroid glands lie on the posterior surface of the thyroid gland and produce
parathyroid hormone.
The adrenal glands are located on top of the kidneys and consist of the renal cortex and renal medulla. The
adrenal cortex is the outer part of the adrenal gland and produces the corticosteroids, glucocorticoids, and
mineralocorticoids. The adrenal medulla is the inner part of the adrenal gland and produces the catecholamines
epinephrine and norepinephrine.
The pancreas lies in the abdomen between the stomach and the small intestine. Clusters of endocrine cells in
the pancreas form the islets of Langerhans, which are composed of alpha cells that release glucagon and beta
cells that release insulin.
Some organs possess endocrine activity as a secondary function but have another primary function. The heart
+
produces the hormone atrial natriuretic peptide, which functions to reduce blood volume, pressure, and Na
concentration. The gastrointestinal tract produces various hormones that aid in digestion. The kidneys produce
renin, calcitriol, and erythropoietin. Adipose tissue produces leptin, which promotes satiety signals in the brain.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 37.5Heat shock proteins (HSP) are so a. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will
named because they help refold misfolded proteins. have the opposite effects on blood sugar
In response to increased temperature (a “heat levels.
shock”), heat shock proteins are activated by release b. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will
from the NR/HSP complex. At the same time, both cause hyperglycemia.
transcription of HSP genes is activated. Why do you c. A pancreatic tumor and type I diabetes will
think the cell responds to a heat shock by increasing both cause hypoglycemia.
the activity of proteins that help refold misfolded d. Both pancreatic tumors and type I diabetes
proteins? result in the inability of cells to take up
glucose.
2.Figure 37.11Pancreatic tumors may cause
excess secretion of glucagon. Type I diabetes results 3.Figure 37.14Hyperthyroidism is a condition in
from the failure of the pancreas to produce insulin. which the thyroid gland is overactive. Hypothyroidism
Which of the following statement about these two is a condition in which the thyroid gland is
conditions is true? underactive. Which of the conditions are the following
two patients most likely to have?
Patient A has symptoms including weight gain, cold
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1188
Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System 1177
sensitivity, low heart rate, and fatigue. profuse sweating, increased heart rate, and difficulty
sleeping.
Patient B has symptoms including weight loss,
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.A newly discovered hormone contains four amino in urine output. This most likely occurs because
acids linked together. Under which chemical class alcohol:
would this hormone be classified? a. inhibits ADH release.
a. lipid-derived hormone b. stimulates ADH release.
b. amino acid-derived hormone c. inhibits TSH release.
c. peptide hormone d. stimulates TSH release.
d. glycoprotein
11.FSH and LH release from the anterior pituitary is
5.Which class of hormones can diffuse through stimulated by ________.
plasma membranes? a. TSH
a. lipid-derived hormones b. GnRH
b. amino acid-derived hormones c. T3
c. peptide hormones d. PTH
d. glycoprotein hormones
12.What hormone is produced by beta cells of the
6.Why are steroids able to diffuse across the plasma pancreas?
membrane? a. T3
a. Their transport protein moves them through b. glucagon
the membrane. c. insulin
b. They are amphipathic, allowing them to d. T4
interact with the entire phospholipid.
13.When blood calcium levels are low, PTH
c. Cells express channels that let hormones
stimulates:
flow down their concentration gradient into
a. excretion of calcium from the kidneys.
the cells.
b. excretion of calcium from the intestines.
d. They are non-polar molecules.
c. osteoblasts.
7.A new antagonist molecule has been discovered d. osteoclasts.
that binds to and blocks plasma membrane
14.How would mutations that completely ablate the
receptors. What effect will this antagonist have on
function of the androgen receptor impact the
testosterone, a steroid hormone?
phenotypic development of humans with XY
a. It will block testosterone from binding to its
chromosomes?
receptor.
a. Patients would appear phenotypically
b. It will block testosterone from activating
female.
cAMP signaling.
b. Patients would appear phenotypically male
c. It will increase testosterone-mediated
with underdeveloped secondary sex
signaling.
characteristics.
d. It will not affect testosterone-mediated
c. Patients would appear phenotypically male,
signaling.
but cannot produce sperm.
8.What effect will a cAMP inhibitor have on a peptide d. Patients would express both male and
hormone-mediated signaling pathway? female secondary sex characteristics.
a. It will prevent the hormone from binding its
15.A rise in blood glucose levels triggers release of
receptor.
insulin from the pancreas. This mechanism of
b. It will prevent activation of a G-protein.
hormone production is stimulated by:
c. It will prevent activation of adenylate
a. humoral stimuli
cyclase.
b. hormonal stimuli
d. It will prevent activation of protein kinases.
c. neural stimuli
9.When insulin binds to its receptor, the complex is d. negative stimuli
endocytosed into the cell. This is an example of
16.Which mechanism of hormonal stimulation would
______ in response to hormone signaling.
be affected if signaling and hormone release from the
a. cAMP activation
hypothalamus was blocked?
b. generating an intracellular receptor
c. activation of a hormone response element
d. receptor down-regulation
10.Drinking alcoholic beverages causes an increase
PAGE: 1189
1178 Chapter 37 | The Endocrine System
a. humoral and hormonal stimuli a. thyroid glands
b. hormonal and neural stimuli b. pituitary glands
c. neural and humoral stimuli c. adrenal glands
d. hormonal and negative stimuli d. gonads
17.A scientist hypothesizes that the pancreas’s 19.Which of the following hormones is not produced
hormone production is controlled by neural stimuli. by the anterior pituitary?
Which observation would support this hypothesis? a. oxytocin
b. growth hormone
a. Insulin is produced in response to sudden c. prolactin
stress without a rise in blood glucose. d. thyroid-stimulating hormone
b. Insulin is produced in response to a rise in
20.Recent studies suggest that blue light exposure
glucagon levels.
can impact human circadian rhythms. This suggests
c. Beta cells express epinephrine receptors.
that blue light disrupts the function of the _____
d. Insulin is produced in response to a rise in
gland(s).
blood glucose in the brain.
a. adrenal
18.Which endocrine glands are associated with the b. pituitary
kidneys? c. pineal
d. thyroid
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
21.Although there are many different hormones in (GH).
the human body, they can be divided into three
29.Researchers have recently demonstrated that
classes based on their chemical structure. What are
stressed people are more susceptible to contracting
these classes and what is one factor that
the common cold than people who are not stressed.
distinguishes them?
What kind of stress must the infected patients be
22.Where is insulin stored, and why would it be experiencing, and why does it make them more
released? susceptible to the virus?
23.Glucagon is the peptide hormone that signals for 30.How is hormone production and release primarily
the body to release glucose into the bloodstream. controlled?
How does glucagon contribute to maintaining
31.Compare and contrast hormonal and humoral
homeostasis throughout the body? What other
stimuli.
hormones are involved in regulating the blood
glucose cycle? 32.Oral contraceptive pills work by delivering
synthetic progestins to a woman every day. Describe
24.Name two important functions of hormone
why this is an effective method of birth control.
receptors.
33.What does aldosterone regulate, and how is it
25.How can hormones mediate changes?
stimulated?
26.Why is cAMP-mediated signal amplification not
34.The adrenal medulla contains two types of
required in steroid hormone signaling? Describe how
secretory cells, what are they and what are their
steroid signaling is amplified instead.
functions?
27.Name and describe a function of one hormone
35.How would damage to the posterior pituitary
produced by the anterior pituitary and one hormone
gland affect the production and release of ADH and
produced by the posterior pituitary.
inhibiting hormones?
28.Describe one direct action of growth hormone
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1190
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1179
38 | THE
MUSCULOSKELETAL
SYSTEM
Figure38.1Improvementsinthedesignofprostheseshaveallowedforawiderrangeofactivitiesinrecipients.(credit:
modification of work by Stuart Grout)
Chapter Outline
38.1:Types of Skeletal Systems
38.2:Bone
38.3:Joints and Skeletal Movement
38.4:Muscle Contraction and Locomotion
Introduction
The muscular and skeletal systems provide support to the body and allow for a wide range of movement. The
bonesoftheskeletalsystemprotectthebody’sinternalorgansandsupporttheweightofthebody.Themuscles
ofthemuscularsystemcontractandpullonthebones,allowingformovementsasdiverseasstanding,walking,
running, and grasping items.
Injury or disease affecting the musculoskeletal system can be very debilitating. In humans, the most common
musculoskeletal diseases worldwide are caused by malnutrition. Ailments that affect the joints are also
widespread, such as arthritis, which can make movement difficult and—in advanced cases—completely impair
mobility. In severe cases in which the joint has suffered extensive damage, joint replacement surgery may be
needed.
Progress in the science of prosthesis design has resulted in the development of artificial joints, with joint
PAGE: 1191
1180 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
replacementsurgeryinthehipsandkneesbeingthemostcommon.Replacementjointsforshoulders,elbows,
and fingers are also available. Even with this progress, there is still room for improvement in the design of
prostheses.Thestate-of-the-artprostheseshavelimiteddurabilityandthereforewearoutquickly,particularlyin
youngoractiveindividuals.Currentresearchisfocusedontheuseofnewmaterials,suchascarbonfiber,that
may make prostheses more durable.
38.1 | Types of Skeletal Systems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the different types of skeletal systems
• Explain the role of the human skeletal system
• Compare and contrast different skeletal systems
A skeletal system is necessary to support the body, protect internal organs, and allow for the movement
of an organism. There are three different skeleton designs that fulfill these functions: hydrostatic skeleton,
exoskeleton, and endoskeleton.
Hydrostatic Skeleton
A hydrostatic skeleton is a skeleton formed by a fluid-filled compartment within the body, called the coelom.
The organs of the coelom are supported by the aqueous fluid, which also resists external compression. This
compartmentisunderhydrostaticpressurebecauseofthefluidandsupportstheotherorgansoftheorganism.
Thistypeofskeletalsystemisfoundinsoft-bodiedanimalssuchasseaanemones,earthworms,Cnidaria,and
other invertebrates (Figure 38.2).
Figure 38.2 The skeleton of the red-knobbed sea star (Protoreaster linckii) is an example of a hydrostatic skeleton.
(credit: “Amada44”/Wikimedia Commons)
Movement in a hydrostatic skeleton is provided by muscles that surround the coelom. The muscles in a
hydrostaticskeletoncontracttochangetheshapeofthecoelom;thepressureofthefluidinthecoelomproduces
movement. For example, earthworms move by waves of muscular contractions of the skeletal muscle of the
bodywallhydrostaticskeleton,calledperistalsis,whichalternatelyshortenandlengthenthebody.Lengthening
thebodyextendstheanteriorendoftheorganism.Mostorganismshaveamechanismtofixthemselvesinthe
substrate.Shorteningthemusclesthendrawstheposteriorportionofthebodyforward.Althoughahydrostatic
skeletoniswell-suited toinvertebrate organismssuchasearthwormsandsomeaquaticorganisms,itisnotan
efficient skeleton for terrestrial animals.
Exoskeleton
Anexoskeletonisanexternalskeletonthatconsistsofahardencasementonthesurfaceofanorganism.For
example, the shells of crabs and insects are exoskeletons (Figure 38.3). This skeleton type provides defence
against predators, supports the body, and allows for movement through the contraction of attached muscles.
As with vertebrates, muscles must cross a joint inside the exoskeleton. Shortening of the muscle changes the
relationshipofthetwosegmentsoftheexoskeleton.Arthropodssuchascrabsandlobstershaveexoskeletons
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1192
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1181
thatconsistof30–50percentchitin,apolysaccharidederivativeofglucosethatisastrongbutflexiblematerial.
Chitin is secreted by the epidermal cells. The exoskeleton is further strengthened by the addition of calcium
carbonate inorganismssuchasthelobster.Because theexoskeleton isacellular,arthropods mustperiodically
shed their exoskeletons because the exoskeleton does not grow as the organism grows.
Figure 38.3Muscles attached to the exoskeleton of the Halloween crab (Gecarcinus quadratus) allow it to move.
Endoskeleton
An endoskeleton is a skeleton that consists of hard, mineralized structures located within the soft tissue of
organisms.Anexampleofaprimitiveendoskeletalstructureisthespiculesofsponges.Thebonesofvertebrates
arecomposedoftissues,whereasspongeshavenotruetissues(Figure38.4).Endoskeletonsprovidesupport
for the body, protect internal organs, and allow for movement through contraction of muscles attached to the
skeleton.
Figure 38.4The skeletons of humans and horses are examples of endoskeletons. (credit: Ross Murphy)
The human skeleton is an endoskeleton that consists of 206 bones in the adult. It has five main functions:
providingsupporttothebody,storingmineralsandlipids,producingbloodcells,protectinginternalorgans,and
PAGE: 1193
1182 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
allowing for movement. The skeletal system in vertebrates is divided into the axial skeleton (which consists of
theskull,vertebralcolumn,andribcage),andtheappendicularskeleton(whichconsistsoftheshoulders,limb
bones, the pectoral girdle, and the pelvic girdle).
Visittheinteractivebody(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/virt_skeleton)sitetobuildavirtualskeleton:select
"skeleton" and click through the activity to place each bone.
Human Axial Skeleton
Theaxialskeletonformsthecentralaxisofthebodyandincludesthebonesoftheskull,ossiclesofthemiddle
ear, hyoid bone of the throat, vertebral column, and the thoracic cage (ribcage) (Figure 38.5). The function of
theaxialskeletonistoprovidesupportandprotectionforthebrain,thespinalcord,andtheorgansintheventral
bodycavity.Itprovidesasurfacefortheattachment ofmusclesthatmovethehead,neck,andtrunk,performs
respiratory movements, and stabilizes parts of the appendicular skeleton.
Figure 38.5 The axial skeleton consists of the bones of the skull, ossicles of the middle ear, hyoid bone, vertebral
column, and rib cage. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The Skull
Thebonesoftheskullsupportthestructuresofthefaceandprotectthebrain.Theskullconsistsof22bones,
which are divided into two categories: cranial bones and facial bones. The cranial bones are eight bones that
form the cranial cavity, which encloses the brain and serves as an attachment site for the muscles of the head
andneck.Theeightcranialbonesarethefrontalbone,twoparietalbones,twotemporalbones,occipitalbone,
sphenoidbone,andtheethmoidbone.Althoughthebonesdevelopedseparatelyintheembryoandfetus,inthe
adult, they are tightly fused with connective tissue and adjoining bones do not move (Figure 38.6).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1194
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1183
Figure38.6Thebonesoftheskullsupportthestructuresofthefaceandprotectthebrain.(credit:modificationofwork
by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Theauditoryossiclesofthemiddleeartransmitsoundsfromtheairasvibrationstothefluid-filledcochlea.The
auditory ossiclesconsist ofthree boneseach: themalleus, incus, andstapes. These arethesmallest bonesin
the body and are unique to mammals.
Fourteen facial bones form the face, provide cavities for the sense organs (eyes, mouth, and nose), protect
the entrances to the digestive and respiratory tracts, and serve as attachment points for facial muscles. The
14 facial bones are the nasal bones, the maxillary bones, zygomatic bones, palatine, vomer, lacrimal bones,
theinferiornasalconchae,andthemandible.Allofthesebonesoccurinpairsexceptforthemandibleandthe
vomer (Figure 38.7).
PAGE: 1195
1184 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Figure38.7Thecranialbones,includingthefrontal,parietal,andsphenoidbones,coverthetopofthehead.Thefacial
bones of the skull form the face and provide cavities for the eyes, nose, and mouth.
Althoughitisnotfoundintheskull,thehyoidboneisconsideredacomponentoftheaxialskeleton.Thehyoid
boneliesbelowthemandibleinthefrontoftheneck.Itactsasamovablebaseforthetongueandisconnected
to muscles of the jaw, larynx, and tongue. The mandible articulates with the base of the skull. The mandible
controls the opening to the airway and gut. In animals with teeth, the mandible brings the surfaces of the teeth
in contact with the maxillary teeth.
The Vertebral Column
The vertebral column, or spinal column, surrounds and protects the spinal cord, supports the head, and acts
asanattachmentpointfortheribsandmusclesofthebackandneck.Theadultvertebralcolumncomprises26
bones: the 24 vertebrae, the sacrum, and the coccyx bones. In the adult, the sacrum is typically composed of
fivevertebraethatfuseintoone.Thecoccyxistypically3–4vertebraethatfuseintoone.Aroundtheageof70,
the sacrum and the coccyx may fuse together. We begin life with approximately 33 vertebrae, but as we grow,
severalvertebraefusetogether.Theadultvertebraearefurtherdividedintothe7cervicalvertebrae,12thoracic
vertebrae, and 5 lumbar vertebrae (Figure 38.8).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1196
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1185
Figure38.8(a)Thevertebralcolumnconsistsofsevencervicalvertebrae(C1–7)twelvethoracicvertebrae(Th1–12),
fivelumbarvertebrae(L1–5),theossacrum,andthecoccyx.(b)Spinalcurvesincreasethestrengthandflexibilityof
thespine.(credita:modificationofworkbyUweGillebasedonoriginalworkbyGray'sAnatomy;creditb:modification
of work by NCI, NIH)
Each vertebral body has a large hole in the center through which the nerves of the spinal cord pass. There is
alsoanotchoneachsidethroughwhichthespinalnerves,whichservethebodyatthatlevel,canexitfromthe
spinalcord.Thevertebralcolumnisapproximately71cm(28inches)inadultmalehumansandiscurved,which
can be seen from a side view. The names of the spinal curves correspond to the region of the spine in which
theyoccur.Thethoracicandsacralcurvesareconcave(curveinwardsrelativetothefrontofthebody)andthe
cervicalandlumbarcurvesareconvex(curveoutwards relative to the front of the body). The archedcurvature
of the vertebral column increases its strength and flexibility, allowing it to absorb shocks like a spring (Figure
38.8).
Intervertebral discs composed of fibrous cartilage lie between adjacent vertebral bodies from the second
cervicalvertebratothesacrum.Eachdiscispartofajointthatallowsforsomemovementofthespineandacts
as a cushion to absorb shocks from movements such as walking and running. Intervertebral discs also act as
ligamentstobindvertebraetogether.Theinnerpartofdiscs,thenucleuspulposus,hardensaspeopleageand
becomes less elastic. This loss of elasticity diminishes its ability to absorb shocks.
The Thoracic Cage
The thoracic cage, also known as the ribcage, is the skeleton of the chest, and consists of the ribs, sternum,
thoracic vertebrae, and costal cartilages (Figure 38.9). The thoracic cage encloses and protects the organs of
the thoracic cavity, including the heart and lungs. It also provides support for the shoulder girdles and upper
limbs,andservesastheattachmentpointforthediaphragm,musclesoftheback,chest,neck,andshoulders.
Changes in the volume of the thorax enable breathing.
The sternum, or breastbone, is a long, flat bone located at the anterior of the chest. It is formed from three
bonesthatfuseintheadult.Theribsare12pairsoflong,curvedbonesthatattachtothethoracicvertebraeand
curvetowardthefrontofthebody,formingtheribcage.Costalcartilagesconnecttheanteriorendsoftheribsto
the sternum, with the exception of rib pairs 11 and 12, which are free-floating ribs.
PAGE: 1197
1186 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Figure38.9Thethoraciccage,orribcage,protectstheheartandthelungs.(credit:modificationofworkbyNCI,NIH)
Human Appendicular Skeleton
The appendicular skeleton is composed of the bones of the upper limbs (which function to grasp and
manipulate objects) and the lower limbs (which permit locomotion). It also includes the pectoral girdle, or
shouldergirdle,thatattachestheupperlimbstothebody,andthepelvicgirdlethatattachesthelowerlimbsto
the body (Figure 38.10).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1198
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1187
Figure 38.10 The appendicular skeleton is composed of the bones of the pectoral limbs (arm, forearm, hand), the
pelvic limbs (thigh, leg, foot), the pectoral girdle, and the pelvic girdle. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz
Villareal)
The Pectoral Girdle
Thepectoralgirdlebonesprovidethepointsofattachmentoftheupperlimbstotheaxialskeleton.Thehuman
pectoralgirdleconsistsoftheclavicle(orcollarbone)intheanterior,andthescapula(orshoulderblades)inthe
posterior (Figure 38.11).
Figure38.11(a)Thepectoralgirdleinprimatesconsistsoftheclaviclesandscapulae.(b)Theposteriorviewreveals
the spine of the scapula to which muscle attaches.
PAGE: 1199
1188 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
The clavicles are S-shaped bones that position the arms on the body. The clavicles lie horizontally across the
frontofthethorax(chest)justabovethefirstrib.Thesebonesarefairlyfragileandaresusceptibletofractures.
For example, a fall with the arms outstretched causes the force to be transmitted to the clavicles, which can
break if the force is excessive. The clavicle articulates with the sternum and the scapula.
The scapulae are flat, triangular bones that are located at the back of the pectoral girdle. They support the
musclescrossingtheshoulderjoint.Aridge,calledthespine,runsacrossthebackofthescapulaandcaneasily
be felt through the skin (Figure 38.11). The spine of the scapula is a good example of a bony protrusion that
facilitates a broad area of attachment for muscles to bone.
The Upper Limb
Theupperlimbcontains30bonesinthreeregions:thearm(shouldertoelbow),theforearm(ulnaandradius),
and the wrist and hand (Figure 38.12).
Figure38.12Theupperlimbconsistsofthehumerusoftheupperarm,theradiusandulnaoftheforearm,eightbones
of the carpus, five bones of the metacarpus, and 14 bones of the phalanges.
Anarticulationisanyplaceatwhichtwobonesarejoined.Thehumerusisthelargestandlongestboneofthe
upper limb and the only bone of the arm. It articulates with the scapula at the shoulder and with the forearm at
theelbow.Theforearmextendsfromtheelbowtothewristandconsistsoftwobones:theulnaandtheradius.
Theradiusislocatedalongthelateral(thumb)sideoftheforearmandarticulateswiththehumerusattheelbow.
Theulnaislocatedonthemedialaspect(pinky-fingerside)oftheforearm.Itislongerthantheradius.Theulna
articulates with the humerus at the elbow. The radius and ulna also articulate with the carpal bones and with
eachother,whichinvertebratesenablesavariabledegreeofrotationofthecarpuswithrespecttothelongaxis
ofthelimb.Thehandincludestheeightbonesofthecarpus(wrist),thefivebonesofthemetacarpus(palm),
andthe14bonesofthephalanges(digits).Eachdigitconsistsofthreephalanges,exceptforthethumb,when
present, which has only two.
The Pelvic Girdle
The pelvic girdle attaches to the lower limbs of the axial skeleton. Because it is responsible for bearing the
weight of the body and for locomotion, the pelvic girdle is securely attached to the axial skeleton by strong
ligaments. It also has deep sockets with robust ligaments to securely attach the femur to the body. The pelvic
girdle is further strengthened by two large hip bones. In adults, the hip bones, or coxal bones, are formed by
the fusion of three pairs of bones: the ilium, ischium, and pubis. The pelvis joins together in the anterior of the
body at a joint called the pubic symphysis and with the bones of the sacrum at the posterior of the body.
The female pelvis is slightly different from the male pelvis. Over generations of evolution, females with a wider
pubic angle and larger diameter pelvic canal reproduced more successfully. Therefore, their offspring also had
pelvic anatomy that enabled successful childbirth (Figure 38.13).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1200
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1189
Figure38.13Toadapttoreproductivefitness,the(a)femalepelvisislighter,wider,shallower,andhasabroaderangle
between the pubic bones than (b) the male pelvis.
The Lower Limb
The lower limb consists of the thigh, the leg, and the foot. The bones of the lower limb are the femur (thigh
bone), patella (kneecap), tibia and fibula (bones of the leg), tarsals (bones of the ankle), and metatarsals and
phalanges (bones of the foot) (Figure 38.14). The bones of the lower limbs are thicker and stronger than the
bonesoftheupperlimbsbecauseoftheneedtosupport theentire weight ofthebodyandtheresulting forces
from locomotion. In addition to evolutionary fitness, the bones of an individual will respond to forces exerted
upon them.
Figure38.14Thelowerlimbconsistsofthethigh(femur),kneecap(patella),leg(tibiaandfibula),ankle(tarsals),and
foot (metatarsals and phalanges) bones.
The femur, or thighbone, is the longest, heaviest, and strongest bone in the body. The femur and pelvis form
thehipjointattheproximalend.Atthedistalend,thefemur,tibia,andpatellaformthekneejoint.Thepatella,
or kneecap, is a triangular bone that lies anterior to the knee joint. The patella is embedded in the tendon of
thefemoralextensors(quadriceps).Itimproveskneeextensionbyreducingfriction.Thetibia,orshinbone,isa
large bone of the leg that is located directly below the knee. The tibia articulates with the femur at its proximal
end,withthefibulaandthetarsalbonesatitsdistalend.Itisthesecondlargestboneinthehumanbodyandis
responsiblefortransmittingtheweightofthebodyfromthefemurtothefoot.Thefibula,orcalfbone,parallels
andarticulateswiththetibia.Itdoesnotarticulatewiththefemuranddoesnotbearweight.Thefibulaactsasa
site for muscle attachment and forms the lateral part of the ankle joint.
PAGE: 1201
1190 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Thetarsalsarethesevenbonesoftheankle.Theankletransmitstheweightofthebodyfromthetibiaandthe
fibula to the foot. The metatarsals are the five bones of the foot. The phalanges are the 14 bones of the toes.
Each toe consists of three phalanges, except for the big toe that has only two (Figure 38.15). Variations exist
inotherspecies;forexample,thehorse’smetacarpalsandmetatarsalsareorientedverticallyanddonotmake
contact with the substrate.
Figure38.15Thisdrawingshowsthebonesofthehumanfootandankle,includingthemetatarsalsandthephalanges.
Evolution of Body Design for Locomotion on Land
The transition of vertebrates onto land required a number of changes in body design, as movement on
land presents a number of challenges for animals that are adapted to movement in water. The buoyancy
of water provides a certain amount of lift, and a common form of movement by fish is lateral undulations
of the entire body. This back and forth movement pushes the body against the water, creating forward
movement. In most fish, the muscles of paired fins attach to girdles within the body, allowing for some
controloflocomotion.Ascertainfishbeganmovingontoland,theyretainedtheirlateralundulationformof
locomotion(anguilliform).However,insteadofpushingagainstwater,theirfinsorflippersbecamepointsof
contact with the ground, around which they rotated their bodies.
Theeffectofgravityandthelackofbuoyancyonlandmeantthatbodyweightwassuspendedonthelimbs,
leadingtoincreasedstrengtheningandossificationofthelimbs.Theeffectofgravityalsorequiredchanges
to the axial skeleton. Lateral undulations of land animal vertebral columns cause torsional strain. A firmer,
more ossified vertebral column became common in terrestrial tetrapods because it reduces strain while
providingthestrengthneededtosupportthebody’sweight.Inlatertetrapods,thevertebraebeganallowing
for vertical motion rather than lateral flexion. Another change in the axial skeleton was the loss of a direct
attachment between the pectoral girdle and the head. This reduced the jarring to the head caused by the
impact of the limbs on the ground. The vertebrae of the neck also evolved to allow movement of the head
independently of the body.
Theappendicularskeletonoflandanimalsisalsodifferentfromaquaticanimals.Theshouldersattachtothe
pectoral girdle through muscles and connective tissue, thus reducing the jarring of the skull. Because of a
lateralundulatingvertebralcolumn,inearlytetrapods,thelimbsweresplayedouttothesideandmovement
occurred by performing “push-ups.” The vertebrae of these animals had to move side-to-side in a similar
mannertofishandreptiles.Thistypeofmotionrequireslargemusclestomovethelimbstowardthemidline;
itwasalmostlikewalkingwhiledoingpush-ups,anditisnotanefficientuseofenergy.Latertetrapodshave
theirlimbsplacedundertheirbodies,sothateachstriderequireslessforcetomoveforward.Thisresulted
in decreased adductor muscle size and an increased range of motion of the scapulae. This also restricts
movement primarily to one plane, creating forward motion rather than moving the limbs upward as well as
forward. The femur and humerus were also rotated, so that the ends of the limbs and digits were pointed
forward,inthedirectionofmotion,ratherthanouttotheside.Byplacementunderneaththebody,limbscan
swing forward like a pendulum to produce a stride that is more efficient for moving over land.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1202
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1191
38.2 | Bone
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Classify the different types of bones in the skeleton
• Explain the role of the different cell types in bone
• Explain how bone forms during development
Bone,orosseoustissue,isaconnectivetissuethatconstitutestheendoskeleton.Itcontainsspecializedcells
and a matrix of mineral salts and collagen fibers.
The mineral salts primarily include hydroxyapatite, a mineral formed from calcium phosphate. Calcification is
the process of deposition of mineral salts on the collagen fiber matrix that crystallizes and hardens the tissue.
The process of calcification only occurs in the presence of collagen fibers.
The bones of the human skeleton are classified by their shape: long bones, short bones, flat bones, sutural
bones, sesamoid bones, and irregular bones (Figure 38.16).
Figure 38.16Shown are different types of bones: flat, irregular, long, short, and sesamoid.
PAGE: 1203
1192 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Long bones are longer than they are wide and have a shaft and two ends. The diaphysis, or central shaft,
containsbonemarrowinamarrowcavity.Theroundedends,theepiphyses,arecoveredwitharticularcartilage
andarefilledwithredbonemarrow,whichproducesbloodcells(Figure38.17).Mostofthelimbbonesarelong
bones—for example, the femur, tibia, ulna, and radius. Exceptions to this include the patella and the bones of
the wrist and ankle.
Figure38.17Thelongboneiscoveredbyarticularcartilageateitherendandcontainsbonemarrow(showninyellow
in this illustration) in the marrow cavity.
Shortbones,orcuboidalbones,arebonesthatarethesamewidthandlength,givingthemacube-likeshape.
For example, the bones of the wrist (carpals) and ankle (tarsals) are short bones (Figure 38.16).
Flatbonesarethinandrelativelybroadbonesthatarefoundwhereextensiveprotectionoforgansisrequiredor
wherebroadsurfacesofmuscleattachmentarerequired.Examplesofflatbonesarethesternum(breastbone),
ribs, scapulae (shoulder blades), and the roof of the skull (Figure 38.16).
Irregularbonesareboneswithcomplexshapes.Thesebonesmayhaveshort,flat,notched,orridgedsurfaces.
Examples of irregular bones are the vertebrae, hip bones, and several skull bones.
Sesamoidbonesaresmall,flatbonesandareshapedsimilarlytoasesameseed.Thepatellaearesesamoid
bones (Figure 38.18). Sesamoid bones develop inside tendons and may be found near joints at the knees,
hands, and feet.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1204
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1193
Figure 38.18The patella of the knee is an example of a sesamoid bone.
Suturalbonesaresmall,flat,irregularlyshapedbones.Theymaybefoundbetweentheflatbonesoftheskull.
They vary in number, shape, size, and position.
Bone Tissue
Bones are considered organs because they contain various types of tissue, such as blood, connective tissue,
nerves,andbonetissue.Osteocytes,thelivingcellsofbonetissue,formthemineralmatrixofbones.Thereare
two types of bone tissue: compact and spongy.
Compact Bone Tissue
Compact bone (or cortical bone) forms the hard external layer of all bones and surrounds the medullary
cavity, or bone marrow. It provides protection and strength to bones. Compact bone tissue consists of units
calledosteonsorHaversiansystems.Osteonsarecylindricalstructuresthatcontainamineralmatrixandliving
osteocytesconnectedbycanaliculi,whichtransportblood.Theyarealignedparalleltothelongaxisofthebone.
Each osteon consists of lamellae, which are layers of compact matrix that surround a central canal called the
Haversian canal. The Haversian canal (osteonic canal) contains the bone’s blood vessels and nerve fibers
(Figure38.19).Osteonsincompactbonetissuearealignedinthesamedirectionalonglinesofstressandhelp
the bone resist bending or fracturing. Therefore, compact bone tissue is prominent in areas of bone at which
stresses are applied in only a few directions.
PAGE: 1205
1194 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Figure38.19Compactbonetissueconsistsofosteonsthatarealignedparalleltothelongaxisofthebone,and
the Haversian canal that contains the bone’s blood vessels and nerve fibers. The inner layer of bones consists
ofspongybonetissue.Thesmalldarkovalsintheosteonrepresentthelivingosteocytes.(credit:modificationof
work by NCI, NIH)
Which of the following statements about bone tissue is false?
a. Compactbonetissueismadeofcylindricalosteonsthatarealignedsuchthattheytravelthelengthof
the bone.
b. Haversian canals contain blood vessels only.
c. Haversian canals contain blood vessels and nerve fibers.
d. Spongy tissue is found on the interior of the bone, and compact bone tissue is found on the exterior.
Spongy Bone Tissue
Whereas compact bone tissue forms the outer layer of all bones, spongy bone or cancellous bone forms the
inner layer of all bones. Spongy bone tissue does not contain osteons that constitute compact bone tissue.
Instead, it consists of trabeculae, which are lamellae that are arranged as rods or plates. Red bone marrow is
foundbetweenthetrabuculae.Bloodvesselswithinthistissuedelivernutrientstoosteocytesandremovewaste.
The red bone marrow of the femur and the interior of other large bones, such as the ileum, forms blood cells.
Spongy bone reduces the density of bone and allows the ends of long bones to compress as the result of
stressesappliedtothebone.Spongyboneisprominentinareasofbonesthatarenotheavilystressedorwhere
stresses arrive from many directions. The epiphyses of bones, such as the neck of the femur, are subject to
stressfrommanydirections.Imaginelayingaheavyframedpictureflatonthefloor.Youcouldholduponeside
ofthepicturewithatoothpickifthetoothpickwasperpendiculartothefloorandthepicture.Nowdrillaholeand
stick the toothpick into the wall to hang up the picture. In this case, the function of the toothpick is to transmit
the downward pressure of the picture to the wall. The force on the picture is straight down to the floor, but the
forceonthetoothpickisboththepicturewirepullingdownandthebottomoftheholeinthewallpushingup.The
toothpick will break off right at the wall.
Theneckofthefemurishorizontallikethetoothpickinthewall.Theweightofthebodypushesitdownnearthe
joint,buttheverticaldiaphysisofthefemurpushesitupattheotherend.Theneckofthefemurmustbestrong
enoughtotransferthedownwardforceofthebodyweighthorizontallytotheverticalshaftofthefemur(Figure
38.20).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1206
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1195
Figure 38.20 Trabeculae in spongy bone are arranged such that one side of the bone bears tension and the other
withstands compression.
View micrographs (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/muscle_tissue) of musculoskeletal tissues as you review
the anatomy.
Cell Types in Bones
Bone consists of four types of cells: osteoblasts, osteoclasts, osteocytes, and osteoprogenitor cells.
Osteoblasts are bone cells that are responsible for bone formation. Osteoblasts synthesize and secrete the
organic part and inorganic part of the extracellular matrix of bone tissue, and collagen fibers. Osteoblasts
become trapped in these secretions and differentiate into less active osteocytes. Osteoclasts are large bone
cellswithupto50nuclei.Theyremovebonestructurebyreleasinglysosomalenzymesandacidsthatdissolve
the bony matrix. These minerals, released from bones into the blood, help regulate calcium concentrations in
body fluids. Bone may also be resorbed for remodeling, if the applied stresses have changed. Osteocytes
are mature bone cells and are the main cells in bony connective tissue; these cells cannot divide. Osteocytes
maintain normal bone structure by recycling the mineral salts in the bony matrix. Osteoprogenitor cells are
squamous stem cells that divide to produce daughter cells that differentiate into osteoblasts. Osteoprogenitor
cells are important in the repair of fractures.
Development of Bone
Ossification, or osteogenesis, is the process of bone formation by osteoblasts. Ossification is distinct from
theprocessofcalcification; whereascalcification takesplaceduringtheossification ofbones,itcanalsooccur
in other tissues. Ossification begins approximately six weeks after fertilization in an embryo. Before this time,
theembryonicskeletonconsistsentirelyoffibrousmembranesandhyalinecartilage.Thedevelopmentofbone
from fibrous membranes is called intramembranous ossification; development from hyaline cartilage is called
endochondral ossification. Bone growth continues until approximately age 25. Bones can grow in thickness
throughout life, but after age 25, ossification functions primarily in bone remodeling and repair.
Intramembranous Ossification
Intramembranous ossification is the process of bone development from fibrous membranes. It is involved in
theformationoftheflatbonesoftheskull,themandible,andtheclavicles.Ossificationbeginsasmesenchymal
cells form a template of the future bone. They then differentiate into osteoblasts at the ossification center.
PAGE: 1207
1196 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Osteoblastssecretetheextracellularmatrixanddepositcalcium,whichhardensthematrix.Thenon-mineralized
portionoftheboneorosteoidcontinuestoformaroundbloodvessels,formingspongybone.Connectivetissue
inthematrixdifferentiatesintoredbonemarrowinthefetus.Thespongyboneisremodeledintoathinlayerof
compact bone on the surface of the spongy bone.
Endochondral Ossification
Endochondral ossification is the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage. All of the bones of
the body, except for the flat bones of the skull, mandible, and clavicles, are formed through endochondral
ossification.
In long bones, chondrocytes form a template of the hyaline cartilage diaphysis. Responding to complex
developmental signals, the matrix begins to calcify. This calcification prevents diffusion of nutrients into the
matrix, resulting in chondrocytes dying and the opening up of cavities in the diaphysis cartilage. Blood vessels
invade the cavities, and osteoblasts and osteoclasts modify the calcified cartilage matrix into spongy bone.
Osteoclaststhenbreakdownsomeofthespongybonetocreateamarrow,ormedullary,cavityinthecenterof
thediaphysis.Dense,irregularconnectivetissueformsasheath(periosteum)aroundthebones.Theperiosteum
assists in attaching the bone to surrounding tissues, tendons, and ligaments. The bone continues to grow and
elongate as the cartilage cells at the epiphyses divide.
In the last stage of prenatal bone development, the centers of the epiphyses begin to calcify. Secondary
ossification centers form in the epiphyses as blood vessels and osteoblasts enter these areas and convert
hyalinecartilageintospongybone.Untiladolescence,hyalinecartilagepersistsattheepiphysealplate(growth
plate),whichistheregionbetweenthediaphysisandepiphysisthatisresponsibleforthelengthwisegrowthof
long bones (Figure 38.21).
Figure 38.21 Endochondral ossification is the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage. The periosteum
istheconnectivetissueontheoutsideofbonethatactsastheinterfacebetweenbone,bloodvessels,tendons,and
ligaments.
Growth of Bone
Long bones continue to lengthen, potentially until adolescence, through the addition of bone tissue at the
epiphyseal plate. They also increase in width through appositional growth.
Lengthening of Long Bones
Chondrocytes on the epiphyseal side of the epiphyseal plate divide; one cell remains undifferentiated near the
epiphysis, and one cell moves toward the diaphysis. The cells, which are pushed from the epiphysis, mature
andaredestroyedbycalcification.Thisprocessreplacescartilagewithboneonthediaphysealsideoftheplate,
resulting in a lengthening of the bone.
Long bones stop growing at around the age of 18 in females and the age of 21 in males in a process called
epiphysealplateclosure.Duringthisprocess,cartilagecellsstopdividingandallofthecartilageisreplacedby
bone.Theepiphysealplatefades,leavingastructurecalledtheepiphyseallineorepiphysealremnant,andthe
epiphysis and diaphysis fuse.
Thickening of Long Bones
Appositional growth is the increase in the diameter of bones by the addition of bony tissue at the surface of
bones. Osteoblasts at the bone surface secrete bone matrix, and osteoclasts on the inner surface break down
bone.Theosteoblastsdifferentiateintoosteocytes.Abalancebetweenthesetwoprocessesallowstheboneto
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1208
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1197
thicken without becoming too heavy.
Bone Remodeling and Repair
Bone renewal continues after birth into adulthood. Bone remodeling is the replacement of old bone tissue
by new bone tissue. It involves the processes of bone deposition by osteoblasts and bone resorption by
osteoclasts. Normal bone growth requires vitamins D, C, and A, plus minerals such as calcium, phosphorous,
andmagnesium.Hormonessuchasparathyroidhormone,growthhormone,andcalcitoninarealsorequiredfor
proper bone growth and maintenance.
Bone turnover rates are quite high, with five to seven percent of bone mass being recycled every week.
Differencesinturnoverrateexistindifferentareasoftheskeletonandindifferentareasofabone.Forexample,
theboneintheheadofthefemurmaybefullyreplacedeverysixmonths,whereasthebonealongtheshaftis
altered much more slowly.
Boneremodelingallowsbonestoadapttostressesbybecomingthickerandstrongerwhensubjectedtostress.
Bones that are not subject to normal stress, for example when a limb is in a cast, will begin to lose mass. A
fractured or broken bone undergoes repair through four stages:
1. Blood vessels in the broken bone tear and hemorrhage, resulting in the formation of clotted blood, or a
hematoma, at the site of the break. The severed blood vessels at the broken ends of the bone are sealed
by the clotting process, and bone cells that are deprived of nutrients begin to die.
2. Within days of the fracture, capillaries grow into the hematoma, and phagocytic cells begin to clear away
thedeadcells.Thoughfragments ofthebloodclotmayremain,fibroblasts andosteoblasts enterthearea
and begin to reform bone. Fibroblasts produce collagen fibers that connect the broken bone ends, and
osteoblasts start to form spongy bone. The repair tissue between the broken bone ends is called the
fibrocartilaginous callus, as it is composed of both hyaline and fibrocartilage (Figure 38.22). Some bone
spicules may also appear at this point.
3. Thefibrocartilaginouscallusisconvertedintoabonycallusofspongybone.Ittakesabouttwomonthsfor
the broken bone ends to be firmly joined together after the fracture. This is similar to the endochondral
formation of bone, as cartilage becomes ossified; osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and bone matrix are present.
4. Thebonycallusisthenremodelledbyosteoclastsandosteoblasts,withexcessmaterialontheexteriorof
theboneandwithinthemedullarycavitybeingremoved.Compactboneisaddedtocreatebonetissuethat
issimilartotheoriginal,unbrokenbone.Thisremodelingcantakemanymonths,andthebonemayremain
uneven for years.
Figure 38.22After this bone is set, a callus will knit the two ends together. (credit: Bill Rhodes)
PAGE: 1209
1198 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Decalcification of Bones
Question:What effect does the removal of calcium and collagen have on bone structure?
Background:Conductaliteraturesearchontheroleofcalciumandcollageninmaintainingbonestructure.
Conduct a literature search on diseases in which bone structure is compromised.
Hypothesis:Developahypothesisthatstatespredictionsoftheflexibility,strength,andmassofbonesthat
have had the calcium and collagen components removed. Develop a hypothesis regarding the attempt to
add calcium back to decalcified bones.
Testthehypothesis:Testthepredictionbyremovingcalciumfromchickenbonesbyplacingtheminajar
ofvinegarforsevendays.Testthehypothesisregardingaddingcalciumbacktodecalcifiedbonebyplacing
the decalcified chicken bones into a jar of water with calcium supplements added. Test the prediction by
denaturing the collagen from the bones by baking them at 250°C for three hours.
Analyze the data: Create a table showing the changes in bone flexibility, strength, and mass in the three
different environments.
Report the results: Under which conditions was the bone most flexible? Under which conditions was the
bone the strongest?
Draw a conclusion: Did the results support or refute the hypothesis? How do the results observed in this
experiment correspond to diseases that destroy bone tissue?
38.3 | Joints and Skeletal Movement
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Classify the different types of joints on the basis of structure
• Explain the role of joints in skeletal movement
The point at which two or more bones meet is called a joint, or articulation. Joints are responsible for
movement, such as the movement of limbs, and stability, such as the stability found in the bones of the skull.
Classification of Joints on the Basis of Structure
There are two ways to classify joints: on the basis of their structure or on the basis of their function. The
structural classification divides joints into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints depending on the
material composing the joint and the presence or absence of a cavity in the joint.
Fibrous Joints
Thebonesoffibrousjointsareheldtogetherbyfibrousconnectivetissue.Thereisnocavity,orspace,present
betweenthebonesandsomostfibrousjointsdonotmoveatall,orareonlycapableofminormovements.There
arethreetypesoffibrousjoints:sutures,syndesmoses,andgomphoses.Suturesarefoundonlyintheskulland
possess short fibers of connective tissue that hold the skull bones tightly in place (Figure 38.23).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1210
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1199
Figure 38.23Sutures are fibrous joints found only in the skull.
Syndesmoses are joints in which the bones are connected by a band of connective tissue, allowing for more
movement than in a suture. An example of a syndesmosis is the joint of the tibia and fibula in the ankle.
The amount of movement in these types of joints is determined by the length of the connective tissue fibers.
Gomphosesoccurbetweenteethandtheirsockets;thetermreferstothewaythetoothfitsintothesocketlike
apeg(Figure38.24).Thetoothisconnectedtothesocketbyaconnectivetissuereferredtoastheperiodontal
ligament.
Figure38.24Gomphosesarefibrousjointsbetweentheteethandtheirsockets.(credit:modificationofworkbyGray's
Anatomy)
Cartilaginous Joints
Cartilaginous joints are joints in which the bones are connected by cartilage. There are two types of
cartilaginous joints: synchondroses and symphyses. In a synchondrosis, the bones are joined by hyaline
cartilage. Synchondroses are found in the epiphyseal plates of growing bones in children. In symphyses,
hyaline cartilage covers the end of the bone but the connection between bones occurs through fibrocartilage.
Symphyses are found at the joints between vertebrae. Either type of cartilaginous joint allows for very little
movement.
Synovial Joints
Synovial joints are the only joints that have a space between the adjoining bones (Figure 38.25). This space
PAGE: 1211
1200 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
is referred to as the synovial (or joint) cavity and is filled with synovial fluid. Synovial fluid lubricates the joint,
reducing friction between the bones and allowing for greater movement. The ends of the bones are covered
with articular cartilage, a hyaline cartilage, and the entire joint is surrounded by an articular capsule composed
of connective tissue that allows movement of the joint while resisting dislocation. Articular capsules may also
possess ligaments that hold the bones together. Synovial joints are capable of the greatest movement of the
threestructuraljointtypes;however,themoremobileajoint,theweakerthejoint.Knees,elbows,andshoulders
are examples of synovial joints.
Figure 38.25Synovial joints are the only joints that have a space or “synovial cavity” in the joint.
Classification of Joints on the Basis of Function
Thefunctionalclassificationdividesjointsintothreecategories:synarthroses,amphiarthroses,anddiarthroses.
A synarthrosis is a joint that is immovable. This includes sutures, gomphoses, and synchondroses.
Amphiarthroses are joints that allow slight movement, including syndesmoses and symphyses. Diarthroses
are joints that allow for free movement of the joint, as in synovial joints.
Movement at Synovial Joints
Thewiderangeofmovementallowedbysynovialjointsproducesdifferenttypesofmovements.Themovement
ofsynovialjointscanbeclassifiedasoneoffourdifferenttypes:gliding,angular,rotational,orspecialmovement.
Gliding Movement
Gliding movements occur as relatively flat bone surfaces move past each other. Gliding movements produce
verylittlerotationorangularmovementofthebones.Thejointsofthecarpalandtarsalbonesareexamplesof
joints that produce gliding movements.
Angular Movement
Angular movements are produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes. There are several
different types of angular movements, including flexion, extension, hyperextension, abduction, adduction, and
circumduction.Flexion,orbending,occurswhentheanglebetweenthebonesdecreases.Movingtheforearm
upward at the elbow or moving the wrist to move the hand toward the forearm are examples of flexion.
Extension is the opposite of flexion in that the angle between the bones of a joint increases. Straightening a
limb after flexion is an example of extension. Extension past the regular anatomical position is referred to as
hyperextension. This includes moving the neck back to look upward, or bending the wrist so that the hand
moves away from the forearm.
Abduction occurs when a bone moves away from the midline of the body. Examples of abduction are moving
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1212
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1201
the arms or legs laterally to lift them straight out to the side. Adduction is the movement of a bone toward the
midlineofthebody.Movementofthelimbsinwardafterabductionisanexampleofadduction.Circumduction
is the movement of a limb in a circular motion, as in moving the arm in a circular motion.
Rotational Movement
Rotational movement is the movement of a bone as it rotates around its longitudinal axis. Rotation can be
toward the midline of the body, which is referred to as medial rotation, or away from the midline of the body,
which is referred to aslateral rotation. Movement of the head from side to side is an example of rotation.
Special Movements
Some movements that cannot be classified as gliding, angular, or rotational are called special movements.
Inversioninvolvesthesolesofthefeetmovinginward,towardthemidlineofthebody.Eversionistheopposite
of inversion, movement of the sole of the foot outward, away from the midline of the body. Protraction is the
anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal plane. Retraction occurs as a joint moves back into position
after protraction. Protraction and retraction can be seen in the movement of the mandible as the jaw is thrust
outwardsandthenbackinwards.Elevationisthemovementofaboneupward,suchaswhentheshouldersare
shrugged, lifting thescapulae. Depression istheopposite ofelevation—movement downwardofabone, such
asaftertheshouldersareshruggedandthescapulaereturntotheirnormalpositionfromanelevatedposition.
Dorsiflexionisabendingattheanklesuchthatthetoesareliftedtowardtheknee.Plantarflexionisabending
at the ankle when the heel is lifted, such as when standing on the toes. Supination is the movement of the
radius and ulna bones of the forearm so that the palm faces forward. Pronation is the opposite movement, in
whichthepalmfacesbackward.Oppositionisthemovementofthethumbtowardthefingersofthesamehand,
making it possible to grasp and hold objects.
Types of Synovial Joints
Synovial joints are further classified into six different categories on the basis of the shape and structure of the
joint.Theshapeofthejointaffectsthetypeofmovementpermittedbythejoint(Figure38.26).Thesejointscan
be described as planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, or ball-and-socket joints.
PAGE: 1213
1202 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Figure 38.26 Different types of joints allow different types of movement. Planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, and
ball-and-socket are all types of synovial joints.
Planar Joints
Planar joints have bones with articulating surfaces that are flat or slightly curved faces. These joints allow for
glidingmovements,andsothejointsaresometimesreferredtoasglidingjoints.Therangeofmotionislimitedin
thesejointsanddoesnotinvolverotation.Planarjointsarefoundinthecarpalbonesinthehandandthetarsal
bones of the foot, as well as between vertebrae (Figure 38.27).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1214
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1203
Figure38.27Thejointsofthecarpalbonesinthewristareexamplesofplanarjoints.(credit:modificationofworkby
Brian C. Goss)
Hinge Joints
In hinge joints, the slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other bone. In this
way,onebonemoveswhiletheotherremainsstationary,likethehingeofadoor.Theelbowisanexampleofa
hinge joint. The knee is sometimes classified as a modified hinge joint (Figure 38.28).
Figure 38.28 The elbow joint, where the radius articulates with the humerus, is an example of a hinge joint. (credit:
modification of work by Brian C. Goss)
Pivot Joints
Pivot joints consist of the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone. This structure
allowsrotationalmovement,astheroundedbonemovesarounditsownaxis.Anexampleofapivotjointisthe
joint of the first and second vertebrae of the neck that allows the head to move back and forth (Figure 38.29).
The joint of the wrist that allows the palm of the hand to be turned up and down is also a pivot joint.
PAGE: 1215
1204 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Figure 38.29The joint in the neck that allows the head to move back and forth is an example of a pivot joint.
Condyloid Joints
Condyloid joints consist of an oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped hollow of
anotherbone(Figure38.30).Thisisalsosometimescalledanellipsoidaljoint.Thistypeofjointallowsangular
movementalongtwoaxes,asseeninthejointsofthewristandfingers,whichcanmovebothsidetosideand
up and down.
Figure 38.30 The metacarpophalangeal joints in the finger are examples of condyloid joints. (credit: modification of
work by Gray's Anatomy)
Saddle Joints
Saddle joints are so named because the ends of each bone resemble a saddle, with concave and convex
portions that fit together. Saddle joints allow angular movements similar to condyloid joints but with a greater
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1216
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1205
range of motion. An example of a saddle joint is the thumb joint, which can move back and forth and up and
down, but more freely than the wrist or fingers (Figure 38.31).
Figure38.31Thecarpometacarpaljointsinthethumbareexamplesofsaddlejoints.(credit:modificationofworkby
Brian C. Goss)
Ball-and-Socket Joints
Ball-and-socket joints possess a rounded, ball-like end of one bone fitting into a cuplike socket of another
bone.Thisorganizationallowsthegreatestrangeofmotion,asallmovementtypesarepossibleinalldirections.
Examples of ball-and-socket joints are the shoulder and hip joints (Figure 38.32).
Figure 38.32The shoulder joint is an example of a ball-and-socket joint.
PAGE: 1217
1206 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Watch this animation showing the six types of synovial joints. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66639/1.3/#eip-id1511301)
Rheumatologist
Rheumatologists are medical doctors who specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of disorders of the
joints,muscles,andbones.Theydiagnoseandtreatdiseasessuchasarthritis,musculoskeletaldisorders,
osteoporosis, and autoimmune diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis and rheumatoid arthritis.
Rheumatoidarthritis(RA)isaninflammatorydisorderthatprimarilyaffectsthesynovialjointsofthehands,
feet,andcervicalspine.Affectedjointsbecomeswollen,stiff,andpainful.AlthoughitisknownthatRAisan
autoimmunediseaseinwhichthebody’simmunesystemmistakenlyattackshealthytissue,thecauseofRA
remainsunknown.Immunecellsfromthebloodenterjointsandthesynoviumcausingcartilagebreakdown,
swelling,andinflammationofthejointlining.Breakdownofcartilagecausesbonestorubagainsteachother
causing pain. RA is more common in women than men and the age of onset is usually 40–50 years of age.
RheumatologistscandiagnoseRAonthebasisofsymptomssuchasjointinflammationandpain,X-rayand
MRIimaging,andbloodtests.Arthrographyisatypeofmedicalimagingofjointsthatusesacontrastagent,
such as a dye, that is opaque to X-rays. This allows the soft tissue structures of joints—such as cartilage,
tendons,andligaments—tobevisualized.AnarthrogramdiffersfromaregularX-raybyshowingthesurface
ofsofttissuesliningthejointinadditiontojointbones.Anarthrogramallowsearlydegenerativechangesin
joint cartilage to be detected before bones become affected.
ThereiscurrentlynocureforRA;however,rheumatologistshaveanumberoftreatmentoptionsavailable.
Early stages can be treated with rest of the affected joints by using a cane or by using joint splints that
minimizeinflammation.Wheninflammationhasdecreased,exercisecanbeusedtostrengthenthemuscles
that surround the joint and to maintain joint flexibility. If joint damage is more extensive, medications can
be used to relieve pain and decrease inflammation. Anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin, topical pain
relievers, and corticosteroid injections may be used. Surgery may be required in cases in which joint
damage is severe.
38.4 | Muscle Contraction and Locomotion
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Classify the different types of muscle tissue
• Explain the role of muscles in locomotion
Musclecellsarespecializedforcontraction.Musclesallowformotionssuchaswalking,andtheyalsofacilitate
bodily processes such as respiration and digestion. The body contains three types of muscle tissue: skeletal
muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle (Figure 38.33).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1218
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1207
Figure 38.33 The body contains three types of muscle tissue: skeletal muscle, smooth muscle, and cardiac muscle,
visualizedhereusinglightmicroscopy.Smoothmusclecellsareshort,taperedateachend,andhaveonlyoneplump
nucleusineach.Cardiacmusclecellsarebranchedandstriated,butshort.Thecytoplasmmaybranch,andtheyhave
one nucleus in the center of the cell. (credit: modification of work by NCI, NIH; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Skeletal muscle tissue forms skeletal muscles, which attach to bones or skin and control locomotion and
any movement that can be consciously controlled. Because it can be controlled by thought, skeletal muscle is
also called voluntary muscle. Skeletal muscles are long and cylindrical in appearance; when viewed under a
microscope,skeletalmuscletissuehasastripedorstriatedappearance.Thestriationsarecausedbytheregular
arrangementofcontractileproteins(actinandmyosin).Actinisaglobularcontractileproteinthatinteractswith
myosinfor muscle contraction. Skeletal muscle also has multiple nuclei present in a single cell.
Smooth muscle tissue occurs in the walls of hollow organs such as the intestines, stomach, and urinary
bladder,andaroundpassagessuchastherespiratorytractandbloodvessels.Smoothmusclehasnostriations,
is not under voluntary control, has only one nucleus per cell, is tapered at both ends, and is called involuntary
muscle.
Cardiac muscle tissue is only found in the heart, and cardiac contractions pump blood throughout the body
andmaintainbloodpressure.Likeskeletalmuscle,cardiacmuscleisstriated,butunlikeskeletalmuscle,cardiac
muscle cannot be consciously controlled and is called involuntary muscle. It has one nucleus per cell, is
branched, and is distinguished by the presence of intercalated disks.
Skeletal Muscle Fiber Structure
Eachskeletalmusclefiberisaskeletalmusclecell.Thesecellsareincrediblylarge,withdiametersofupto100
µm and lengths of up to 30 cm. The plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber is called the sarcolemma.
Thesarcolemmaisthesiteofactionpotentialconduction,whichtriggersmusclecontraction.Withineachmuscle
fiber are myofibrils—long cylindrical structures that lie parallel to the muscle fiber. Myofibrils run the entire
lengthofthemusclefiber,andbecausetheyareonlyapproximately1.2µmindiameter,hundredstothousands
canbefoundinsideonemusclefiber.Theyattachtothesarcolemmaattheirends,sothatasmyofibrilsshorten,
the entire muscle cell contracts (Figure 38.34).
Figure 38.34 A skeletal muscle cell is surrounded by a plasma membrane called the sarcolemma with a cytoplasm
called the sarcoplasm. A muscle fiber is composed of many fibrils, packaged into orderly units.
Thestriatedappearanceofskeletalmuscletissueisaresultofrepeatingbandsoftheproteinsactinandmyosin
that are present along the length of myofibrils. Dark A bands and light I bands repeat along myofibrils, and the
alignment of myofibrils in the cell causes the entire cell to appear striated or banded.
PAGE: 1219
1208 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Each I band has a dense line running vertically through the middle called a Z disc or Z line. The Z discs mark
theborderofunits calledsarcomeres,whicharethefunctional units ofskeletal muscle. Onesarcomereisthe
space between two consecutive Z discs and contains one entire A band and two halves of an I band, one on
either side of the A band. A myofibril is composed of many sarcomeres running along its length, and as the
sarcomeres individually contract, the myofibrils and muscle cells shorten (Figure 38.35).
Figure38.35AsarcomereistheregionfromoneZlinetothenextZline.Manysarcomeresarepresentinamyofibril,
resulting in the striation pattern characteristic of skeletal muscle.
Myofibrilsarecomposedofsmallerstructurescalledmyofilaments.Therearetwomaintypesoffilaments:thick
filaments and thin filaments; each has different compositions and locations. Thick filaments occur only in the
Abandofamyofibril.ThinfilamentsattachtoaproteinintheZdisccalledalpha-actininandoccuracrossthe
entirelengthoftheIbandandpartwayintotheAband.Theregionatwhichthickandthinfilamentsoverlaphas
adenseappearance,asthereislittlespacebetweenthefilaments.Thinfilamentsdonotextendallthewayinto
theAbands,leavingacentralregionoftheAbandthatonlycontainsthickfilaments.Thiscentralregionofthe
AbandlooksslightlylighterthantherestoftheAbandandiscalledtheHzone.ThemiddleoftheHzonehasa
verticallinecalledtheMline,atwhichaccessoryproteinsholdtogetherthickfilaments.BoththeZdiscandthe
Mlineholdmyofilamentsinplacetomaintainthestructuralarrangementandlayeringofthemyofibril.Myofibrils
are connected to each other by intermediate, or desmin, filaments that attach to the Z disc.
Thick and thin filaments are themselves composed of proteins. Thick filaments are composed of the protein
myosin.Thetailofamyosinmoleculeconnectswithothermyosinmoleculestoformthecentralregionofathick
filament near the M line, whereas the heads align on either side of the thick filament where the thin filaments
overlap.Theprimarycomponentofthinfilamentsistheactinprotein.Twoothercomponentsofthethinfilament
aretropomyosinandtroponin.Actinhasbindingsitesformyosinattachment. Strandsoftropomyosinblockthe
binding sites and prevent actin–myosin interactions when the muscles are at rest. Troponin consists of three
2+
globular subunits. One subunit binds to tropomyosin, one subunit binds to actin, and one subunit binds Ca
ions.
View this animation showing the organization of muscle fibers. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66643/1.3/#eip-id992518)
Sliding Filament Model of Contraction
Foramusclecelltocontract,thesarcomeremustshorten.However,thickandthinfilaments—thecomponents
of sarcomeres—do not shorten. Instead, they slide by one another, causing the sarcomere to shorten while
the filaments remain the same length. The sliding filament theory of muscle contraction was developed to fit
the differences observed in the named bands on the sarcomere at different degrees of muscle contraction and
relaxation.Themechanismofcontractionisthebindingofmyosintoactin,formingcross-bridgesthatgenerate
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1220
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1209
filament movement (Figure 38.36).
Figure38.36When(a)asarcomere(b)contracts,theZlinesmoveclosertogetherandtheIbandgetssmaller.TheA
band stays the same width and, at full contraction, the thin filaments overlap.
When a sarcomere shortens, some regions shorten whereas others stay the same length. A sarcomere is
defined as the distance between two consecutive Z discs or Z lines; when a muscle contracts, the distance
between the Z discs is reduced. The H zone—the central region of the A zone—contains only thick filaments
and is shortened during contraction. The I band contains only thin filaments and also shortens. The A band
doesnotshorten—itremainsthesamelength—butAbandsofdifferentsarcomeresmoveclosertogetherduring
contraction, eventually disappearing. Thin filaments are pulled by the thick filaments toward the center of the
sarcomereuntiltheZdiscsapproachthethickfilaments.Thezoneofoverlap,inwhichthinfilamentsandthick
filaments occupy the same area, increases as the thin filaments move inward.
ATP and Muscle Contraction
The motion of muscle shortening occurs as myosin heads bind to actin and pull the actin inwards. This action
requires energy, which is provided by ATP. Myosin binds to actin at a binding site on the globular actin protein.
Myosin has another binding site for ATP at which enzymatic activity hydrolyzes ATP to ADP, releasing an
inorganic phosphate molecule and energy.
ATP binding causes myosin to release actin, allowing actin and myosin to detach from each other. After this
happens, the newly bound ATP is converted to ADP and inorganic phosphate, Pi. The enzyme at the binding
site on myosin is called ATPase. The energy released during ATP hydrolysis changes the angle of the myosin
headintoa“cocked”position.Themyosinheadistheninapositionforfurthermovement,possessingpotential
energy, but ADP and Pi are still attached. If actin binding sites are covered and unavailable, the myosin will
remain in the high energy configuration with ATP hydrolyzed, but still attached.
If the actin binding sites are uncovered, a cross-bridge will form; that is, the myosin head spans the distance
PAGE: 1221
1210 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
between the actin and myosin molecules. Pi is then released, allowing myosin to expend the stored energy as
aconformationalchange.ThemyosinheadmovestowardtheMline,pullingtheactinalongwithit.Astheactin
ispulled,thefilamentsmoveapproximately10nmtowardtheMline.Thismovementiscalledthepowerstroke,
asitisthestepatwhichforceisproduced.AstheactinispulledtowardtheMline,thesarcomereshortensand
the muscle contracts.
When the myosin head is “cocked,” it contains energy and is in a high-energy configuration. This energy is
expendedasthemyosinheadmovesthroughthepowerstroke;attheendofthepowerstroke,themyosinhead
isinalow-energyposition.Afterthepowerstroke,ADPisreleased;however,thecross-bridgeformedisstillin
place,andactinandmyosinareboundtogether.ATPcanthenattachtomyosin,whichallowsthecross-bridge
cycle to start again and further muscle contraction can occur (Figure 38.37).
Watch this video explaining how a muscle contraction is signaled. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66643/1.3/#eip-id4815428)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1222
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1211
Figure 38.37 The cross-bridge muscle contraction cycle, which is triggered by Ca2+ binding to the actin active
site, is shown. With each contraction cycle, actin moves relative to myosin.
Which of the following statements about muscle contraction is true?
a. The power stroke occurs when ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and phosphate.
b. The power stroke occurs when ADP and phosphate dissociate from the myosin head.
c. The power stroke occurs when ADP and phosphate dissociate from the actin active site.
2+
d. The power stroke occurs when Ca binds the calcium head.
Viewthisanimation(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/muscle_contract)ofthecross-bridgemusclecontraction.
Regulatory Proteins
When a muscle is in a resting state, actin and myosin are separated. To keep actin from binding to the active
PAGE: 1223
1212 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
siteonmyosin,regulatoryproteinsblockthemolecularbindingsites.Tropomyosinblocksmyosinbindingsites
on actin molecules, preventing cross-bridge formation and preventing contraction in a muscle without nervous
input.Troponinbinds to tropomyosin and helps to position it on the actin molecule; it also binds calcium ions.
Toenableamusclecontraction,tropomyosinmustchangeconformation,uncoveringthemyosin-bindingsiteon
anactinmoleculeandallowingcross-bridgeformation.Thiscanonlyhappeninthepresenceofcalcium,which
is kept at extremely low concentrations in the sarcoplasm. If present, calcium ions bind to troponin, causing
conformationalchangesintroponinthatallowtropomyosintomoveawayfromthemyosinbindingsitesonactin.
Once the tropomyosin is removed, a cross-bridge can form between actin and myosin, triggering contraction.
2+
Cross-bridge cycling continues until Ca ions and ATP are no longer available and tropomyosin again covers
the binding sites on actin.
Excitation–Contraction Coupling
Excitation–contraction coupling is the link (transduction) between the action potential generated in the
sarcolemma and the start of a muscle contraction. The trigger for calcium release from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum into the sarcoplasm is a neural signal. Each skeletal muscle fiber is controlled by a motor neuron,
whichconductssignalsfromthebrainorspinalcordtothemuscle.Theareaofthesarcolemmaonthemuscle
fiber that interacts with the neuron is called the motor end plate. The end of the neuron’s axon is called the
synaptic terminal, and it does not actually contact the motor end plate. A small space called the synaptic cleft
separatesthesynapticterminalfromthemotorendplate.Electricalsignalstravelalongtheneuron’saxon,which
branches through the muscle and connects to individual muscle fibers at a neuromuscular junction.
The ability of cells to communicate electrically requires that the cells expend energy to create an electrical
gradientacrosstheircellmembranes.Thischargegradientiscarriedbyions,whicharedifferentiallydistributed
across the membrane. Each ion exerts an electrical influence and a concentration influence. Just as milk will
eventuallymixwithcoffeewithouttheneedtostir,ionsalsodistributethemselvesevenly,iftheyarepermittedto
do so. In this case, they are not permitted to return to an evenly mixed state.
+ +
Thesodium–potassiumATPaseusescellularenergytomoveK ionsinsidethecellandNa ionsoutside.This
+
aloneaccumulatesasmallelectricalcharge,butabigconcentrationgradient.ThereislotsofK inthecelland
+ +
lots of Na outside the cell. Potassium is able to leave the cell through K channels that are open 90% of the
+ + +
time, and it does. However, Na channels are rarely open, so Na remains outside the cell. When K leaves
the cell, obeying its concentration gradient, that effectively leaves a negative charge behind. So at rest, there
+
is a large concentration gradient for Na to enter the cell, and there is an accumulation of negative charges
left behind in the cell. This is the resting membrane potential. Potential in this context means a separation
of electrical charge that is capable of doing work. It is measured in volts, just like a battery. However, the
transmembrane potential is considerably smaller (0.07 V); therefore, the small value is expressed as millivolts
(mV) or 70 mV. Because the inside of a cell is negative compared with the outside, a minus sign signifies the
excess of negative charges inside the cell, −70 mV.
+
If an event changes the permeability of the membrane to Na ions, they will enter the cell. That will change
the voltage. This is an electrical event, called an action potential, that can be used as a cellular signal.
Communicationoccursbetweennervesandmusclesthroughneurotransmitters.Neuronactionpotentialscause
the release of neurotransmitters from the synaptic terminal into the synaptic cleft, where they can then diffuse
acrossthesynapticcleftandbindtoareceptormoleculeonthemotorendplate.Themotorendplatepossesses
junctional folds—folds in the sarcolemma that create a large surface area for the neurotransmitter to bind to
+
receptors.ThereceptorsareactuallysodiumchannelsthatopentoallowthepassageofNa intothecellwhen
they receive a neurotransmitter signal.
Acetylcholine (ACh) is a neurotransmitter released by motor neurons that binds to receptors in the motor end
plate.Neurotransmitterreleaseoccurswhenanactionpotentialtravelsdownthemotorneuron’saxon,resulting
2+
inalteredpermeabilityofthesynapticterminalmembraneandaninfluxofcalcium.TheCa ionsallowsynaptic
vesiclestomovetoandbindwiththepresynapticmembrane(ontheneuron),andreleaseneurotransmitterfrom
the vesicles into the synaptic cleft. Once released by the synaptic terminal, ACh diffuses across the synaptic
clefttothemotorendplate,whereitbindswithAChreceptors.Asaneurotransmitterbinds,theseionchannels
+
open, and Na ions cross the membrane into the muscle cell. This reduces the voltage difference between
the inside and outside of the cell, which is called depolarization. As ACh binds at the motor end plate, this
depolarizationiscalledanend-platepotential.Thedepolarizationthenspreadsalongthesarcolemma,creating
anactionpotentialassodiumchannelsadjacenttotheinitialdepolarizationsitesensethechangeinvoltageand
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1224
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1213
open. The action potential moves across the entire cell, creating a wave of depolarization.
ACh is broken down by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) into acetyl and choline. AChE resides in
the synaptic cleft, breaking down ACh so that it does not remain bound to ACh receptors, which would cause
unwanted extended muscle contraction (Figure 38.38).
Figure 38.38 This diagram shows excitation-contraction coupling in a skeletal muscle contraction. The
sarcoplasmic reticulum is a specialized endoplasmic reticulum found in muscle cells.
The deadly nerve gas Sarin irreversibly inhibits acetycholinesterase. What effect would Sarin have on
muscle contraction?
After depolarization, the membrane returns to its resting state. This is called repolarization, during which
voltage-gatedsodiumchannelsclose.Potassiumchannelscontinueat90%conductance.Becausetheplasma
membrane sodium–potassium ATPase always transports ions, the resting state (negatively charged inside
relative to the outside) is restored. The period immediately following the transmission of an impulse in a nerve
ormuscle,inwhichaneuronormusclecellregainsitsabilitytotransmitanotherimpulse,iscalledtherefractory
period. During the refractory period, the membrane cannot generate another action potential. The refractory
periodallowsthevoltage-sensitiveionchannelstoreturntotheirrestingconfigurations.Thesodiumpotassium
+ + +
ATPase continually moves Na back out of the cell and K back into the cell, and the K leaks out leaving
negative charge behind. Very quickly, the membrane repolarizes, so that it can again be depolarized.
PAGE: 1225
1214 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Control of Muscle Tension
Neural control initiates the formation of actin–myosin cross-bridges, leading to the sarcomere shortening
involved in muscle contraction. These contractions extend from the muscle fiber through connective tissue to
pull on bones, causing skeletal movement. The pull exerted by a muscle is called tension, and the amount of
forcecreatedbythistensioncanvary.Thisenablesthesamemusclestomoveverylightobjectsandveryheavy
objects.Inindividualmusclefibers,theamountoftensionproduceddependsonthecross-sectionalareaofthe
muscle fiber and the frequency of neural stimulation.
Thenumberofcross-bridgesformedbetweenactinandmyosindeterminetheamountoftensionthatamuscle
fibercanproduce.Cross-bridgescanonlyformwherethickandthinfilaments overlap,allowingmyosintobind
to actin. If more cross-bridges are formed, more myosin will pull on actin, and more tension will be produced.
The ideal length of a sarcomere during production of maximal tension occurs when thick and thin filaments
overlap to the greatest degree. If a sarcomere at rest is stretched past an ideal resting length, thick and thin
filamentsdonotoverlaptothegreatestdegree,andfewercross-bridgescanform.Thisresultsinfewermyosin
headspullingonactin,andlesstensionisproduced.Asasarcomereisshortened,thezoneofoverlapisreduced
as the thin filaments reach the H zone, which is composed of myosin tails. Because it is myosin heads that
formcross-bridges,actinwillnotbindtomyosininthiszone,reducingthetensionproducedbythismyofiber.If
the sarcomere is shortened even more, thin filaments begin to overlap with each other—reducing cross-bridge
formation even further, and producing even less tension. Conversely, if the sarcomere is stretched to the point
atwhichthickandthinfilamentsdonotoverlapatall,nocross-bridgesareformedandnotensionisproduced.
This amount of stretching does not usually occur because accessory proteins, internal sensory nerves, and
connective tissue oppose extreme stretching.
Theprimaryvariabledeterminingforceproductionisthenumberofmyofiberswithinthemusclethatreceivean
action potential from the neuron that controls that fiber. When using the biceps to pick up a pencil, the motor
cortex of the brain only signals a few neurons of the biceps, and only a few myofibers respond. In vertebrates,
eachmyofiberrespondsfullyifstimulated.Whenpickingupapiano,themotorcortexsignalsalloftheneurons
in the biceps and every myofiber participates. This is close to the maximum force the muscle can produce. As
mentionedabove,increasingthefrequencyofactionpotentials(thenumberofsignalspersecond)canincrease
the force a bit more, because the tropomyosin is flooded with calcium.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1226
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1215
KEY TERMS
abduction when a bone moves away from the midline of the body
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) enzyme that breaks down ACh into acetyl and choline
actin globular contractile protein that interacts with myosin for muscle contraction
adduction movement of the limbs inward after abduction
amphiarthrosis joint that allows slight movement; includes syndesmoses and symphyses
angular movement produced when the angle between the bones of a joint changes
appendicular skeleton composed of the bones of the upper limbs, which function to grasp and manipulate
objects, and the lower limbs, which permit locomotion
appositional growth increase in the diameter of bones by the addition of bone tissue at the surface of bones
articulation any place where two bones are joined
auditory ossicle (also, middle ear) transduces sounds from the air into vibrations in the fluid-filled cochlea
axial skeleton formsthecentralaxisofthebodyandincludesthebonesoftheskull,theossiclesofthemiddle
ear, the hyoid bone of the throat, the vertebral column, and the thoracic cage (ribcage)
ball-and-socket joint jointwitharounded,ball-likeendofonebonefittingintoacuplikesocketofanotherbone
bone (also, osseous tissue) connective tissue that constitutes the endoskeleton
bone remodeling replacement of old bone tissue by new bone tissue
calcification processofdepositionofmineralsaltsinthecollagenfibermatrixthatcrystallizesandhardensthe
tissue
cardiac muscle tissue muscle tissue found only in the heart; cardiac contractions pump blood throughout the
body and maintain blood pressure
carpus eight bones that comprise the wrist
cartilaginous joint joint in which the bones are connected by cartilage
circumduction movement of a limb in a circular motion
clavicle S-shaped bone that positions the arms laterally
compact bone forms the hard external layer of all bones
condyloid joint oval-shaped end of one bone fitting into a similarly oval-shaped hollow of another bone
coxal bone hip bone
cranial bone oneofeightbonesthatformthecranialcavitythatenclosesthebrainandservesasanattachment
site for the muscles of the head and neck
depression movementdownwardofabone,suchasaftertheshouldersareshruggedandthescapulaereturn
to their normal position from an elevated position; opposite of elevation
diaphysis central shaft of bone, contains bone marrow in a marrow cavity
diarthrosis joint that allows for free movement of the joint; found in synovial joints
dorsiflexion bending at the ankle such that the toes are lifted toward the knee
PAGE: 1227
1216 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
elevation movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are shrugged, lifting the scapulae
endochondral ossification process of bone development from hyaline cartilage
endoskeleton skeleton of living cells that produces a hard, mineralized tissue located within the soft tissue of
organisms
epiphyseal plate region between the diaphysis and epiphysis that is responsible for the lengthwise growth of
long bones
epiphysis rounded end of bone, covered with articular cartilage and filled with red bone marrow, which
produces blood cells
eversion movement of the sole of the foot outward, away from the midline of the body; opposite of inversion
exoskeleton asecretedcellularproductexternalskeletonthatconsistsofahardencasementonthesurfaceof
an organism
extension movement in which the angle between the bones of a joint increases; opposite of flexion
facial bone one of the 14 bones that form the face; provides cavities for the sense organs (eyes, mouth, and
nose) and attachment points for facial muscles
femur (also, thighbone) longest, heaviest, and strongest bone in the body
fibrous joint joint held together by fibrous connective tissue
fibula (also, calf bone) parallels and articulates with the tibia
flat bone thinandrelativelybroadbonefoundwhereextensiveprotectionoforgansisrequiredorwherebroad
surfaces of muscle attachment are required
flexion movement in which the angle between the bones decreases; opposite of extension
forearm extends from the elbow to the wrist and consists of two bones: the ulna and the radius
gliding movement when relatively flat bone surfaces move past each other
gomphosis the joint in which the tooth fits into the socket like a peg
Haversian canal contains the bone’s blood vessels and nerve fibers
hinge joint slightly rounded end of one bone fits into the slightly hollow end of the other bone
humerus only bone of the arm
hydrostatic skeleton skeleton that consists of aqueous fluid held under pressure in a closed body
compartment
hyoid bone lies below the mandible in the front of the neck
hyperextension extension past the regular anatomical position
intervertebral disc composed of fibrous cartilage; lies between adjacent vertebrae from the second cervical
vertebra to the sacrum
intramembranous ossification process of bone development from fibrous membranes
inversion soles of the feet moving inward, toward the midline of the body
irregular bone bone with complex shapes; examples include vertebrae and hip bones
joint point at which two or more bones meet
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1228
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1217
lamella layer of compact tissue that surrounds a central canal called the Haversian canal
lateral rotation rotation away from the midline of the body
long bone bone that is longer than wide, and has a shaft and two ends
lower limb consists of the thigh, the leg, and the foot
medial rotation rotation toward the midline of the body
metacarpus five bones that comprise the palm
metatarsal one of the five bones of the foot
motor end plate sarcolemma of the muscle fiber that interacts with the neuron
myofibril long cylindrical structures that lie parallel to the muscle fiber
myofilament small structures that make up myofibrils
myosin contractile protein that interacts with actin for muscle contraction
opposition movementofthethumbtowardthefingersofthesamehand,makingitpossibletograspandhold
objects
osseous tissue connective tissue that constitutes the endoskeleton
ossification (also, osteogenesis) process of bone formation by osteoblasts
osteoblast bone cell responsible for bone formation
osteoclast large bone cells with up to 50 nuclei, responsible for bone remodeling
osteocyte mature bone cells and the main cell in bone tissue
osteon cylindrical structure aligned parallel to the long axis of the bone
patella (also, kneecap) triangular bone that lies anterior to the knee joint
pectoral girdle bones that transmit the force generated by the upper limbs to the axial skeleton
pelvic girdle bones that transmit the force generated by the lower limbs to the axial skeleton
phalange one of the bones of the fingers or toes
pivot joint joint with the rounded end of one bone fitting into a ring formed by the other bone
planar joint joint with bones whose articulating surfaces are flat
plantar flexion bending at the ankle such that the heel is lifted, such as when standing on the toes
pronation movement in which the palm faces backward
protraction anterior movement of a bone in the horizontal plane
radius bone located along the lateral (thumb) side of the forearm; articulates with the humerus at the elbow
resorption process by which osteoclasts release minerals stored in bones
retraction movement in which a joint moves back into position after protraction
rib oneof12pairsoflong,curvedbonesthatattachtothethoracicvertebraeandcurvetowardthefrontofthe
body to form the ribcage
PAGE: 1229
1218 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
rotational movement movement of a bone as it rotates around its own longitudinal axis
saddle joint joint with concave and convex portions that fit together; named because the ends of each bone
resemble a saddle
sarcolemma plasma membrane of a skeletal muscle fiber
sarcomere functional unit of skeletal muscle
scapula flat, triangular bone located at the posterior pectoral girdle
sesamoid bone small, flat bone shaped like a sesame seed; develops inside tendons
short bone bone that has the same width and length, giving it a cube-like shape
skeletal muscle tissue forms skeletal muscles, which attach to bones and control locomotion and any
movement that can be consciously controlled
skull bone that supports the structures of the face and protects the brain
smooth muscle tissue occurs in the walls of hollow organs such as the intestines, stomach, and urinary
bladder, and around passages such as the respiratory tract and blood vessels
spongy bone tissue forms the inner layer of all bones
sternum (also, breastbone) long, flat bone located at the front of the chest
supination movement of the radius and ulna bones of the forearm so that the palm faces forward
sutural bone small, flat, irregularly shaped bone that forms between the flat bones of the cranium
suture short fiber of connective tissue that holds the skull bones tightly in place; found only in the skull
symphysis hyaline cartilage covers the end of the bone, but the connection between bones occurs through
fibrocartilage; symphyses are found at the joints between vertebrae
synarthrosis joint that is immovable
synchondrosis bonesjoinedbyhyalinecartilage;synchondrosesarefoundintheepiphysealplatesofgrowing
bones in children
syndesmosis joint in which the bones are connected by a band of connective tissue, allowing for more
movement than in a suture
synovial joint only joint that has a space between the adjoining bones
tarsal one of the seven bones of the ankle
thick filament a group of myosin molecules
thin filament two polymers of actin wound together along with tropomyosin and troponin
thoracic cage (also,ribcage)skeletonofthechest,whichconsistsoftheribs,thoracicvertebrae,sternum,and
costal cartilages
tibia (also, shinbone) large bone of the leg that is located directly below the knee
trabeculae lamellae that are arranged as rods or plates
tropomyosin acts to block myosin binding sites on actin molecules, preventing cross-bridge formation and
preventing contraction until a muscle receives a neuron signal
troponin binds to tropomyosin and helps to position it on the actin molecule, and also binds calcium ions
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1230
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1219
ulna bone located on the medial aspect (pinky-finger side) of the forearm
vertebral column (also, spine) surrounds and protects the spinal cord, supports the head, and acts as an
attachment point for ribs and muscles of the back and neck
CHAPTER SUMMARY
38.1Types of Skeletal Systems
The three types of skeleton designs are hydrostatic skeletons, exoskeletons, and endoskeletons. A hydrostatic
skeleton is formed by a fluid-filled compartment held under hydrostatic pressure; movement is created by the
muscles producing pressure on the fluid. An exoskeleton is a hard external skeleton that protects the outer
surface of an organism and enables movement through muscles attached on the inside. An endoskeleton is an
internal skeleton composed of hard, mineralized tissue that also enables movement by attachment to muscles.
The human skeleton is an endoskeleton that is composed of the axial and appendicular skeleton. The axial
skeleton is composed of the bones of the skull, ossicles of the ear, hyoid bone, vertebral column, and ribcage.
The skull consists of eight cranial bones and 14 facial bones. Six bones make up the ossicles of the middle ear,
while the hyoid bone is located in the neck under the mandible. The vertebral column contains 26 bones, and it
surrounds and protects the spinal cord. The thoracic cage consists of the sternum, ribs, thoracic vertebrae, and
costal cartilages. The appendicular skeleton is made up of the limbs of the upper and lower limbs. The pectoral
girdle is composed of the clavicles and the scapulae. The upper limb contains 30 bones in the arm, the
forearm, and the hand. The pelvic girdle attaches the lower limbs to the axial skeleton. The lower limb includes
the bones of the thigh, the leg, and the foot.
38.2Bone
Bone, or osseous tissue, is connective tissue that includes specialized cells, mineral salts, and collagen fibers.
The human skeleton can be divided into long bones, short bones, flat bones, and irregular bones. Compact
bone tissue is composed of osteons and forms the external layer of all bones. Spongy bone tissue is composed
of trabeculae and forms the inner part of all bones. Four types of cells compose bony tissue: osteocytes,
osteoclasts, osteoprogenitor cells, and osteoblasts. Ossification is the process of bone formation by
osteoblasts. Intramembranous ossification is the process of bone development from fibrous membranes.
Endochondral ossification is the process of bone development from hyaline cartilage. Long bones lengthen as
chondrocytes divide and secrete hyaline cartilage. Osteoblasts replace cartilage with bone. Appositional growth
is the increase in the diameter of bones by the addition of bone tissue at the surface of bones. Bone
remodeling involves the processes of bone deposition by osteoblasts and bone resorption by osteoclasts. Bone
repair occurs in four stages and can take several months.
38.3Joints and Skeletal Movement
The structural classification of joints divides them into bony, fibrous, cartilaginous, and synovial joints. The
bones of fibrous joints are held together by fibrous connective tissue; the three types of fibrous joints are
sutures, syndesomes, and gomphoses. Cartilaginous joints are joints in which the bones are connected by
cartilage; the two types of cartilaginous joints are synchondroses and symphyses. Synovial joints are joints that
have a space between the adjoining bones. The functional classification divides joints into three categories:
synarthroses, amphiarthroses, and diarthroses. The movement of synovial joints can be classified as one of
four different types: gliding, angular, rotational, or special movement. Gliding movements occur as relatively flat
bone surfaces move past each other. Angular movements are produced when the angle between the bones of
a joint changes. Rotational movement is the movement of a bone as it rotates around its own longitudinal axis.
Special movements include inversion, eversion, protraction, retraction, elevation, depression, dorsiflexion,
plantar flexion, supination, pronation, and opposition. Synovial joints are also classified into six different
categories on the basis of the shape and structure of the joint: planar, hinge, pivot, condyloid, saddle, and ball-
and-socket.
38.4Muscle Contraction and Locomotion
The body contains three types of muscle tissue: skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and smooth muscle. Skeleton
muscle tissue is composed of sarcomeres, the functional units of muscle tissue. Muscle contraction occurs
when sarcomeres shorten, as thick and thin filaments slide past each other, which is called the sliding filament
model of muscle contraction. ATP provides the energy for cross-bridge formation and filament sliding.
PAGE: 1231
1220 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
Regulatory proteins, such as troponin and tropomyosin, control cross-bridge formation. Excitation–contraction
coupling transduces the electrical signal of the neuron, via acetylcholine, to an electrical signal on the muscle
membrane, which initiates force production. The number of muscle fibers contracting determines how much
force the whole muscle produces.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 38.19Which of the following statements a. The power stroke occurs when ATP is
about bone tissue is false? hydrolyzed to ADP and phosphate.
a. Compact bone tissue is made of cylindrical b. The power stroke occurs when ADP and
osteons that are aligned such that they phosphate dissociate from the myosin head.
travel the length of the bone. c. The power stroke occurs when ADP and
b. Haversian canals contain blood vessels phosphate dissociate from the actin active
only. site.
c. Haversian canals contain blood vessels and d. The power stroke occurs when Ca 2+ binds
nerve fibers. the calcium head.
d. Spongy tissue is found on the interior of the
3.Figure 38.38The deadly nerve gas Sarin
bone, and compact bone tissue is found on
irreversibly inhibits acetycholinesterase. What effect
the exterior.
would Sarin have on muscle contraction?
2.Figure 38.37Which of the following statements
about muscle contraction is true?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The forearm consists of the: 9.The Haversian canal:
a. radius and ulna a. is arranged as rods or plates
b. radius and humerus b. contains the bone’s blood vessels and nerve
c. ulna and humerus fibers
d. humerus and carpus c. is responsible for the lengthwise growth of
long bones
5.The pectoral girdle consists of the:
d. synthesizes and secretes matrix
a. clavicle and sternum
b. sternum and scapula 10.The epiphyseal plate:
c. clavicle and scapula a. is arranged as rods or plates
d. clavicle and coccyx b. contains the bone’s blood vessels and nerve
fibers
6.All of the following are groups of vertebrae except
c. is responsible for the lengthwise growth of
________, which is a curvature.
long bones
a. thoracic
d. synthesizes and secretes bone matrix
b. cervical
c. lumbar 11.The cells responsible for bone resorption are
d. pelvic ________.
a. osteoclasts
7.Which of these is a facial bone?
b. osteoblasts
a. frontal
c. fibroblasts
b. occipital
d. osteocytes
c. lacrimal
d. temporal 12.Compact bone is composed of ________.
8.Which of the following isnota true statement
a. trabeculae
comparing exoskeletons and endoskeletons?
b. compacted collagen
c. osteons
a. Endoskeletons can support larger
d. calcium phosphate only
organisms.
b. Only endoskeletons can grow as an 13.Osteoporosis is a condition where bones become
organism grows. weak and brittle. It is caused by an imbalance in the
c. Exoskeletons provide greater protection of activity of which cells?
the internal organs.
d. Exoskeletons provide less mechanical
leverage.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1232
Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System 1221
a. osteoclasts and osteoblasts a. ball and socket
b. osteoclasts and osteocytes b. gomphosis
c. osteoblasts and chondrocytes c. syndesmosis
d. osteocytes and chondrocytes d. symphysis
14.While assembling a skeleton of a new species, a 20.In relaxed muscle, the myosin-binding site on
scientist points to one of the bones and observes that actin is blocked by ________.
it looks like the most likely site of leg muscle a. titin
attachment. What kind of bone did she indicate? b. troponin
c. myoglobin
a. sesamoid bone d. tropomyosin
b. long bone
21.The cell membrane of a muscle fiber is called a
c. trabecular bone
________.
d. flat bone
a. myofibril
15.Synchondroses and symphyses are: b. sarcolemma
a. synovial joints c. sarcoplasm
b. cartilaginous joints d. myofilament
c. fibrous joints
22.The muscle relaxes if no new nerve signal
d. condyloid joints
arrives. However the neurotransmitter from the
16.The movement of bone away from the midline of previous stimulation is still present in the synapse.
the body is called ________. The activity of ________ helps to remove this
a. circumduction neurotransmitter.
b. extension a. myosin
c. adduction b. action potential
d. abduction c. tropomyosin
d. acetylcholinesterase
17.Which of the following is not a characteristic of
the synovial fluid? 23.The ability of a muscle to generate tension
a. lubrication immediately after stimulation is dependent on:
b. shock absorption
c. regulation of water balance in the joint a. myosin interaction with the M line
d. protection of articular cartilage b. overlap of myosin and actin
c. actin attachments to the Z line
18.The elbow is an example of which type of joint?
d. none of the above
a. hinge 24.Botulinum toxin causes flaccid paralysis of the
b. pivot muscles, and is used for cosmetic purposes under
c. saddle the name Botox. Which of the following is the most
d. gliding likely mechanism of action of Botox?
a. Botox decreases the production of
19.A high ankle sprain is an injury caused by over-
acetylcholinesterase.
stretching the ligaments connecting the tibia and
b. Botox increases calcium release from the
fibula. What type of joint is involved in this sprain?
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
c. Botox blocks the ATP binding site in actin.
d. Botox decreases the release of
acetylcholine from motor neurons.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
25.What are the major differences between the male 28.Scoliosis is a medical condition where the spine
pelvis and female pelvis that permit childbirth in develops a sideways curvature. How would this
females? change interfere with the normal function of the
spine?
26.What are the major differences between the
pelvic girdle and the pectoral girdle that allow the 29.What are the major differences between spongy
pelvic girdle to bear the weight of the body? bone and compact bone?
27.Both hydrostatic and exoskeletons can protect 30.What are the roles of osteoblasts, osteocytes,
internal organs from harm. Contrast the ways the and osteoclasts?
skeletons perform these functions.
31.Thalidomide was a morning sickness drug given
PAGE: 1233
1222 Chapter 38 | The Musculoskeletal System
to women that caused babies to be born without arm 35.How would muscle contractions be affected if
bones. If recent studies have shown that thalidomide ATP was completely depleted in a muscle fiber?
prevents the formation of new blood vessels,
36.What factors contribute to the amount of tension
describe the type of bone development inhibited by
produced in an individual muscle fiber?
the drug and what stage of ossification was affected.
37.What effect will low blood calcium have on
32.What movements occur at the hip joint and knees
neurons? What effect will low blood calcium have on
as you bend down to touch your toes?
skeletal muscles?
33.What movement(s) occur(s) at the scapulae
38.Skeletal muscles can only produce a mechanical
when you shrug your shoulders?
force as they are contracted, but a leg flexes and
34.Describe the joints and motions involved in taking extends while walking. How can muscles perform this
a step forward if a person is initially standing still. task?
Assume the person holds his foot at the same angle
throughout the motion.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1234
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1223
39 | THE RESPIRATORY
SYSTEM
Figure 39.1 Lungs, which appear as nearly transparent tissue surrounding the heart in this X-ray of a dog (left), are
thecentralorgansoftherespiratorysystem.Theleftlungissmallerthantherightlungtoaccommodatespaceforthe
heart. A dog’s nose (right) has a slit on the side of each nostril. When tracking a scent, the slits open, blocking the
frontofthenostrils.Thisallowsthedogtoexhalethoughthenow-openareaonthesideofthenostrilswithoutlosing
thescentthatisbeingfollowed.(credita:modificationofworkbyGeoffStearns;creditb:modificationofworkbyCory
Zanker)
Chapter Outline
39.1:Systems of Gas Exchange
39.2:Gas Exchange across Respiratory Surfaces
39.3:Breathing
39.4:Transport of Gases in Human Bodily Fluids
Introduction
Breathing is an involuntary event. How often a breath is taken and how much air is inhaled or exhaled are
tightly regulated by the respiratory center in the brain. Humans, when they aren’t exerting themselves, breathe
approximately15timesperminuteonaverage.Canines,likethedoginFigure39.1,havearespiratoryrateof
about 15–30 breaths per minute. With every inhalation, air fills the lungs, and with every exhalation, air rushes
back out. That air is doing more than just inflating and deflating the lungs in the chest cavity. The air contains
oxygen that crosses the lung tissue, enters the bloodstream, and travels to organs and tissues. Oxygen (O2)
entersthecellswhereitisusedformetabolicreactionsthatproduceATP,ahigh-energycompound.Atthesame
time,thesereactionsreleasecarbondioxide(CO2)asaby-product.CO2istoxicandmustbeeliminated.Carbon
dioxide exits the cells, enters the bloodstream, travels back to the lungs, and is expired out of the body during
exhalation.
PAGE: 1235
1224 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
39.1 | Systems of Gas Exchange
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the passage of air from the outside environment to the lungs
• Explain how the lungs are protected from particulate matter
Theprimaryfunctionoftherespiratorysystemistodeliveroxygentothecellsofthebody’stissuesandremove
carbondioxide,acellwasteproduct.Themainstructuresofthehumanrespiratorysystemarethenasalcavity,
the trachea, and lungs.
All aerobic organisms require oxygen to carry out their metabolic functions. Along the evolutionary tree,
different organisms have devised different means of obtaining oxygen from the surrounding atmosphere. The
environment in which the animal lives greatly determines how an animal respires. The complexity of the
respiratory system is correlated with the size of the organism. As animal size increases, diffusion distances
increase and the ratio of surface area to volume drops. In unicellular organisms, diffusion across the cell
membrane is sufficient for supplying oxygen to the cell (Figure 39.2). Diffusion is a slow, passive transport
process.Inorderfordiffusiontobeafeasiblemeansofprovidingoxygentothecell,therateofoxygenuptake
must match the rate of diffusion across the membrane. In other words, if the cell were very large or thick,
diffusion would not be able to provide oxygen quickly enough to the inside of the cell. Therefore, dependence
on diffusion as a means of obtaining oxygen and removing carbon dioxide remains feasible only for small
organisms or those with highly-flattened bodies, such as many flatworms (Platyhelminthes). Larger organisms
had to evolve specialized respiratory tissues, such as gills, lungs, and respiratory passages accompanied by
complex circulatory systems, to transport oxygen throughout their entire body.
Figure 39.2 The cell of the unicellular alga Ventricaria ventricosa is one of the largest known, reaching one to five
centimeters in diameter. Like all single-celled organisms,V. ventricosaexchanges gases across the cell membrane.
Direct Diffusion
Forsmallmulticellularorganisms,diffusionacrosstheoutermembraneissufficienttomeettheiroxygenneeds.
Gas exchange by direct diffusion across surface membranes is efficient for organisms less than 1 mm in
diameter.Insimpleorganisms,suchascnidariansandflatworms,everycellinthebodyisclosetotheexternal
environment. Their cells are kept moist and gases diffuse quickly via direct diffusion. Flatworms are small,
literallyflatworms,which‘breathe’throughdiffusionacrosstheoutermembrane(Figure39.3).Theflatshapeof
theseorganismsincreasesthesurfaceareafordiffusion,ensuringthateachcellwithinthebodyisclosetothe
outer membranesurface andhasaccesstooxygen. If the flatworm hadacylindrical body,then the cellsinthe
center would not be able to get oxygen.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1236
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1225
Figure 39.3 This flatworm’s process of respiration works by diffusion across the outer membrane. (credit: Stephen
Childs)
Skin and Gills
Earthworms and amphibians use their skin (integument) as a respiratory organ. A dense network of capillaries
lies just below the skin and facilitates gas exchange between the external environment and the circulatory
system. The respiratory surface must be kept moist in order for the gases to dissolve and diffuse across cell
membranes.
Organisms that live in water need to obtain oxygen from the water. Oxygen dissolves in water but at a lower
concentration than in the atmosphere. The atmosphere has roughly 21 percent oxygen. In water, the oxygen
concentration is much lower than that. Fish and many other aquatic organisms have evolved gills to take up
the dissolved oxygen from water (Figure 39.4). Gills are thin tissue filaments that are highly branched and
folded. When water passes over the gills, the dissolved oxygen in water rapidly diffuses across the gills into
the bloodstream. The circulatory system can then carry the oxygenated blood to the other parts of the body. In
animals that contain coelomic fluid instead of blood, oxygen diffuses across the gill surfaces into the coelomic
fluid. Gills are found in mollusks, annelids, and crustaceans.
Figure39.4Thiscommoncarp,likemanyotheraquaticorganisms,hasgillsthatallowittoobtainoxygenfromwater.
(credit: "Guitardude012"/Wikimedia Commons)
The folded surfaces of the gills provide a large surface area to ensure that the fish gets sufficient oxygen.
Diffusion is a process in which material travels from regions of high concentration to low concentration until
equilibrium is reached. In this case, blood with a low concentration of oxygen molecules circulates through the
gills. The concentration of oxygen molecules in water is higher than the concentration of oxygen molecules
in gills. As a result, oxygen molecules diffuse from water (high concentration) to blood (low concentration),
as shown in Figure 39.5. Similarly, carbon dioxide molecules in the blood diffuse from the blood (high
concentration) to water (low concentration).
PAGE: 1237
1226 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
Figure 39.5 As water flows over the gills, oxygen is transferred to blood via the veins. (credit "fish": modification of
work by Duane Raver, NOAA)
Tracheal Systems
Insect respiration is independent of its circulatory system; therefore, the blood does not play a direct role in
oxygentransport.Insectshaveahighlyspecializedtypeofrespiratorysystemcalledthetrachealsystem,which
consistsofanetworkofsmalltubesthatcarriesoxygentotheentirebody.Thetrachealsystemisthemostdirect
and efficient respiratory system in active animals. The tubes in the tracheal system are made of a polymeric
material called chitin.
Insect bodies have openings, called spiracles, along the thorax and abdomen. These openings connect to the
tubular network, allowing oxygen to pass into the body (Figure 39.6) and regulating the diffusion of CO2 and
water vapor. Air enters and leaves the tracheal system through the spiracles. Some insects can ventilate the
tracheal system with body movements.
Figure 39.6Insects perform respiration via a tracheal system.
Mammalian Systems
In mammals, pulmonary ventilation occurs via inhalation (breathing). During inhalation, air enters the body
throughthenasalcavitylocatedjustinsidethenose(Figure39.7).Asairpassesthroughthenasalcavity,the
airiswarmedtobodytemperatureandhumidified.Therespiratorytractiscoatedwithmucustosealthetissues
from direct contact with air. Mucus is high in water. As air crosses these surfaces of the mucous membranes,
it picks up water. These processes help equilibrate the air to the body conditions, reducing any damage that
cold,dryaircancause.Particulatematterthatisfloatingintheairisremovedinthenasalpassagesviamucus
andcilia.Theprocessesofwarming,humidifying,andremovingparticlesareimportantprotectivemechanisms
thatpreventdamagetothetracheaandlungs.Thus,inhalationservesseveralpurposesinadditiontobringing
oxygen into the respiratory system.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1238
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1227
Figure39.7Airenterstherespiratorysystemthroughthenasalcavityandpharynx,andthenpassesthroughthe
trachea and into the bronchi, which bring air into the lungs. (credit: modification of work by NCI)
Which of the following statements about the mammalian respiratory system is false?
a. When we breathe in, air travels from the pharynx to the trachea.
b. The bronchioles branch into bronchi.
c. Alveolar ducts connect to alveolar sacs.
d. Gas exchange between the lung and blood takes place in the alveolus.
From the nasal cavity, air passes through the pharynx (throat) and the larynx (voice box), as it makes its way
to the trachea (Figure 39.7). The main function of the trachea is to funnel the inhaled air to the lungs and the
exhaledairbackoutofthebody.Thehumantracheaisacylinderabout10to12cmlongand2cmindiameter
that sits in front of the esophagus and extends from the larynx into the chest cavity where it divides into the
two primary bronchi at the midthorax. It is made of incomplete rings of hyaline cartilage and smooth muscle
(Figure 39.8). The trachea is lined with mucus-producing goblet cells and ciliated epithelia. The cilia propel
foreign particles trapped in the mucus toward the pharynx. The cartilage provides strength and support to the
tracheatokeepthepassageopen.Thesmoothmusclecancontract,decreasingthetrachea’sdiameter,which
causes expired air to rush upwards from the lungs at a great force. The forced exhalation helps expel mucus
when we cough. Smooth muscle can contract or relax, depending on stimuli from the external environment or
the body’s nervous system.
PAGE: 1239
1228 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
Figure39.8Thetracheaandbronchiaremadeofincompleteringsofcartilage.(credit:modificationofworkbyGray's
Anatomy)
Lungs: Bronchi and Alveoli
Theendofthetracheabifurcates(divides)totherightandleftlungs.Thelungsarenotidentical.Therightlung
islargerandcontainsthreelobes,whereasthesmallerleftlungcontainstwolobes(Figure39.9).Themuscular
diaphragm, which facilitates breathing, is inferior to (below) the lungs and marks the end of the thoracic cavity.
Figure 39.9 The trachea bifurcates into the right and left bronchi in the lungs. The right lung is made of three lobes
and is larger. To accommodate the heart, the left lung is smaller and has only two lobes.
In the lungs, air is diverted into smaller and smaller passages, or bronchi. Air enters the lungs through the
two primary (main) bronchi (singular: bronchus). Each bronchus divides into secondary bronchi, then into
tertiarybronchi,whichinturndivide,creatingsmallerandsmallerdiameterbronchiolesastheysplitandspread
through the lung. Like the trachea, the bronchi are made of cartilage and smooth muscle. At the bronchioles,
the cartilage is replaced with elastic fibers. Bronchi are innervated by nerves of both the parasympathetic and
sympathetic nervous systems that control muscle contraction (parasympathetic) or relaxation (sympathetic) in
thebronchiandbronchioles,dependingonthenervoussystem’scues.Inhumans,bronchioleswithadiameter
smaller than 0.5 mm are the respiratory bronchioles. They lack cartilage and therefore rely on inhaled air to
supporttheirshape.Asthepassagewaysdecreaseindiameter,therelativeamountofsmoothmuscleincreases.
The terminal bronchioles subdivide into microscopic branches called respiratory bronchioles. The respiratory
bronchioles subdivide into several alveolar ducts. Numerous alveoli and alveolar sacs surround the alveolar
ducts.Thealveolarsacsresemblebunchesofgrapestetheredtotheendofthebronchioles(Figure39.10).In
the acinar region, the alveolar ducts are attached to the end of each bronchiole. At the end of each duct are
approximately100alveolarsacs,eachcontaining20to30alveolithatare200to300micronsindiameter.Gas
exchangeoccursonlyinalveoli.Alveoliaremadeofthin-walledparenchymalcells,typicallyone-cellthick,that
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1240
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1229
lookliketinybubbleswithinthesacs.Alveoliareindirectcontactwithcapillaries(one-cellthick)ofthecirculatory
system. Such intimate contact ensures that oxygen will diffuse from alveoli into the blood and be distributed to
the cells of the body. In addition, the carbon dioxide that was produced by cells as a waste product will diffuse
from the blood into alveoli to be exhaled. The anatomical arrangement of capillaries and alveoli emphasizes
thestructuralandfunctionalrelationshipoftherespiratoryandcirculatorysystems.Becausetherearesomany
alveoli (~300 million per lung) within each alveolar sac and so many sacs at the end of each alveolar duct, the
lungs have a sponge-like consistency. This organization produces a very large surface area that is available
2
for gas exchange. The surface area of alveoli in the lungs is approximately 75 m . This large surface area,
combinedwiththethin-wallednatureofthealveolarparenchymalcells,allowsgasestoeasilydiffuseacrossthe
cells.
Figure39.10Terminalbronchiolesareconnectedbyrespiratorybronchiolestoalveolarductsandalveolarsacs.Each
alveolarsaccontains20to30sphericalalveoliandhastheappearanceofabunchofgrapes.Airflowsintotheatrium
ofthealveolarsac,thencirculatesintoalveoliwheregasexchangeoccurswiththecapillaries.Mucousglandssecrete
mucous into the airways, keeping them moist and flexible. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Watch the following video to review the respiratory system. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66645/1.3/#eip-id1171744721747)
Protective Mechanisms
The air that organisms breathe contains particulate matter such as dust, dirt, viral particles, and bacteria that
candamagethelungsortriggerallergicimmuneresponses.Therespiratorysystemcontainsseveralprotective
mechanisms to avoid problems or tissue damage. In the nasal cavity, hairs and mucus trap small particles,
viruses, bacteria, dust, and dirt to prevent their entry.
If particulates do make it beyond the nose, or enter through the mouth, the bronchi and bronchioles of the
lungs also contain several protective devices. The lungs produce mucus—a sticky substance made of mucin,
acomplexglycoprotein,aswellassaltsandwater—thattrapsparticulates.Thebronchiandbronchiolescontain
PAGE: 1241
1230 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
cilia,smallhair-likeprojectionsthatlinethewallsofthebronchiandbronchioles(Figure39.11).Theseciliabeat
in unison and move mucus and particles out of the bronchi and bronchioles back up to the throat where it is
swallowed and eliminated via the esophagus.
In humans, for example, tar and other substances in cigarette smoke destroy or paralyze the cilia, making the
removal of particles more difficult. In addition, smoking causes the lungs to produce more mucus, which the
damaged cilia are not able to move. This causes a persistent cough, as the lungs try to rid themselves of
particulate matter, and makes smokers more susceptible to respiratory ailments.
Figure 39.11 The bronchi and bronchioles contain cilia that help move mucus and other particles out of the lungs.
(credit: Louisa Howard, modification of work by Dartmouth Electron Microscope Facility)
39.2 | Gas Exchange across Respiratory Surfaces
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Name and describe lung volumes and capacities
• Understand how gas pressure influences how gases move into and out of the body
Thestructureofthelungmaximizesitssurfaceareatoincreasegasdiffusion.Becauseoftheenormousnumber
2
of alveoli (approximately 300 million in each human lung), the surface area of the lung is very large (75 m ).
Having such a large surface area increases the amount of gas that can diffuse into and out of the lungs.
Basic Principles of Gas Exchange
Gas exchange during respiration occurs primarily through diffusion. Diffusion is a process in which transport is
driven by a concentration gradient. Gas molecules move from a region of high concentration to a region of low
concentration. Blood that is low in oxygen concentration and high in carbon dioxide concentration undergoes
gasexchangewithairinthelungs.Theairinthelungshasahigherconcentrationofoxygenthanthatofoxygen-
depletedbloodandalowerconcentrationofcarbondioxide.Thisconcentrationgradientallowsforgasexchange
during respiration.
Partialpressureisameasureoftheconcentrationoftheindividualcomponentsinamixtureofgases.Thetotal
pressure exerted by the mixture is the sum of the partial pressures of the components in the mixture. The rate
ofdiffusionofagasisproportionaltoitspartialpressurewithinthetotalgasmixture.Thisconceptisdiscussed
further in detail below.
Lung Volumes and Capacities
Differentanimalshavedifferentlungcapacitiesbasedontheiractivities.Cheetahshaveevolvedamuchhigher
lung capacity than humans; it helps provide oxygen to all the muscles in the body and allows them to run very
fast.Elephantsalsohaveahighlungcapacity.Inthiscase,itisnotbecausetheyrunfastbutbecausetheyhave
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1242
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1231
a large body and must be able to take up oxygen in accordance with their body size.
Human lung size is determined by genetics, sex, and height. At maximal capacity, an average lung can hold
almostsixlitersofair,butlungsdonotusuallyoperateatmaximalcapacity.Airinthelungsismeasuredinterms
of lung volumes and lung capacities (Figure 39.12 and Table 39.1). Volume measures the amount of air for
one function (such as inhalation or exhalation). Capacity is any two or more volumes (for example, how much
can be inhaled from the end of a maximal exhalation).
Figure 39.12 Human lung volumes and capacities are shown. The total lung capacity of the adult male is six liters.
Tidalvolumeisthevolumeofairinhaledinasingle,normalbreath.Inspiratorycapacityistheamountofairtakenin
during a deep breath, and residual volume is the amount of air left in the lungs after forceful respiration.
Lung Volumes and Capacities (Avg Adult Male)
Volume/ Volume
Definition Equations
Capacity (liters)
Tidal volume (TV) Amount of air inhaled during a normal breath 0.5 -
Expiratory reserve Amount of air that can be exhaled after a normal
1.2 -
volume (ERV) exhalation
Inspiratory reserve Amount of air that can be further inhaled after a normal
3.1 -
volume (IRV) inhalation
Residual volume
Air left in the lungs after a forced exhalation 1.2 -
(RV)
Maximum amount of air that can be moved in or out of
Vital capacity (VC) 4.8 ERV+TV+IRV
the lungs in a single respiratory cycle
Inspiratory capacity Volume of air that can be inhaled in addition to a
3.6 TV+IRV
(IC) normal exhalation
Functional residual
Volume of air remaining after a normal exhalation 2.4 ERV+RV
capacity (FRC)
Total lung capacity Total volume of air in the lungs after a maximal
6.0 RV+ERV+TV+IRV
(TLC) inspiration
Forced expiratory How much air can be forced out of the lungs over a
~4.1 to 5.5 -
volume (FEV1) specific time period, usually one second
Table 39.1
Thevolumeinthelungcanbedividedintofourunits:tidalvolume,expiratoryreservevolume,inspiratoryreserve
PAGE: 1243
1232 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
volume,andresidualvolume.Tidalvolume(TV)measurestheamountofairthatisinspiredandexpiredduring
a normal breath. On average, this volume is around one-half liter, which is a little less than the capacity of a
20-ouncedrinkbottle.Theexpiratoryreservevolume(ERV)istheadditionalamountofairthatcanbeexhaled
afteranormalexhalation.Itisthereserveamountthatcanbeexhaledbeyondwhatisnormal.Conversely,the
inspiratoryreservevolume(IRV)istheadditionalamountofairthatcanbeinhaledafteranormalinhalation.
Theresidualvolume(RV)istheamountofairthatisleftafterexpiratoryreservevolumeisexhaled.Thelungs
arenevercompletelyempty:Thereisalwayssomeairleftinthelungsafteramaximalexhalation.Ifthisresidual
volume did not exist and the lungs emptied completely, the lung tissues would stick together and the energy
necessary to reinflate the lung could be too great to overcome. Therefore, there is always some air remaining
in the lungs. Residual volume is also important for preventing large fluctuations in respiratory gases (O2 and
CO2).Theresidualvolumeistheonlylungvolumethatcannotbemeasureddirectlybecauseitisimpossibleto
completely empty the lung of air. This volume can only be calculated rather than measured.
Capacitiesaremeasurementsoftwoormorevolumes.Thevitalcapacity(VC)measuresthemaximumamount
of air that can be inhaled or exhaled during a respiratory cycle. It is the sum of the expiratory reserve volume,
tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume. The inspiratory capacity (IC) is the amount of air that can be
inhaledaftertheendofanormalexpiration.Itis,therefore,thesumofthetidalvolumeandinspiratoryreserve
volume. The functional residual capacity (FRC) includes the expiratory reserve volume and the residual
volume. The FRC measures the amount of additional air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation. Lastly,
thetotallungcapacity(TLC)isameasurementofthetotalamountofairthatthelungcanhold.Itisthesumof
the residual volume, expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume.
Lung volumes are measured by a technique called spirometry. An important measurement taken during
spirometryistheforcedexpiratoryvolume(FEV),whichmeasureshowmuchaircanbeforcedoutofthelung
overaspecificperiod,usuallyonesecond(FEV1).Inaddition,theforcedvitalcapacity(FVC),whichisthetotal
amountofairthatcanbeforciblyexhaled,ismeasured.Theratioofthesevalues(FEV1/FVCratio)isusedto
diagnoselungdiseasesincludingasthma,emphysema,andfibrosis.IftheFEV1/FVCratioishigh,thelungsare
notcompliant(meaningtheyarestiffandunabletobendproperly),andthepatientmostlikelyhaslungfibrosis.
Patients exhale most of the lung volume very quickly. Conversely, when the FEV1/FVC ratio is low, there is
resistanceinthelungthatischaracteristicofasthma.Inthisinstance,itishardforthepatienttogettheairout
ofhisorherlungs,andittakesalongtimetoreachthemaximalexhalationvolume.Ineithercase,breathingis
difficult and complications arise.
Respiratory Therapist
Respiratory therapists or respiratory practitioners evaluate and treat patients with lung and cardiovascular
diseases. They work as part of a medical team to develop treatment plans for patients. Respiratory
therapists may treat premature babies with underdeveloped lungs, patients with chronic conditions such
as asthma, or older patients suffering from lung disease such as emphysema and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). They may operate advanced equipment such as compressed gas delivery
systems,ventilators,bloodgasanalyzers,andresuscitators.Specializedprogramstobecomearespiratory
therapistgenerallyleadtoabachelor’sdegreewitharespiratorytherapistspecialty.Becauseofagrowing
aging population, career opportunities as a respiratory therapist are expected to remain strong.
Gas Pressure and Respiration
Therespiratoryprocesscanbebetterunderstoodbyexaminingthepropertiesofgases.Gasesmovefreely,but
gas particles are constantly hitting the walls of their vessel, thereby producing gas pressure.
Air is a mixture of gases, primarily nitrogen (N2; 78.6 percent), oxygen (O2; 20.9 percent), water vapor (H2O;
0.5 percent), and carbon dioxide (CO2; 0.04 percent). Each gas component of that mixture exerts a pressure.
The pressure for an individual gas in the mixture is the partial pressure of that gas. Approximately 21 percent
ofatmosphericgasisoxygen.Carbondioxide,however,isfoundinrelativelysmallamounts,0.04percent.The
partialpressureforoxygenismuchgreaterthanthatofcarbondioxide.Thepartialpressureofanygascanbe
calculated by:
P = (P ) × (percent content in mixture).
atm
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1244
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1233
Patm, the atmospheric pressure, is the sum of all of the partial pressures of the atmospheric gases added
together,
P = P + P + P + P = 760 mm Hg
atm N2 O2 H2O CO2
× (percent content in mixture).
The pressure of the atmosphere at sea level is 760 mm Hg. Therefore, the partial pressure of oxygen is:
P = (760 mm Hg) (0.21) = 160 mm Hg
O2
and for carbon dioxide:
P = (760 mm Hg) (0.0004) = 0.3 mm Hg.
CO2
Athighaltitudes,Patmdecreasesbutconcentrationdoesnotchange;thepartialpressuredecreaseisduetothe
reduction in Patm.
Whentheairmixturereachesthelung,ithasbeenhumidified.Thepressureofthewatervaporinthelungdoes
notchangethepressureoftheair,butitmustbeincludedinthepartialpressureequation.Forthiscalculation,
the water pressure (47 mm Hg) is subtracted from the atmospheric pressure:
760 mm Hg − 47 mm Hg = 713 mm Hg
and the partial pressure of oxygen is:
(760 mm Hg − 47 mm Hg) × 0.21 = 150 mm Hg.
Thesepressuresdeterminethegasexchange,ortheflowofgas,inthesystem.Oxygenandcarbondioxidewill
flowaccordingtotheirpressuregradientfromhightolow.Therefore,understandingthepartialpressureofeach
gas will aid in understanding how gases move in the respiratory system.
Gas Exchange across the Alveoli
Inthebody,oxygenisusedbycellsofthebody’stissuesandcarbondioxideisproducedasawasteproduct.The
ratioofcarbondioxideproductiontooxygenconsumptionistherespiratoryquotient(RQ).RQvariesbetween
0.7 and 1.0. If just glucose were used to fuel the body, the RQ would equal one. One mole of carbon dioxide
would be produced for every mole of oxygen consumed. Glucose, however, is not the only fuel for the body.
Proteinandfatarealsousedasfuelsforthebody.Becauseofthis,lesscarbondioxideisproducedthanoxygen
is consumed and the RQ is, on average, about 0.7 for fat and about 0.8 for protein.
The RQ is used to calculate the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveolar spaces within the lung, the alveolar
P . Above, the partial pressure of oxygen in the lungs was calculated to be 150 mm Hg. However, lungs
O2
neverfullydeflatewithanexhalation;therefore,theinspiredairmixeswiththisresidualairandlowersthepartial
pressure of oxygen within the alveoli. This means that there is a lower concentration of oxygen in the lungs
than is found in the air outside the body. Knowing the RQ, the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli can be
calculated:
alveolar P
alveolar P = inspired P − (
O2)
O2 O2 RQ
With an RQ of 0.8 and a P in the alveoli of 40 mm Hg, the alveolar P is equal to:
CO2 O2
40 mm Hg
alveolar P = 150 mm Hg − ( ) = 100 mm Hg.
O2 0.8
Noticethatthispressureislessthantheexternalair.Therefore,theoxygenwillflowfromtheinspiredairinthe
lung (P = 150 mm Hg) into the bloodstream (P = 100 mm Hg) (Figure 39.13).
O2 O2
In the lungs, oxygen diffuses out of the alveoli and into the capillaries surrounding the alveoli. Oxygen (about
98percent)bindsreversiblytotherespiratorypigmenthemoglobinfoundinredbloodcells(RBCs).RBCscarry
oxygen to the tissues where oxygen dissociates from the hemoglobin and diffuses into the cells of the tissues.
Morespecifically,alveolar P ishigherinthealveoli(P =100mmHg)thanblood P (40mmHg)in
O2 ALVO2 O2
thecapillaries.Becausethispressuregradientexists,oxygendiffusesdownitspressuregradient,movingoutof
PAGE: 1245
1234 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
the alveoli and entering the blood of the capillaries where O2 binds to hemoglobin. At the same time, alveolar
P islower P =40mmHgthanblood P =(45mmHg).CO2diffusesdownitspressuregradient,
CO2 ALVO2 CO2
moving out of the capillaries and entering the alveoli.
Oxygenandcarbondioxidemoveindependentlyofeachother;theydiffusedowntheirownpressuregradients.
As blood leaves the lungs through the pulmonary veins, the venous P = 100 mm Hg, whereas the venous
O2
P =40mmHg.Asbloodentersthesystemiccapillaries,thebloodwillloseoxygenandgaincarbondioxide
CO2
because of the pressure difference of the tissues and blood. In systemic capillaries, P = 100 mm Hg, but in
O2
the tissue cells, P = 40 mm Hg. This pressure gradient drives the diffusion of oxygen out of the capillaries
O2
and into the tissue cells. At the same time, blood P = 40 mm Hg and systemic tissue P = 45 mm Hg.
CO2 CO2
The pressure gradient drives CO2 out of tissue cells and into the capillaries. The blood returning to the lungs
throughthepulmonaryarterieshasavenous P =40mmHganda P =45mmHg.Thebloodentersthe
O2 CO2
lungcapillarieswheretheprocessofexchanginggasesbetweenthecapillariesandalveolibeginsagain(Figure
39.13).
Figure 39.13The partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide change as blood moves through the body.
Which of the following statements is false?
a. In the tissues, P drops as blood passes from the arteries to the veins, while P increases.
O2 CO2
b. Blood travels from the lungs to the heart to body tissues, then back to the heart, then the lungs.
c. Blood travels from the lungs to the heart to body tissues, then back to the lungs, then the heart.
d. P is higher in air than in the lungs.
O2
Inshort,thechangeinpartialpressurefromthealveolitothecapillariesdrivestheoxygenintothetissuesand
thecarbondioxideintothebloodfromthetissues.Thebloodisthentransportedtothelungswheredifferences
in pressure in the alveoli result in the movement of carbon dioxide out of the blood into the lungs, and oxygen
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1246
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1235
into the blood.
Watch this video to learn how to carry out spirometry. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66646/1.3/#eip-id1166886382710)
39.3 | Breathing
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how the structures of the lungs and thoracic cavity control the mechanics of breathing
• Explain the importance of compliance and resistance in the lungs
• Discuss problems that may arise due to a V/Q mismatch
Mammalian lungs are located in the thoracic cavity where they are surrounded and protected by the rib cage,
intercostal muscles, and bound by the chest wall. The bottom of the lungs is contained by the diaphragm, a
skeletal muscle that facilitates breathing. Breathing requires the coordination of the lungs, the chest wall, and
most importantly, the diaphragm.
Types of Breathing
Amphibianshaveevolvedmultiplewaysofbreathing.Youngamphibians,liketadpoles,usegillstobreathe,and
they don’t leave the water. Some amphibians retain gills for life. As the tadpole grows, the gills disappear and
lungs grow. These lungs are primitive and not as evolved as mammalian lungs. Adult amphibians are lacking
orhaveareduceddiaphragm,sobreathingvialungsisforced.Theothermeansofbreathingforamphibiansis
diffusion across the skin. To aid this diffusion, amphibian skin must remain moist.
Birds face a unique challenge with respect to breathing: They fly. Flying consumes a great amount of energy;
therefore,birdsrequirealotofoxygentoaidtheirmetabolicprocesses.Birdshaveevolvedarespiratorysystem
that supplies them with the oxygen needed to enable flying. Similar to mammals, birds have lungs, which are
organsspecializedforgasexchange.Oxygenatedair,takeninduringinhalation, diffusesacrossthesurfaceof
the lungs into the bloodstream, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the lungs and expelled during
exhalation. The details of breathing between birds and mammals differ substantially.
In addition to lungs, birds have air sacs inside their body. Air flows in one direction from the posterior air sacs
tothelungsandoutoftheanteriorairsacs.Theflowofairisintheoppositedirectionfrombloodflow,andgas
exchangetakesplacemuchmoreefficiently.Thistypeofbreathingenablesbirdstoobtaintherequisiteoxygen,
evenathigheraltitudeswheretheoxygenconcentrationislow.Thisdirectionalityofairflowrequirestwocycles
of air intake and exhalation to completely get the air out of the lungs.
PAGE: 1247
1236 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
Avian Respiration
Birds have evolved a respiratory system that enables them to fly. Flying is a high-energy process and
requiresalotofoxygen.Furthermore,manybirdsflyinhighaltitudeswheretheconcentrationofoxygenis
low. How did birds evolve a respiratory system that is so unique?
Decades of research by paleontologists have shown that birds evolved from therapods, meat-eating
dinosaurs(Figure39.14).Infact,fossilevidenceshowsthatmeat-eatingdinosaursthatlivedmorethan100
millionyearsagohadasimilarflow-throughrespiratorysystemwithlungsandairsacs.Archaeopteryxand
Xiaotingia, for example, were flying dinosaurs and are believed to be early precursors of birds.
Figure39.14Dinosaurs,fromwhichbirdsdescended,havesimilarhollowbonesandarebelievedtohavehada
similar respiratory system. (credit b: modification of work by Zina Deretsky, National Science Foundation)
Mostofusconsiderthatdinosaursareextinct.However,modernbirdsaredescendantsofaviandinosaurs.
The respiratory system of modern birds has been evolving for hundreds of millions of years.
All mammals have lungs that are the main organs for breathing. Lung capacity has evolved to support the
animal’s activities. During inhalation, the lungs expand with air, and oxygen diffuses across the lung’s surface
andentersthebloodstream.Duringexhalation,thelungsexpelairandlungvolumedecreases.Inthenextfew
sections, the process of human breathing will be explained.
The Mechanics of Human Breathing
Boyle’s Law is the gas law that states that in a closed space, pressure and volume are inversely related. As
volume decreases, pressure increases and vice versa (Figure 39.15). The relationship between gas pressure
and volume helps to explain the mechanics of breathing.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1248
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1237
Figure 39.15 This graph shows data from Boyle’s original 1662 experiment, which shows that pressure and volume
are inversely related. No units are given as Boyle used arbitrary units in his experiments.
There is always a slightly negative pressure within the thoracic cavity, which aids in keeping the airways
of the lungs open. During inhalation, volume increases as a result of contraction of the diaphragm, and
pressure decreases (according to Boyle’s Law). This decrease of pressure in the thoracic cavity relative to the
environment makes the cavity less than the atmosphere (Figure 39.16a). Because of this drop in pressure, air
rushesintotherespiratorypassages.Toincreasethevolumeofthelungs,thechestwallexpands.Thisresults
from the contraction of the intercostal muscles, the muscles that are connected to the rib cage. Lung volume
expands because the diaphragm contracts and the intercostal muscles contract, thus expanding the thoracic
cavity. This increase in the volume of the thoracic cavity lowers pressure compared to the atmosphere, so air
rushes into the lungs, thus increasing its volume. The resulting increase in volume is largely attributed to an
increase in alveolar space, because the bronchioles and bronchi are stiff structures that do not change in size.
Figure39.16Thelungs,chestwall,anddiaphragmareallinvolvedinrespiration,both(a)inhalationand(b)expiration.
(credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Thechestwallexpandsoutandawayfromthelungs.Thelungsareelastic;therefore,whenairfillsthelungs,the
elasticrecoilwithinthetissuesofthelungexertspressurebacktowardtheinteriorofthelungs.Theseoutward
and inward forces compete to inflate and deflate the lung with every breath. Upon exhalation, the lungs recoil
to force the air out of the lungs, and the intercostal muscles relax, returning the chest wall back to its original
position(Figure39.16b).Thediaphragmalsorelaxesandmoveshigherintothethoraciccavity.Thisincreases
thepressurewithinthethoraciccavityrelativetotheenvironment,andairrushesoutofthelungs.Themovement
of air out of the lungs is a passive event. No muscles are contracting to expel the air.
Each lung is surrounded by an invaginated sac. The layer of tissue that covers the lung and dips into spaces
is called the visceral pleura. A second layer of parietal pleura lines the interior of the thorax (Figure 39.17).
The space between these layers, the intrapleural space, contains a small amount of fluid that protects the
PAGE: 1249
1238 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
tissueandreducesthefrictiongeneratedfromrubbingthetissuelayerstogetherasthelungscontractandrelax.
Pleurisyresultswhentheselayersoftissuebecomeinflamed;itispainfulbecausetheinflammationincreases
the pressure within the thoracic cavity and reduces the volume of the lung.
Figure39.17Atissuelayercalledpleurasurroundsthelungandinteriorofthethoraciccavity.(credit:modificationof
work by NCI)
View how Boyle’s Law is related to breathing and watch a video (https://www.openstaxcollege.org/l/
boyles_law) on Boyle’s Law. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/
m66647/1.3/#eip-id1169422250553)
The Work of Breathing
The number of breaths per minute is the respiratory rate. On average, under non-exertion conditions, the
humanrespiratoryrateis12–15breaths/minute.Therespiratoryratecontributestothealveolarventilation,or
howmuchairmovesintoandoutofthealveoli.Alveolarventilationpreventscarbondioxidebuildupinthealveoli.
There are two ways to keep the alveolar ventilation constant: increase the respiratory rate while decreasing
thetidalvolumeofairperbreath(shallowbreathing),ordecreasetherespiratoryratewhileincreasingthetidal
volumeperbreath.Ineithercase,theventilationremainsthesame,buttheworkdoneandtypeofworkneeded
arequitedifferent.Bothtidalvolumeandrespiratoryratearecloselyregulatedwhenoxygendemandincreases.
Therearetwotypesofworkconductedduringrespiration,flow-resistiveandelasticwork.Flow-resistiverefers
to the work of the alveoli and tissues in the lung, whereas elastic work refers to the work of the intercostal
muscles, chest wall, and diaphragm. Increasing the respiration rate increases the flow-resistive work of the
airwaysanddecreasestheelasticworkofthemuscles.Decreasingtherespiratoryratereversesthetypeofwork
required.
Surfactant
The air-tissue/water interface of the alveoli has a high surface tension. This surface tension is similar to the
surface tension of water at the liquid-air interface of a water droplet that results in the bonding of the water
moleculestogether.Surfactantisacomplexmixtureofphospholipidsandlipoproteinsthatworkstoreducethe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1250
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1239
surfacetensionthatexistsbetweenthealveolitissueandtheairfoundwithinthealveoli.Byloweringthesurface
tension of the alveolar fluid, it reduces the tendency of alveoli to collapse.
Surfactant works like a detergent to reduce the surface tension and allows for easier inflation of the airways.
When a balloon is first inflated, it takes a large amount of effort to stretch the plastic and start to inflate the
balloon. If a little bit of detergent was applied to the interior of the balloon, then the amount of effort or work
neededtobegintoinflatetheballoonwoulddecrease,anditwouldbecomemucheasiertostartblowingupthe
balloon.Thissameprincipleappliestotheairways.Asmallamountofsurfactanttotheairwaytissuesreduces
theeffort orworkneededtoinflate those airways. Babies bornprematurely sometimes donotproduceenough
surfactant.Asaresult,theysufferfromrespiratorydistresssyndrome,becauseitrequiresmoreefforttoinflate
their lungs. Surfactant is also important for preventing collapse of small alveoli relative to large alveoli.
Lung Resistance and Compliance
Pulmonarydiseasesreducetherateofgasexchangeintoandoutofthelungs.Twomaincausesofdecreased
gas exchange are compliance (how elastic the lung is) and resistance (how much obstruction exists in the
airways).Achangeineithercandramaticallyalterbreathingandtheabilitytotakeinoxygenandreleasecarbon
dioxide.
Examples of restrictive diseases are respiratory distress syndrome and pulmonary fibrosis. In both diseases,
theairwaysarelesscompliantandtheyarestifforfibrotic.Thereisadecreaseincompliancebecausethelung
tissue cannot bend and move. In these types of restrictive diseases, the intrapleural pressure is more positive
and the airways collapse upon exhalation, which traps air in the lungs. Forced or functional vital capacity
(FVC),whichistheamountofairthatcanbeforciblyexhaledaftertakingthedeepestbreathpossible,ismuch
lowerthaninnormalpatients,andthetimeittakestoexhalemostoftheairisgreatlyprolonged(Figure39.18).
A patient suffering from these diseases cannot exhale the normal amount of air.
Obstructive diseases and conditions include emphysema, asthma, and pulmonary edema. In emphysema,
which mostly arises from smoking tobacco, the walls of the alveoli are destroyed, decreasing the surface area
forgasexchange.Theoverallcomplianceofthelungsisincreased,becauseasthealveolarwallsaredamaged,
lung elastic recoil decreases due to a loss of elastic fibers, and more air is trapped in the lungs at the end
of exhalation. Asthma is a disease in which inflammation is triggered by environmental factors. Inflammation
obstructstheairways.Theobstructionmaybeduetoedema(fluidaccumulation),smoothmusclespasmsinthe
wallsofthebronchioles,increasedmucussecretion,damagetotheepitheliaoftheairways,oracombinationof
theseevents.Thosewithasthmaoredemaexperienceincreasedocclusionfromincreasedinflammationofthe
airways.Thistendstoblocktheairways,preventingthepropermovementofgases(Figure39.18).Thosewith
obstructivediseaseshavelargevolumesofairtrappedafterexhalationandbreatheataveryhighlungvolume
to compensate for the lack of airway recruitment.
PAGE: 1251
1240 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
Figure 39.18 The ratio of FEV1 (the amount of air that can be forcibly exhaled in one second after taking a deep
breath) to FVC (the total amount of air that can be forcibly exhaled) can be used to diagnose whether a person has
restrictive or obstructive lung disease. In restrictive lung disease, FVC is reduced but airways are not obstructed, so
thepersonisabletoexpelairreasonablyfast.Inobstructivelungdisease,airwayobstructionresultsinslowexhalation
as well as reduced FVC. Thus, the FEV1/FVC ratio is lower in persons with obstructive lung disease (less than 69
percent) than in persons with restrictive disease (88 to 90 percent).
Dead Space: V/Q Mismatch
Pulmonary circulation pressure is very low compared to that of the systemic circulation. It is also independent
of cardiac output. This is because of a phenomenon called recruitment, which is the process of opening
airways that normally remain closed when cardiac output increases. As cardiac output increases, the number
of capillaries and arteries that are perfused (filled with blood) increases. These capillaries and arteries are not
always in use but are ready if needed. At times, however, there is a mismatch between the amount of air
(ventilation,V)andtheamountofblood(perfusion,Q)inthelungs.Thisisreferredtoasventilation/perfusion
(V/Q) mismatch.
There are two types of V/Q mismatch. Both produce dead space, regions of broken down or blocked lung
tissue. Dead spaces can severely impact breathing, because they reduce the surface area available for gas
diffusion.Asaresult,theamountofoxygenintheblooddecreases,whereasthecarbondioxidelevelincreases.
Deadspaceiscreatedwhennoventilationand/orperfusiontakesplace.Anatomicaldeadspaceoranatomical
shunt,arisesfromananatomicalfailure,whilephysiologicaldeadspaceorphysiologicalshunt,arisesfroma
functional impairment of the lung or arteries.
An example of an anatomical shunt is the effect of gravity on the lungs. The lung is particularly susceptible to
changesinthemagnitudeanddirectionofgravitationalforces.Whensomeoneisstandingorsittingupright,the
pleural pressure gradient leads to increased ventilation further down in the lung. As a result, the intrapleural
pressure is more negative at the base of the lung than at the top, and more air fills the bottom of the lung
than the top. Likewise, it takes less energy to pump blood to the bottom of the lung than to the top when in
a prone position. Perfusion of the lung is not uniform while standing or sitting. This is a result of hydrostatic
forces combined with the effect of airway pressure. An anatomical shunt develops because the ventilation of
theairwaysdoesnotmatchtheperfusionofthearteriessurroundingthoseairways.Asaresult,therateofgas
exchangeisreduced.Notethatthisdoesnotoccurwhenlyingdown,becauseinthisposition,gravitydoesnot
preferentially pull the bottom of the lung down.
A physiological shunt can develop if there is infection or edema in the lung that obstructs an area. This will
decrease ventilation but not affect perfusion; therefore, the V/Q ratio changes and gas exchange is affected.
The lung can compensate for these mismatches in ventilation and perfusion. If ventilation is greater than
perfusion, the arterioles dilate and the bronchioles constrict. This increases perfusion and reduces ventilation.
Likewise, if ventilation is less than perfusion, the arterioles constrict and the bronchioles dilate to correct the
imbalance.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1252
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1241
View the mechanics of breathing.
(This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66647/1.3/#eip-
id1166285291346)
39.4 | Transport of Gases in Human Bodily Fluids
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how oxygen is bound to hemoglobin and transported to body tissues
• Explain how carbon dioxide is transported from body tissues to the lungs
Once the oxygen diffuses across the alveoli, it enters the bloodstream and is transported to the tissues where
it is unloaded, and carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood and into the alveoli to be expelled from the body.
Although gas exchange is a continuous process, the oxygen and carbon dioxide are transported by different
mechanisms.
Transport of Oxygen in the Blood
Althoughoxygendissolvesinblood,onlyasmallamountofoxygenistransportedthisway.Only1.5percentof
oxygeninthebloodisdissolveddirectlyintotheblooditself.Mostoxygen—98.5percent—isboundtoaprotein
called hemoglobin and carried to the tissues.
Hemoglobin
Hemoglobin, or Hb, is a protein molecule found in red blood cells (erythrocytes) made of four subunits:
two alpha subunits and two beta subunits (Figure 39.19). Each subunit surrounds a central heme group
that contains iron and binds one oxygen molecule, allowing each hemoglobin molecule to bind four oxygen
molecules. Molecules with more oxygen bound to the heme groups are brighter red. As a result, oxygenated
arterial blood where the Hb is carrying four oxygen molecules is bright red, while venous blood that is
deoxygenated is darker red.
Figure39.19Theproteininside(a)redbloodcellsthatcarriesoxygentocellsandcarbondioxidetothelungsis(b)
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is made up of four symmetrical subunits and four heme groups. Iron associated with the
heme binds oxygen. It is the iron in hemoglobin that gives blood its red color.
It is easier to bind a second and third oxygen molecule to Hb than the first molecule. This is because the
PAGE: 1253
1242 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
hemoglobin molecule changes its shape, or conformation, as oxygen binds. The fourth oxygen is then more
difficult to bind. The binding of oxygen to hemoglobin can be plotted as a function of the partial pressure of
oxygenintheblood(x-axis)versustherelativeHb-oxygensaturation(y-axis).Theresultinggraph—anoxygen
dissociationcurve—issigmoidal,orS-shaped(Figure39.20).Asthepartialpressureofoxygenincreases,the
hemoglobin becomes increasingly saturated with oxygen.
Figure 39.20 The oxygen dissociation curve demonstrates that, as the partial pressure of oxygen increases,
more oxygen binds hemoglobin. However, the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen may shift to the left or the right
depending on environmental conditions.
The kidneys are responsible for removing excess H+ ions from the blood. If the kidneys fail, what would
happen to blood pH and to hemoglobin affinity for oxygen?
Factors That Affect Oxygen Binding
Theoxygen-carryingcapacityofhemoglobindetermineshowmuchoxygeniscarriedintheblood.Inaddition
to P , other environmental factors and diseases can affect oxygen carrying capacity and delivery.
O2
Carbon dioxide levels, blood pH, and body temperature affect oxygen-carrying capacity (Figure 39.20). When
carbon dioxide is in the blood, it reacts with water to form bicarbonate (HCO − ) and hydrogen ions (H + ). As
3
+
the level of carbon dioxide in the blood increases, more H is produced and the pH decreases. This increase
in carbon dioxide and subsequent decrease in pH reduce the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen. The oxygen
dissociatesfromtheHbmolecule,shiftingtheoxygendissociationcurvetotheright.Therefore,moreoxygenis
needed to reach the same hemoglobin saturation level as when the pH was higher. A similar shift in the curve
also results from an increase in body temperature. Increased temperature, such as from increased activity of
skeletal muscle, causes the affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen to be reduced.
Diseaseslikesicklecellanemiaandthalassemiadecreasetheblood’sabilitytodeliveroxygentotissuesandits
oxygen-carryingcapacity.Insicklecellanemia,theshapeoftheredbloodcelliscrescent-shaped,elongated,
and stiffened, reducing its ability to deliver oxygen (Figure 39.21). In this form, red blood cells cannot pass
throughthecapillaries.Thisispainfulwhenitoccurs.Thalassemiaisararegeneticdiseasecausedbyadefect
in either the alpha or the beta subunit of Hb. Patients with thalassemia produce a high number of red blood
cells, but these cells have lower-than-normal levels of hemoglobin. Therefore, the oxygen-carrying capacity is
diminished.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1254
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1243
Figure39.21Individualswithsicklecellanemiahavecrescent-shapedredbloodcells.(credit:modificationofworkby
Ed Uthman; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Transport of Carbon Dioxide in the Blood
Carbondioxidemoleculesaretransportedinthebloodfrombodytissuestothelungsbyoneofthreemethods:
dissolution directly into the blood, binding to hemoglobin, or carried as a bicarbonate ion. Several properties
of carbon dioxide in the blood affect its transport. First, carbon dioxide is more soluble in blood than oxygen.
About5to7percentofallcarbondioxideisdissolvedintheplasma.Second,carbondioxidecanbindtoplasma
proteins or can enter red blood cells and bind to hemoglobin. This form transports about 10 percent of the
carbondioxide.Whencarbondioxidebindstohemoglobin,amoleculecalledcarbaminohemoglobinisformed.
Bindingofcarbondioxidetohemoglobinisreversible.Therefore,whenitreachesthelungs,thecarbondioxide
can freely dissociate from the hemoglobin and be expelled from the body.
Third, the majority of carbon dioxide molecules (85 percent) are carried as part of the bicarbonate buffer
system. In this system, carbon dioxide diffuses into the red blood cells. Carbonic anhydrase (CA) within the
red blood cells quickly converts the carbon dioxide into carbonic acid (H2CO3). Carbonic acid is an unstable
intermediate molecule that immediately dissociates into bicarbonate ions (HCO − ) and hydrogen (H + ) ions.
3
Sincecarbondioxideisquicklyconvertedintobicarbonateions,thisreactionallowsforthecontinueduptakeof
+
carbon dioxide into the blood down its concentration gradient. It also results in the production of H ions. If too
+ +
muchH isproduced,itcanalterbloodpH.However,hemoglobinbindstothefreeH ionsandthuslimitsshifts
in pH. The newly synthesized bicarbonate ion is transported out of the red blood cell into the liquid component
-
of the blood in exchange for a chloride ion (Cl); this is called the chloride shift. When the blood reaches the
+
lungs,thebicarbonateionistransportedbackintotheredbloodcellinexchangeforthechlorideion.TheH ion
dissociatesfromthehemoglobinandbindstothebicarbonateion.Thisproducesthecarbonicacidintermediate,
which is converted back into carbon dioxide through the enzymatic action of CA. The carbon dioxide produced
is expelled through the lungs during exhalation.
CO + H O ↔ H 2 CO 3 ↔ HCO 3 + H +
2 2
(carbonic acid) (bicarbonate)
Thebenefitofthebicarbonatebuffersystemisthatcarbondioxideis“soakedup”intothebloodwithlittlechange
tothepHofthesystem.ThisisimportantbecauseittakesonlyasmallchangeintheoverallpHofthebodyfor
severe injury or death to result. The presence of this bicarbonate buffer system also allows for people to travel
andliveathighaltitudes:Whenthepartialpressureofoxygenandcarbondioxidechangeathighaltitudes,the
bicarbonate buffer system adjusts to regulate carbon dioxide while maintaining the correct pH in the body.
Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
While carbon dioxide can readily associate and dissociate from hemoglobin, other molecules such as carbon
monoxide (CO) cannot. Carbon monoxide has a greater affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen. Therefore, when
carbonmonoxideispresent,itbindstohemoglobinpreferentiallyoveroxygen.Asaresult,oxygencannotbind
to hemoglobin, so very little oxygen is transported through the body (Figure 39.22). Carbon monoxide is a
colorless, odorless gas and is therefore difficult to detect. It is produced by gas-powered vehicles and tools.
PAGE: 1255
1244 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
Carbonmonoxidecancauseheadaches,confusion,andnausea;long-termexposurecancausebraindamage
or death. Administering 100 percent (pure) oxygen is the usual treatment for carbon monoxide poisoning.
Administration of pure oxygen speeds up the separation of carbon monoxide from hemoglobin.
Figure 39.22As percent CO increases, the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin decreases.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1256
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1245
KEY TERMS
alveolar P partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli (usually around 100 mmHg)
O2
alveolar duct duct that extends from the terminal bronchiole to the alveolar sac
alveolar sac structure consisting of two or more alveoli that share a common opening
alveolar ventilation how much air is in the alveoli
alveolus (plural: alveoli) (also, air sac) terminal region of the lung where gas exchange occurs
anatomical dead space (also,anatomical shunt)regionofthelungthat lacksproperventilation/perfusion due
to an anatomical block
bicarbonate (HCO − 3 ) ion ion created when carbonic acid dissociates into H + and (HCO − 3 )
bicarbonate buffer system system in the blood that absorbs carbon dioxide and regulates pH levels
bronchiole airway that extends from the main tertiary bronchi to the alveolar sac
bronchus (plural: bronchi) smaller branch of cartilaginous tissue that stems off of the trachea; air is funneled
through the bronchi to the region where gas exchange occurs in alveoli
carbaminohemoglobin molecule that forms when carbon dioxide binds to hemoglobin
carbonic anhydrase (CA) enzyme that catalyzes carbon dioxide and water into carbonic acid
chloride shift exchange of chloride for bicarbonate into or out of the red blood cell
compliance measurement of the elasticity of the lung
dead space area in the lung that lacks proper ventilation or perfusion
diaphragm domed-shaped skeletal muscle located under lungs that separates the thoracic cavity from the
abdominal cavity
elastic recoil property of the lung that drives the lung tissue inward
elastic work work conducted by the intercostal muscles, chest wall, and diaphragm
expiratory reserve volume (ERV) amount of additional air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation
FEV1/FVC ratio ratio of how much air can be forced out of the lung in one second to the total amount that is
forced out of the lung; a measurement of lung function that can be used to detect disease states
flow-resistive work of breathing performed by the alveoli and tissues in the lung
forced expiratory volume (FEV) (also,forcedvitalcapacity)measureofhowmuchaircanbeforcedoutofthe
lung from maximal inspiration over a specific amount of time
functional residual capacity (FRC) expiratory reserve volume plus residual volume
functional vital capacity (FVC) amount of air that can be forcibly exhaled after taking the deepest breath
possible
heme group centralizediron-containinggroupthatissurroundedbythealphaandbetasubunitsofhemoglobin
hemoglobin molecule in red blood cells that can bind oxygen, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide
inspiratory capacity (IC) tidal volume plus inspiratory reserve volume
inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) amount of additional air that can be inspired after a normal inhalation
PAGE: 1257
1246 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
intercostal muscle muscle connected to the rib cage that contracts upon inspiration
intrapleural space space between the layers of pleura
larynx voice box, a short passageway connecting the pharynx and the trachea
lung capacity measurement of two or more lung volumes (how much air can be inhaled from the end of an
expiration to maximal capacity)
lung volume measurement of air for one lung function (normal inhalation or exhalation)
mucin complex glycoprotein found in mucus
mucus sticky protein-containing fluid secretion in the lung that traps particulate matter to be expelled from the
body
nasal cavity opening of the respiratory system to the outside environment
obstructive disease disease (such as emphysema and asthma) that arises from obstruction of the airways;
compliance increases in these diseases
oxygen dissociation curve curve depicting the affinity of oxygen for hemoglobin
oxygen-carrying capacity amount of oxygen that can be transported in the blood
partial pressure amount of pressure exerted by one gas within a mixture of gases
particulate matter small particle such as dust, dirt, viral particles, and bacteria that are in the air
pharynx throat;atubethatstartsintheinternalnaresandrunspartwaydowntheneck,whereitopensintothe
esophagus and the larynx
physiological dead space (also,physiologicalshunt)regionofthelungthatlacksproperventilation/perfusion
due to a physiological change in the lung (like inflammation or edema)
pleura tissue layer that surrounds the lungs and lines the interior of the thoracic cavity
pleurisy painful inflammation of the pleural tissue layers
primary bronchus (also, main bronchus) region of the airway within the lung that attaches to the trachea and
bifurcates to each lung where it branches into secondary bronchi
recruitment process of opening airways that normally remain closed when the cardiac output increases
residual volume (RV) amount of air remaining in the lung after a maximal expiration
resistance measurement of lung obstruction
respiratory bronchiole terminal portion of the bronchiole tree that is attached to the terminal bronchioles and
alveoli ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli
respiratory distress syndrome disease that arises from a deficient amount of surfactant
respiratory quotient (RQ) ratio of carbon dioxide production to each oxygen molecule consumed
respiratory rate number of breaths per minute
restrictive disease diseasethatresultsfromarestrictionanddecreasedcomplianceofthealveoli;respiratory
distress syndrome and pulmonary fibrosis are examples
sickle cell anemia geneticdisorderthataffectstheshapeofredbloodcells,andtheirabilitytotransportoxygen
and move through capillaries
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1258
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1247
spirometry method to measure lung volumes and to diagnose lung diseases
surfactant detergent-like liquid in the airways that lowers the surface tension of the alveoli to allow for
expansion
terminal bronchiole region of bronchiole that attaches to the respiratory bronchioles
thalassemia raregeneticdisorderthatresultsinmutationofthealphaorbetasubunitsofhemoglobin,creating
smaller red blood cells with less hemoglobin
tidal volume (TV) amount of air that is inspired and expired during normal breathing
total lung capacity (TLC) sumoftheresidualvolume,expiratoryreservevolume,tidalvolume,andinspiratory
reserve volume
trachea cartilaginous tube that transports air from the larynx to the primary bronchi
venous P partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the veins (40 mm Hg in the pulmonary veins)
CO2
venous P partial pressure of oxygen in the veins (100 mm Hg in the pulmonary veins)
O2
ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) mismatch region of the lung that lacks proper alveolar ventilation (V) and/or
arterial perfusion (Q)
vital capacity (VC) sum of the expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume
CHAPTER SUMMARY
39.1Systems of Gas Exchange
Animal respiratory systems are designed to facilitate gas exchange. In mammals, air is warmed and humidified
in the nasal cavity. Air then travels down the pharynx, through the trachea, and into the lungs. In the lungs, air
passes through the branching bronchi, reaching the respiratory bronchioles, which house the first site of gas
exchange. The respiratory bronchioles open into the alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli. Because there
are so many alveoli and alveolar sacs in the lung, the surface area for gas exchange is very large. Several
protective mechanisms are in place to prevent damage or infection. These include the hair and mucus in the
nasal cavity that trap dust, dirt, and other particulate matter before they can enter the system. In the lungs,
particles are trapped in a mucus layer and transported via cilia up to the esophageal opening at the top of the
trachea to be swallowed.
39.2Gas Exchange across Respiratory Surfaces
The lungs can hold a large volume of air, but they are not usually filled to maximal capacity. Lung volume
measurements include tidal volume, expiratory reserve volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and residual
volume. The sum of these equals the total lung capacity. Gas movement into or out of the lungs is dependent
on the pressure of the gas. Air is a mixture of gases; therefore, the partial pressure of each gas can be
calculated to determine how the gas will flow in the lung. The difference between the partial pressure of the gas
in the air drives oxygen into the tissues and carbon dioxide out of the body.
39.3Breathing
The structure of the lungs and thoracic cavity control the mechanics of breathing. Upon inspiration, the
diaphragm contracts and lowers. The intercostal muscles contract and expand the chest wall outward. The
intrapleural pressure drops, the lungs expand, and air is drawn into the airways. When exhaling, the intercostal
muscles and diaphragm relax, returning the intrapleural pressure back to the resting state. The lungs recoil and
airways close. The air passively exits the lung. There is high surface tension at the air-airway interface in the
lung. Surfactant, a mixture of phospholipids and lipoproteins, acts like a detergent in the airways to reduce
surface tension and allow for opening of the alveoli.
Breathing and gas exchange are both altered by changes in the compliance and resistance of the lung. If the
compliance of the lung decreases, as occurs in restrictive diseases like fibrosis, the airways stiffen and collapse
upon exhalation. Air becomes trapped in the lungs, making breathing more difficult. If resistance increases, as
PAGE: 1259
1248 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
happens with asthma or emphysema, the airways become obstructed, trapping air in the lungs and causing
breathing to become difficult. Alterations in the ventilation of the airways or perfusion of the arteries can affect
gas exchange. These changes in ventilation and perfusion, called V/Q mismatch, can arise from anatomical or
physiological changes.
39.4Transport of Gases in Human Bodily Fluids
Hemoglobin is a protein found in red blood cells that is comprised of two alpha and two beta subunits that
surround an iron-containing heme group. Oxygen readily binds this heme group. The ability of oxygen to bind
increases as more oxygen molecules are bound to heme. Disease states and altered conditions in the body
can affect the binding ability of oxygen, and increase or decrease its ability to dissociate from hemoglobin.
Carbon dioxide can be transported through the blood via three methods. It is dissolved directly in the blood,
bound to plasma proteins or hemoglobin, or converted into bicarbonate. The majority of carbon dioxide is
transported as part of the bicarbonate system. Carbon dioxide diffuses into red blood cells. Inside, carbonic
anhydrase converts carbon dioxide into carbonic acid (H2CO3), which is subsequently hydrolyzed into
bicarbonate (HCO − ) and H + . The H + ion binds to hemoglobin in red blood cells, and bicarbonate is
3
transported out of the red blood cells in exchange for a chloride ion. This is called the chloride shift.
Bicarbonate leaves the red blood cells and enters the blood plasma. In the lungs, bicarbonate is transported
+
back into the red blood cells in exchange for chloride. The H dissociates from hemoglobin and combines with
bicarbonate to form carbonic acid with the help of carbonic anhydrase, which further catalyzes the reaction to
convert carbonic acid back into carbon dioxide and water. The carbon dioxide is then expelled from the lungs.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 39.7Which of the following statements a. In the tissues, P drops as blood passes
about the mammalian respiratory system is false?
O2
from the arteries to the veins, while P
CO2
a. When we breathe in, air travels from the
increases.
pharynx to the trachea.
b. Blood travels from the lungs to the heart to
b. The bronchioles branch into bronchi.
body tissues, then back to the heart, then
c. Alveolar ducts connect to alveolar sacs.
the lungs.
d. Gas exchange between the lung and blood
c. Blood travels from the lungs to the heart to
takes place in the alveolus.
body tissues, then back to the lungs, then
2.Figure 39.13Which of the following statements is the heart.
false? d. P is higher in air than in the lungs.
O2
3.Figure 39.20The kidneys are responsible for
removing excess H+ ions from the blood. If the
kidneys fail, what would happen to blood pH and to
hemoglobin affinity for oxygen?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The respiratory system ________. 6.Which is the order of airflow during inhalation?
a. provides body tissues with oxygen
b. provides body tissues with oxygen and a. nasal cavity, trachea, larynx, bronchi,
carbon dioxide bronchioles, alveoli
c. establishes how many breaths are taken per b. nasal cavity, larynx, trachea, bronchi,
minute bronchioles, alveoli
d. provides the body with carbon dioxide c. nasal cavity, larynx, trachea, bronchioles,
bronchi, alveoli
5.Air is warmed and humidified in the nasal
d. nasal cavity, trachea, larynx, bronchioles,
passages. This helps to ________.
bronchi, alveoli
a. ward off infection
b. decrease sensitivity during breathing 7.The inspiratory reserve volume measures the
c. prevent damage to the lungs ________.
d. all of the above
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1260
Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System 1249
a. amount of air remaining in the lung after a 11.Restrictive airway diseases ________.
maximal exhalation a. increase the compliance of the lung
b. amount of air that the lung holds b. decrease the compliance of the lung
c. amount of air that can be further exhaled c. increase the lung volume
after a normal breath d. decrease the work of breathing
d. amount of air that can be further inhaled
12.Alveolar ventilation remains constant when
after a normal breath
________.
8.Of the following, which does not explain why the a. the respiratory rate is increased while the
partial pressure of oxygen is lower in the lung than in volume of air per breath is decreased
the external air? b. the respiratory rate and the volume of air
a. Air in the lung is humidified; therefore, water per breath are increased
vapor pressure alters the pressure. c. the respiratory rate is decreased while
b. Carbon dioxide mixes with oxygen. increasing the volume per breath
c. Oxygen is moved into the blood and is d. both a and c
headed to the tissues.
13.Which of the following will NOT facilitate the
d. Lungs exert a pressure on the air to reduce
transfer of oxygen to tissues?
the oxygen pressure.
a. decreased body temperature
9.The total lung capacity is calculated using which of b. decreased pH of the blood
the following formulas? c. increased carbon dioxide
a. residual volume + tidal volume + inspiratory d. increased exercise
reserve volume
14.The majority of carbon dioxide in the blood is
b. residual volume + expiratory reserve volume
transported by ________.
+ inspiratory reserve volume
a. binding to hemoglobin
c. expiratory reserve volume + tidal volume +
b. dissolution in the blood
inspiratory reserve volume
c. conversion to bicarbonate
d. residual volume + expiratory reserve volume
d. binding to plasma proteins
+ tidal volume + inspiratory reserve volume
15.The majority of oxygen in the blood is transported
10.How would paralysis of the diaphragm alter
by ________.
inspiration?
a. dissolution in the blood
a. It would prevent contraction of the
b. being carried as bicarbonate ions
intercostal muscles.
c. binding to blood plasma
b. It would prevent inhalation because the
d. binding to hemoglobin
intrapleural pressure would not change.
c. It would decrease the intrapleural pressure
and allow more air to enter the lungs.
d. It would slow expiration because the lung
would not relax.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Describe the function of these terms and describe intrapleural pressure during inhalation?
where they are located: main bronchus, trachea,
23.Explain how a puncture to the thoracic cavity
alveoli, and acinus.
(from a knife wound, for instance) could alter the
17.How does the structure of alveoli maximize gas ability to inhale.
exchange?
24.When someone is standing, gravity stretches the
18.What does FEV1/FVC measure? What factors bottom of the lung down toward the floor to a greater
may affect FEV1/FVC? extent than the top of the lung. What implication
could this have on the flow of air in the lungs? Where
19.What is the reason for having residual volume in
does gas exchange occur in the lungs?
the lung?
25.What would happen if no carbonic anhydrase
20.How can a decrease in the percent of oxygen in
were present in red blood cells?
the air affect the movement of oxygen in the body?
26.How does the administration of 100 percent
21.If a patient has increased resistance in his or her
oxygen save a patient from carbon monoxide
lungs, how can this be detected by a doctor? What
poisoning? Why wouldn’t giving carbon dioxide work?
does this mean?
22.How would increased airway resistance affect
PAGE: 1261
1250 Chapter 39 | The Respiratory System
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1262
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1251
40 | THE CIRCULATORY
SYSTEM
Figure40.1Justashighwaysystemstransportpeopleandgoodsthroughacomplexnetwork,thecirculatorysystem
transports nutrients, gases, and wastes throughout the animal body. (credit: modification of work by Andrey Belenko)
Chapter Outline
40.1:Overview of the Circulatory System
40.2:Components of the Blood
40.3:Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels
40.4:Blood Flow and Blood Pressure Regulation
Introduction
Mostanimalsarecomplexmulticellularorganismsthatrequireamechanismfortransportingnutrientsthroughout
their bodies and removing waste products. The circulatory system has evolved over time from simple diffusion
through cells in the early evolution of animals to a complex network of blood vessels that reach all parts of
thehumanbody.Thisextensivenetworksuppliesthecells,tissues,andorganswithoxygenandnutrients,and
removes carbon dioxide and waste, which are byproducts of respiration.
Atthecoreofthehumancirculatorysystemistheheart.Thesizeofaclenchedfist,thehumanheartisprotected
beneaththeribcage.Madeofspecializedanduniquecardiacmuscle,itpumpsbloodthroughoutthebodyand
to the heart itself. Heart contractions are driven by intrinsic electrical impulses that the brain and endocrine
hormoneshelptoregulate.Understandingtheheart’sbasicanatomyandfunctionisimportanttounderstanding
the body’s circulatory and respiratory systems.
Gas exchange is one essential function of the circulatory system. A circulatory system is not needed in
organisms with no specialized respiratory organs because oxygen and carbon dioxide diffuse directly between
their body tissues and the external environment. However, in organisms that possess lungs and gills, oxygen
must be transported from these specialized respiratory organs to the body tissues via a circulatory system.
Therefore, circulatory systems have had to evolve to accommodate the great diversity of body sizes and body
types present among animals.
PAGE: 1263
1252 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
40.1 | Overview of the Circulatory System
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe an open and closed circulatory system
• Describe interstitial fluid and hemolymph
• Compare and contrast the organization and evolution of the vertebrate circulatory system
Inallanimals,exceptafewsimpletypes,thecirculatorysystemisusedtotransportnutrientsandgasesthrough
the body. Simple diffusion allows some water, nutrient, waste, and gas exchange into primitive animals that
are only a few cell layers thick; however, bulk flow is the only method by which the entire body of larger more
complex organisms is accessed.
Circulatory System Architecture
The circulatory system is effectively a network of cylindrical vessels: the arteries, veins, and capillaries that
emanate from a pump, the heart. In all vertebrate organisms, as well as some invertebrates, this is a closed-
loop system, in which the blood is not free in a cavity. In a closed circulatory system, blood is contained
inside blood vessels and circulates unidirectionally from the heart around the systemic circulatory route, then
returnstotheheartagain,asillustratedinFigure40.2a.Asopposedtoaclosedsystem,arthropods—including
insects, crustaceans, and most mollusks—have an open circulatory system, as illustrated in Figure 40.2b. In
anopen circulatory system,thebloodisnotenclosedinthebloodvesselsbutispumpedintoacavitycalled
a hemocoel and is called hemolymph because the blood mixes with the interstitial fluid. As the heart beats
andtheanimalmoves,thehemolymphcirculatesaroundtheorganswithinthebodycavityandthenreentersthe
heartsthroughopeningscalledostia.Thismovementallowsforgasandnutrientexchange.Anopencirculatory
systemdoesnotuseasmuchenergyasaclosedsystemtooperateortomaintain;however,thereisatrade-off
with the amount of blood that can be moved to metabolically active organs and tissues that require high levels
ofoxygen.Infact,onereasonthatinsectswithwingspansofuptotwofeetwide(70cm)arenotaroundtoday
isprobablybecausetheywereoutcompetedbythearrivalofbirds150millionyearsago.Birds,havingaclosed
circulatorysystem,arethoughttohavemovedmoreagilely,allowingthemtogetfoodfasterandpossiblytoprey
on the insects.
Figure 40.2 In (a) closed circulatory systems, the heart pumps blood through vessels that are separate from the
interstitial fluid of the body. Most vertebrates and some invertebrates, like this annelid earthworm, have a closed
circulatory system. In (b) open circulatory systems, a fluid called hemolymph is pumped through a blood vessel that
empties into the body cavity. Hemolymph returns to the blood vessel through openings called ostia. Arthropods like
this bee and most mollusks have open circulatory systems.
Circulatory System Variation in Animals
The circulatory system varies from simple systems in invertebrates to more complex systems in vertebrates.
The simplest animals, such as the sponges (Porifera) and rotifers (Rotifera), do not need a circulatory system
because diffusion allows adequate exchange of water, nutrients, and waste, as well as dissolved gases, as
shown in Figure 40.3a. Organisms that are more complex but still only have two layers of cells in their body
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1264
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1253
plan, such as jellies (Cnidaria) and comb jellies (Ctenophora) also use diffusion through their epidermis and
internally through the gastrovascular compartment. Both their internal and external tissues are bathed in an
aqueousenvironmentandexchangefluidsbydiffusiononbothsides,asillustrated inFigure 40.3b.Exchange
of fluids is assisted by the pulsing of the jellyfish body.
Figure40.3Simpleanimalsconsistingofasinglecelllayersuchasthe(a)spongeoronlyafewcelllayerssuchas
the (b) jellyfish do not have a circulatory system. Instead, gases, nutrients, and wastes are exchanged by diffusion.
Formorecomplexorganisms,diffusionisnotefficientforcyclinggases,nutrients,andwasteeffectivelythrough
the body; therefore, more complex circulatory systems evolved. Most arthropods and many mollusks have
open circulatory systems. In an open system, an elongated beating heart pushes the hemolymph through the
body and muscle contractions help to move fluids. The larger more complex crustaceans, including lobsters,
have developed arterial-like vessels to push blood through their bodies, and the most active mollusks, such as
squids,haveevolvedaclosedcirculatorysystemandareabletomoverapidlytocatchprey.Closedcirculatory
systems are a characteristic of vertebrates; however, there are significant differences in the structure of the
heartandthecirculationofbloodbetweenthedifferentvertebrategroupsduetoadaptationduringevolutionand
associated differences in anatomy. Figure 40.4 illustrates the basic circulatory systems of some vertebrates:
fish, amphibians, reptiles, and mammals.
PAGE: 1265
1254 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure40.4(a)Fishhavethesimplestcirculatorysystemsofthevertebrates:bloodflowsunidirectionallyfromthetwo-
chambered heart through the gills andthen the rest of the body. (b)Amphibians havetwo circulatory routes: onefor
oxygenationofthebloodthroughthelungsandskin,andtheothertotakeoxygentotherestofthebody.Theblood
is pumped from a three-chambered heart with two atria and a single ventricle. (c) Reptiles also have two circulatory
routes; however, blood is only oxygenated through the lungs. The heart is three chambered, but the ventricles are
partially separated so some mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood occurs except in crocodilians and birds.
(d)Mammalsandbirdshavethemostefficientheartwithfourchambersthatcompletelyseparatetheoxygenatedand
deoxygenated blood; it pumps only oxygenated blood through the body and deoxygenated blood to the lungs.
As illustrated in Figure 40.4a. Fish have a single circuit for blood flow and a two-chambered heart that has
only a single atrium and a single ventricle. The atrium collects blood that has returned from the body and
the ventricle pumps the blood to the gills where gas exchange occurs and the blood is re-oxygenated; this
is called gill circulation. The blood then continues through the rest of the body before arriving back at the
atrium;thisiscalledsystemiccirculation.Thisunidirectionalflowofbloodproducesagradientofoxygenated
to deoxygenated blood around the fish’s systemic circuit. The result is a limit in the amount of oxygen that can
reach some of the organs and tissues of the body, reducing the overall metabolic capacity of fish.
In amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals, blood flow is directed in two circuits: one through the lungs and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1266
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1255
back to the heart, which is called pulmonary circulation, and the other throughout the rest of the body and
its organs including the brain (systemic circulation). In amphibians, gas exchange also occurs through the skin
during pulmonary circulation and is referred to aspulmocutaneous circulation.
As shown in Figure 40.4b, amphibians have a three-chambered heart that has two atria and one ventricle
ratherthanthetwo-chamberedheartoffish.Thetwoatria(superiorheartchambers)receivebloodfromthetwo
differentcircuits(thelungsandthesystems),andthenthereissomemixingofthebloodintheheart’sventricle
(inferiorheartchamber),whichreducestheefficiencyofoxygenation.Theadvantagetothisarrangementisthat
high pressure in the vessels pushes blood to the lungs and body. The mixing is mitigated by a ridge within the
ventriclethatdivertsoxygen-richbloodthroughthesystemiccirculatorysystemanddeoxygenatedbloodtothe
pulmocutaneous circuit. For this reason, amphibians are often described as havingdouble circulation.
Most reptiles also have a three-chambered heart similar to the amphibian heart that directs blood to the
pulmonary and systemic circuits, as shown in Figure 40.4c. The ventricle is divided more effectively by a
partial septum, which results in less mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood. Some reptiles (alligators
and crocodiles) are the most primitive animals to exhibit a four-chambered heart. Crocodilians have a unique
circulatorymechanismwheretheheartshuntsbloodfromthelungstowardthestomachandotherorgansduring
longperiodsofsubmergence,forinstance,whiletheanimalwaitsforpreyorstaysunderwaterwaitingforpreyto
rot.Oneadaptationincludestwomainarteriesthatleavethesamepartoftheheart:onetakesbloodtothelungs
and the other provides an alternate route to the stomach and other parts of the body. Two other adaptations
include a hole in the heart between the two ventricles, called the foramen of Panizza, which allows blood to
movefromonesideofthehearttotheother,andspecializedconnectivetissuethatslowsthebloodflowtothe
lungs.Togethertheseadaptationshavemadecrocodilesandalligatorsoneofthemostevolutionarilysuccessful
animal groups on earth.
Inmammalsandbirds,theheartisalsodividedintofourchambers:twoatriaandtwoventricles,asillustratedin
Figure40.4d.Theoxygenatedbloodisseparatedfromthedeoxygenatedblood,whichimprovestheefficiency
of double circulation and is probably required for the warm-blooded lifestyle of mammals and birds. The four-
chamberedheartofbirdsandmammalsevolvedindependentlyfromathree-chamberedheart.Theindependent
evolution of the same or a similar biological trait is referred to as convergent evolution.
40.2 | Components of the Blood
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• List the basic components of the blood
• Compare red and white blood cells
• Describe blood plasma and serum
Hemoglobin is responsible for distributing oxygen, and to a lesser extent, carbon dioxide, throughout the
circulatory systems of humans, vertebrates, and many invertebrates. The blood is more than the proteins,
though.Bloodisactuallyatermusedtodescribetheliquidthatmovesthroughthevesselsandincludesplasma
(the liquid portion, which contains water, proteins, salts, lipids, and glucose) and the cells (red and white cells)
and cell fragments called platelets. Blood plasma is actually the dominant component of blood and contains
thewater,proteins,electrolytes,lipids,andglucose.Thecellsareresponsibleforcarryingthegases(redcells)
andtheimmuneresponse(white).Theplateletsareresponsibleforbloodclotting.Interstitialfluidthatsurrounds
cells is separate from the blood, but in hemolymph, they are combined. In humans, cellular components make
up approximately 45 percent of the blood and the liquid plasma 55 percent. Blood is 20 percent of a person’s
extracellular fluid and eight percent of weight.
The Role of Blood in the Body
Blood, like the human blood illustrated in Figure 40.5 is important for regulation of the body’s systems and
homeostasis. Blood helps maintain homeostasis by stabilizing pH, temperature, osmotic pressure, and by
eliminatingexcessheat.Bloodsupportsgrowthbydistributingnutrientsandhormones,andbyremovingwaste.
Bloodplaysaprotectiverolebytransportingclottingfactorsandplateletstopreventbloodlossandtransporting
the disease-fighting agents orwhite blood cellsto sites of infection.
PAGE: 1267
1256 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure 40.5 The cells and cellular components of human blood are shown. Red blood cells deliver oxygen to the
cellsandremovecarbondioxide.Whitebloodcells—includingneutrophils,monocytes,lymphocytes,eosinophils,and
basophils—are involved in the immune response. Platelets form clots that prevent blood loss after injury.
Red Blood Cells
Redbloodcells,orerythrocytes(erythro-=“red”;-cyte=“cell”),arespecializedcellsthatcirculatethroughthe
body delivering oxygen to cells; they are formed from stem cells in the bone marrow. In mammals, red blood
cellsaresmallbiconcavecellsthatatmaturitydonotcontainanucleusormitochondriaandareonly7–8µmin
size. In birds and non-avian reptiles, a nucleus is still maintained in red blood cells.
The red coloring of blood comes from the iron-containing protein hemoglobin, illustrated in Figure 40.6a. The
principlejobofthisproteinistocarryoxygen,butitalsotransportscarbondioxideaswell.Hemoglobinispacked
intoredbloodcellsatarateofabout250millionmoleculesofhemoglobinpercell.Eachhemoglobinmolecule
binds four oxygen molecules so that each red blood cell carries one billion molecules of oxygen. There are
approximately 25 trillion red blood cells in the five liters of blood in the human body, which could carry up to
21
25 sextillion (25 × 10 ) molecules of oxygen in the body at any time. In mammals, the lack of organelles in
erythrocytes leaves more room for the hemoglobin molecules, and the lack of mitochondria also prevents use
of the oxygen for metabolic respiration. Only mammals have anucleated red blood cells, and some mammals
(camels, for instance) even have nucleated red blood cells. The advantage of nucleated red blood cells is that
thesecellscanundergomitosis.Anucleatedredbloodcellsmetabolizeanaerobically(withoutoxygen),making
use of a primitive metabolic pathway to produce ATP and increase the efficiency of oxygen transport.
Not all organisms use hemoglobin as the method of oxygen transport. Invertebrates that utilize hemolymph
ratherthanbloodusedifferentpigmentstobindtotheoxygen.Thesepigmentsusecopperorirontotheoxygen.
Invertebrateshaveavarietyofotherrespiratorypigments.Hemocyanin,ablue-green,copper-containingprotein,
illustrated in Figure 40.6b is found in mollusks, crustaceans, and some of the arthropods. Chlorocruorin, a
green-colored, iron-containing pigment is found in four families of polychaete tubeworms. Hemerythrin, a red,
iron-containing protein is found in some polychaete worms and annelids and is illustrated in Figure 40.6c.
Despite the name, hemerythrin does not contain a heme group and its oxygen-carrying capacity is poor
compared to hemoglobin.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1268
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1257
Figure 40.6 In most vertebrates, (a) hemoglobin delivers oxygen to the body and removes some carbon dioxide.
Hemoglobiniscomposedoffourproteinsubunits,twoalphachainsandtwobetachains,andahemegroupthathas
iron associated with it. The iron reversibly associates with oxygen, and in so doing is oxidized from Fe2+ to Fe3+. In
mostmollusksandsomearthropods,(b)hemocyanindeliversoxygen.Unlikehemoglobin,hemolymphisnotcarriedin
bloodcells,butfloatsfreeinthehemolymph.Copperinsteadofironbindstheoxygen,givingthehemolymphablue-
green color. In annelids, such as the earthworm, and some other invertebrates, (c) hemerythrin carries oxygen. Like
hemoglobin, hemerythrin is carried in blood cells and has iron associated with it, but despite its name, hemerythrin
does not contain heme.
Thesmallsizeandlargesurfaceareaofredbloodcellsallowsforrapiddiffusionofoxygenandcarbondioxide
acrosstheplasmamembrane.Inthelungs,carbondioxideisreleasedandoxygenistakeninbytheblood.Inthe
tissues,oxygenisreleasedfromthebloodandcarbondioxideisboundfortransportbacktothelungs.Studies
have found that hemoglobin also binds nitrous oxide (NO). NO is a vasodilator that relaxes the blood vessels
and capillaries and may help with gas exchange and the passage of red blood cells through narrow vessels.
Nitroglycerin,aheartmedicationforanginaandheartattacks,isconvertedtoNOtohelprelaxthebloodvessels
and increase oxygen flow through the body.
A characteristic of red blood cells is their glycolipid and glycoprotein coating; these are lipids and proteins that
havecarbohydratemoleculesattached.Inhumans,thesurfaceglycoproteinsandglycolipidsonredbloodcells
vary between individuals, producing the different blood types, such as A, B, and O. Red blood cells have an
average life span of 120 days, at which time they are broken down and recycled in the liver and spleen by
phagocytic macrophages, a type of white blood cell.
White Blood Cells
Whitebloodcells,alsocalledleukocytes(leuko=white),makeupapproximatelyonepercentbyvolumeofthe
cellsinblood.Theroleofwhitebloodcellsisverydifferentthanthatofredbloodcells:theyareprimarilyinvolved
in the immune response to identify and target pathogens, such as invading bacteria, viruses, and other foreign
organisms. White blood cells are formed continually; some only live for hours or days, but some live for years.
The morphology of white blood cells differs significantly from red blood cells. They have nuclei and do not
containhemoglobin.Thedifferenttypesofwhitebloodcellsareidentifiedbytheirmicroscopicappearanceafter
histologicstaining,andeachhasadifferentspecializedfunction.Thetwomaingroups,bothillustratedinFigure
40.7 are the granulocytes, which include the neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils, and the agranulocytes,
which include the monocytes and lymphocytes.
PAGE: 1269
1258 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure40.7(a)Granulocytes—includingneutrophils,eosinophilsandbasophils—arecharacterizedbyalobednucleus
and granular inclusions in the cytoplasm. Granulocytes are typically first-responders during injury or infection. (b)
Agranulocytesincludelymphocytesandmonocytes.Lymphocytes,includingBandTcells,areresponsibleforadaptive
immuneresponse.Monocytesdifferentiateintomacrophagesanddendriticcells,whichinturnrespondtoinfectionor
injury.
Granulocytes contain granules in their cytoplasm; the agranulocytes are so named because of the lack of
granules in their cytoplasm. Some leukocytes become macrophages that either stay at the same site or move
through the bloodstream and gather at sites of infection or inflammation where they are attracted by chemical
signalsfromforeignparticlesanddamagedcells.Lymphocytesaretheprimarycellsoftheimmunesystemand
include B cells, T cells, and natural killer cells. B cells destroy bacteria and inactivate their toxins. They also
produce antibodies. T cells attack viruses, fungi, some bacteria, transplanted cells, and cancer cells. T cells
attack viruses by releasing toxins that kill the viruses. Natural killer cells attack a variety of infectious microbes
and certain tumor cells.
One reason that HIV poses significant management challenges is because the virus directly targets T cells
by gaining entry through a receptor. Once inside the cell, HIV then multiplies using the T cell’s own genetic
machinery. After the HIV virus replicates, it is transmitted directly from the infected T cell to macrophages. The
presenceofHIVcanremainunrecognizedforanextensiveperiodoftimebeforefulldiseasesymptomsdevelop.
Platelets and Coagulation Factors
Blood must clot to heal wounds and prevent excess blood loss. Small cell fragments called platelets
(thrombocytes)areattractedtothewoundsitewheretheyadherebyextendingmanyprojectionsandreleasing
their contents. These contents activate other platelets and also interact with other coagulation factors, which
convert fibrinogen, a water-soluble protein present in blood serum into fibrin (a non-water soluble protein),
causingthebloodtoclot.ManyoftheclottingfactorsrequirevitaminKtowork,andvitaminKdeficiencycanlead
toproblemswithbloodclotting.Manyplateletsconvergeandsticktogetheratthewoundsiteformingaplatelet
plug (also called a fibrin clot), as illustrated in Figure 40.8b. The plug or clot lasts for a number of days and
stops the loss of blood. Platelets are formed from the disintegration of larger cells called megakaryocytes, like
thatshowninFigure40.8a.Foreachmegakaryocyte,2000–3000plateletsareformedwith150,000to400,000
platelets present in each cubic millimeter of blood. Each platelet is disc shaped and 2–4 μm in diameter. They
contain many small vesicles but do not contain a nucleus.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1270
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1259
Figure 40.8 (a) Platelets are formed from large cells called megakaryocytes. The megakaryocyte breaks up into
thousandsoffragmentsthatbecomeplatelets.(b)Plateletsarerequiredforclottingoftheblood.Theplateletscollect
at a wound site in conjunction with other clotting factors, such as fibrinogen, to form a fibrin clot that prevents blood
loss and allows the wound to heal.
Plasma and Serum
Theliquidcomponentofbloodiscalledplasma,anditisseparatedbyspinningorcentrifugingthebloodathigh
rotations(3000rpmorhigher).Thebloodcellsandplateletsareseparatedbycentrifugalforcestothebottomof
aspecimentube.Theupperliquidlayer,theplasma,consistsof90percentwateralongwithvarioussubstances
requiredformaintainingthebody’spH,osmoticload,andforprotectingthebody.Theplasmaalsocontainsthe
coagulation factors and antibodies.
The plasma component of blood without the coagulation factors is called the serum. Serum is similar to
interstitial fluid in which the correct composition of key ions acting as electrolytes is essential for normal
functioningofmusclesandnerves.Othercomponentsintheserumincludeproteinsthatassistwithmaintaining
pH and osmotic balance while giving viscosity to the blood. The serum also contains antibodies, specialized
proteins that are important for defense against viruses and bacteria. Lipids, including cholesterol, are also
transported in the serum, along with various other substances including nutrients, hormones, metabolic waste,
plus external substances, such as, drugs, viruses, and bacteria.
Human serum albumin is the most abundant protein in human blood plasma and is synthesized in the liver.
Albumin, which constitutes about half of the blood serum protein, transports hormones and fatty acids, buffers
pH, and maintains osmotic pressures. Immunoglobin is a protein antibody produced in the mucosal lining and
plays an important role in antibody mediated immunity.
PAGE: 1271
1260 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Blood Types Related to Proteins on the Surface of the Red Blood
Cells
Red blood cells are coated in antigens made of glycolipids and glycoproteins. The composition of these
molecules is determined by genetics, which have evolved over time. In humans, the different surface
antigens are grouped into 24 different blood groups with more than 100 different antigens on each red
blood cell. The two most well known blood groups are the ABO, shown in Figure 40.9, and Rh systems.
The surface antigens in the ABO blood group are glycolipids, called antigen A and antigen B. People with
bloodtypeAhaveantigenA,thosewithbloodtypeBhaveantigenB,thosewithbloodtypeABhaveboth
antigens,andpeoplewithbloodtypeOhaveneitherantigen.Antibodiescalledagglutinougensarefoundin
thebloodplasmaandreactwiththeAorBantigens,ifthetwoaremixed.WhentypeAandtypeBbloodare
combined, agglutination (clumping) of the blood occurs because of antibodies in the plasma that bind with
the opposing antigen; this causes clots that coagulate in the kidney causing kidney failure. Type O blood
has neither A or B antigens, and therefore, type O blood can be given to all blood types. Type O negative
bloodistheuniversaldonor.TypeABpositivebloodistheuniversalacceptorbecauseithasbothAandB
antigen.TheABObloodgroupswerediscoveredin1900and1901byKarlLandsteinerattheUniversityof
Vienna.
TheRhbloodgroupwasfirstdiscoveredinRhesusmonkeys.MostpeoplehavetheRhantigen(Rh+)and
do not have anti-Rh antibodies in their blood. The few people who do not have the Rh antigen and are
Rh– can develop anti-Rh antibodies if exposed to Rh+ blood. This can happen after a blood transfusion
or after an Rh– woman has an Rh+ baby. The first exposure does not usually cause a reaction; however,
at the second exposure, enough antibodies have built up in the blood to produce a reaction that causes
agglutination and breakdown of red blood cells. An injection can prevent this reaction.
Figure40.9HumanredbloodcellsmayhaveeithertypeAorBglycoproteinsontheirsurface,bothglycoproteins
combined(AB),orneither(O).Theglycoproteinsserveasantigensandcanelicitanimmuneresponseinaperson
whoreceivesatransfusioncontainingunfamiliarantigens.TypeOblood,whichhasnoAorBantigens,doesnot
elicit an immune response when injected into a person of any blood type. Thus, O is considered the universal
donor.PersonswithtypeABbloodcanacceptbloodfromanybloodtype,andtypeABisconsideredtheuniversal
acceptor.
Play a blood typing game on the Nobel Prize website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/blood_typing) to
solidify your understanding of blood types.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1272
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1261
40.3 | Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the structure of the heart and explain how cardiac muscle is different from other muscles
• Describe the cardiac cycle
• Explain the structure of arteries, veins, and capillaries, and how blood flows through the body
The heart is a complex muscle that pumps blood through the three divisions of the circulatory system: the
coronary (vessels that serve the heart), pulmonary (heart and lungs), and systemic (systems of the body), as
showninFigure40.10.Coronarycirculationintrinsictothehearttakesblooddirectlyfromthemainartery(aorta)
comingfromtheheart.Forpulmonaryandsystemiccirculation,thehearthastopumpbloodtothelungsorthe
restofthebody,respectively.Invertebrates,thelungsarerelativelyclosetotheheartinthethoraciccavity.The
shorterdistancetopumpmeansthatthemusclewallontherightsideoftheheartisnotasthickastheleftside
which must have enough pressure to pump blood all the way to your big toe.
Figure40.10Themammaliancirculatorysystemisdividedintothreecircuits:thesystemiccircuit,thepulmonary
circuit, and the coronary circuit. Blood is pumped from veins of the systemic circuit into the right atrium of the
heart,thenintotherightventricle.Bloodthenentersthepulmonarycircuit,andisoxygenatedbythelungs.From
thepulmonarycircuit,bloodreenterstheheartthroughtheleftatrium.Fromtheleftventricle,bloodreentersthe
systemic circuit through the aorta and isdistributed to the rest of the body. The coronary circuit, which provides
blood to the heart, is not shown.
Which of the following statements about the circulatory system is false?
a. Blood in the pulmonary vein is deoxygenated.
b. Blood in the inferior vena cava is deoxygenated.
c. Blood in the pulmonary artery is deoxygenated.
d. Blood in the aorta is oxygenated.
Structure of the Heart
The heart muscle is asymmetrical as a result of the distance blood must travel in the pulmonary and systemic
circuits.Sincetherightsideoftheheartsendsbloodtothepulmonarycircuititissmallerthantheleftsidewhich
mustsendbloodouttothewholebodyinthesystemiccircuit,asshowninFigure40.11.Inhumans,theheartis
aboutthesizeofaclenchedfist;itisdividedintofourchambers:twoatriaandtwoventricles.Thereisoneatrium
PAGE: 1273
1262 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
andoneventricleontherightsideandoneatriumandoneventricleontheleftside.Theatriaarethechambers
thatreceiveblood,andtheventriclesarethechambersthatpumpblood.Therightatriumreceivesdeoxygenated
bloodfromthesuperiorvenacava,whichdrainsbloodfromthejugularveinthatcomesfromthebrainandfrom
the veins that come from the arms, as well as from the inferior vena cava which drains blood from the veins
that come from the lower organs and the legs. In addition, the right atrium receives blood from the coronary
sinuswhichdrainsdeoxygenatedbloodfromtheheartitself. Thisdeoxygenatedbloodthenpassestotheright
ventricle through the atrioventricular valve or the tricuspid valve, a flap of connective tissue that opens in
only one direction to prevent the backflow of blood. The valve separating the chambers on the left side of the
heart valve is called the biscuspid or mitral valve. After it is filled, the right ventricle pumps the blood through
thepulmonaryarteries,bypassingthesemilunarvalve(orpulmonicvalve)tothelungsforre-oxygenation.After
bloodpassesthroughthepulmonaryarteries,therightsemilunarvalvesclosepreventingthebloodfromflowing
backwards into the right ventricle. The left atrium then receives the oxygen-rich blood from the lungs via the
pulmonary veins. This blood passes through the bicuspid valve or mitral valve (the atrioventricular valve on
theleftsideoftheheart)totheleftventriclewherethebloodispumpedoutthroughtheaorta,themajorartery
of the body, taking oxygenated blood to the organs and muscles of the body. Once blood is pumped out of the
leftventricleandintotheaorta,theaorticsemilunarvalve(oraorticvalve)closespreventingbloodfromflowing
backward into the left ventricle. This pattern of pumping is referred to as double circulation and is found in all
mammals.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1274
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1263
Figure 40.11 (a) The heart is primarily made of a thick muscle layer, called the myocardium, surrounded by
membranes.One-wayvalvesseparatethefourchambers.(b)Bloodvesselsofthecoronarysystem,includingthe
coronary arteries and veins, keep the heart musculature oxygenated.
Which of the following statements about the heart is false?
a. The mitral valve separates the left ventricle from the left atrium.
b. Blood travels through the bicuspid valve to the left atrium.
c. Both the aortic and the pulmonary valves are semilunar valves.
d. The mitral valve is an atrioventricular valve.
The heart is composed of three layers; the epicardium, the myocardium, and the endocardium, illustrated in
Figure 40.11. The inner wall of the heart has a lining called the endocardium. The myocardium consists of
PAGE: 1275
1264 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
the heart muscle cells that make up the middle layer and the bulk of the heart wall. The outer layer of cells is
called the epicardium, of which the second layer is a membranous layered structure called the pericardium
that surrounds and protects the heart; it allows enough room for vigorous pumping but also keeps the heart in
place to reduce friction between the heart and other structures.
The heart has its own blood vessels that supply the heart muscle with blood. The coronary arteries branch
fromtheaortaandsurroundtheoutersurfaceoftheheartlikeacrown.Theydivergeintocapillarieswherethe
heartmuscleissuppliedwithoxygenbeforeconvergingagainintothecoronaryveinstotakethedeoxygenated
blood back to the right atrium where the blood will be re-oxygenated through the pulmonary circuit. The heart
musclewilldiewithoutasteadysupplyofblood.Atherosclerosisistheblockageofanarterybythebuildupof
fattyplaques.Becauseofthesize(narrow)ofthecoronaryarteriesandtheirfunctioninservingtheheartitself,
atherosclerosiscanbedeadlyinthesearteries.Theslowdownofbloodflowandsubsequentoxygendeprivation
that results from atherosclerosis causes severe pain, known as angina, and complete blockage of the arteries
will causemyocardial infarction: the death of cardiac muscle tissue, commonly known as a heart attack.
The Cardiac Cycle
Themainpurposeoftheheartistopumpbloodthroughthebody;itdoessoinarepeatingsequencecalledthe
cardiaccycle.Thecardiaccycleisthecoordinationofthefillingandemptyingoftheheartofbloodbyelectrical
signalsthatcausetheheartmusclestocontractandrelax.Thehumanheartbeatsover100,000timesperday.
Ineachcardiaccycle,theheartcontracts(systole),pushingoutthebloodandpumpingitthroughthebody;this
isfollowedbyarelaxationphase(diastole),wheretheheartfillswithblood,asillustratedinFigure40.12.The
atria contract at the same time, forcing blood through the atrioventricular valves into the ventricles. Closing of
the atrioventricular valves produces a monosyllabic “lup” sound. Following a brief delay, the ventricles contract
at the same time forcing blood through the semilunar valves into the aorta and the artery transporting blood to
the lungs (via the pulmonary artery). Closing of the semilunar valves produces a monosyllabic “dup” sound.
Figure40.12During(a)cardiacdiastole,theheartmuscleisrelaxedandbloodflowsintotheheart.During(b)atrial
systole, the atria contract, pushing blood into the ventricles. During (c) atrial diastole, the ventricles contract, forcing
blood out of the heart.
The pumping of the heart is a function of the cardiac muscle cells, or cardiomyocytes, that make up the heart
muscle. Cardiomyocytes, shown in Figure 40.13, are distinctive muscle cells that are striated like skeletal
muscle but pump rhythmically and involuntarily like smooth muscle; they are connected by intercalated disks
exclusivetocardiacmuscle.Theyareself-stimulatedforaperiodoftimeandisolatedcardiomyocyteswillbeat
if given the correct balance of nutrients and electrolytes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1276
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1265
Figure40.13Cardiomyocytesarestriatedmusclecellsfoundincardiactissue.(credit:modificationofworkbyDr.S.
Girod, Anton Becker; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The autonomous beating of cardiac muscle cells is regulated by the heart’s internal pacemaker that uses
electrical signals to time the beating of the heart. The electrical signals and mechanical actions, illustrated in
Figure 40.14, are intimately intertwined. The internal pacemaker starts at the sinoatrial (SA) node, which is
located near the wall of the right atrium. Electrical charges spontaneously pulse from the SA node causing the
twoatriatocontractinunison.Thepulsereachesasecondnode,calledtheatrioventricular(AV)node,between
therightatriumandrightventriclewhereitpausesforapproximately0.1secondbeforespreadingtothewallsof
theventricles.FromtheAVnode,theelectricalimpulseentersthebundleofHis,thentotheleftandrightbundle
branchesextendingthroughtheinterventricularseptum.Finally,thePurkinjefibersconducttheimpulsefromthe
apex of the heart up the ventricular myocardium, and then the ventricles contract. This pause allows the atria
to empty completely into the ventricles before the ventricles pump out the blood. The electrical impulses in the
heartproduceelectricalcurrentsthatflowthroughthebodyandcanbemeasuredontheskinusingelectrodes.
Thisinformationcanbeobservedasanelectrocardiogram(ECG)—arecordingoftheelectricalimpulsesofthe
cardiac muscle.
PAGE: 1277
1266 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure40.14Thebeatingoftheheartisregulatedbyanelectricalimpulsethatcausesthecharacteristicreadingofan
ECG.Thesignalisinitiatedatthesinoatrialvalve.Thesignalthen(a)spreadstotheatria,causingthemtocontract.
Thesignalis(b)delayedattheatrioventricularnodebeforeitispassedontothe(c)heartapex.Thedelayallowsthe
atria to relax before the (d) ventricles contract. The final part of the ECG cycle prepares the heart for the next beat.
Visitthis site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/electric_heart)to see the heart’s “pacemaker” in action.
Arteries, Veins, and Capillaries
The blood from the heart is carried through the body by a complex network of blood vessels (Figure 40.15).
Arteries take blood away from the heart. The main artery is the aorta that branches into major arteries that
take blood to different limbs and organs. These major arteries include the carotid artery that takes blood to the
brain,thebrachialarteriesthattakebloodtothearms,andthethoracicarterythattakesbloodtothethoraxand
then into the hepatic, renal, and gastric arteries for the liver, kidney, and stomach, respectively. The iliac artery
takes blood to the lower limbs. The major arteries diverge into minor arteries, and then smaller vessels called
arterioles, to reach more deeply into the muscles and organs of the body.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1278
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1267
Figure 40.15The major human arteries and veins are shown. (credit: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
Arterioles diverge into capillary beds. Capillary beds contain a large number (10 to 100) of capillaries that
branch among the cells and tissues of the body. Capillaries are narrow-diameter tubes that can fit red blood
cellsthroughinsinglefileandarethesitesfortheexchangeofnutrients,waste,andoxygenwithtissuesatthe
cellularlevel.Fluidalsocrossesintotheinterstitialspacefromthecapillaries.Thecapillariesconvergeagaininto
venules that connect to minor veins that finally connect to major veins that take blood high in carbon dioxide
backtotheheart.Veinsarebloodvesselsthatbringbloodbacktotheheart.Themajorveinsdrainbloodfrom
thesameorgansandlimbsthatthemajorarteriessupply.Fluidisalsobroughtbacktotheheartviathelymphatic
system.
The structure of the different types of blood vessels reflects their function or layers. There are three distinct
layers, or tunics, that form the walls of blood vessels (Figure 40.16). The first tunic is a smooth, inner lining
of endothelial cells that are in contact with the red blood cells. The endothelial tunic is continuous with the
endocardiumoftheheart.Incapillaries,thissinglelayerofcellsisthelocationofdiffusionofoxygenandcarbon
dioxide between the endothelial cells and red blood cells, as well as the exchange site via endocytosis and
exocytosis.Themovementofmaterialsatthesiteofcapillariesisregulatedbyvasoconstriction,narrowingof
thebloodvessels,andvasodilation,wideningofthebloodvessels;thisisimportantintheoverallregulationof
blood pressure.
Veinsandarteriesbothhavetwofurthertunicsthatsurroundtheendothelium:themiddletuniciscomposedof
smoothmuscleandtheoutermostlayerisconnectivetissue(collagenandelasticfibers).Theelasticconnective
tissue stretches and supports the blood vessels, and the smooth muscle layer helps regulate blood flow by
alteringvascularresistancethroughvasoconstrictionandvasodilation.Thearterieshavethickersmoothmuscle
andconnectivetissuethantheveinstoaccommodatethehigherpressureandspeedoffreshlypumpedblood.
Theveinsarethinnerwalledasthepressureandrateofflowaremuchlower.Inaddition,veinsarestructurally
different than arteries in that veins have valves to prevent the backflow of blood. Because veins have to work
againstgravitytogetbloodbacktotheheart,contractionofskeletalmuscleassistswiththeflowofbloodback
to the heart.
PAGE: 1279
1268 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure40.16Arteriesandveinsconsistofthreelayers:anoutertunicaexterna,amiddletunicamedia,andaninner
tunica intima. Capillaries consist ofasinglelayerofepithelial cells, thetunica intima. (credit: modification ofworkby
NCI, NIH)
40.4 | Blood Flow and Blood Pressure Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the system of blood flow through the body
• Describe how blood pressure is regulated
Blood pressure (BP) is the pressure exerted by blood on the walls of a blood vessel that helps to push blood
throughthebody.Systolicbloodpressuremeasurestheamountofpressurethatbloodexertsonvesselswhile
the heart is beating. The optimal systolic blood pressure is 120 mmHg. Diastolic blood pressure measures the
pressureinthevesselsbetweenheartbeats.Theoptimaldiastolicbloodpressureis80mmHg.Manyfactorscan
affectbloodpressure,suchashormones,stress,exercise,eating,sitting,andstanding.Bloodflowthroughthe
body is regulated by the size of blood vessels, by the action of smooth muscle, by one-way valves, and by the
fluid pressure of the blood itself.
How Blood Flows Through the Body
Blood is pushed through the body by the action of the pumping heart. With each rhythmic pump, blood is
pushed under high pressure and velocity away from the heart, initially along the main artery, the aorta. In the
aorta,thebloodtravelsat30cm/sec.Asbloodmovesintothearteries,arterioles,andultimatelytothecapillary
beds, the rate of movement slows dramatically to about 0.026 cm/sec, one-thousand times slower than the
rateofmovementintheaorta.Whilethediameterofeachindividualarterioleandcapillaryisfarnarrowerthan
the diameter of the aorta, and according to the law of continuity, fluid should travel faster through a narrower
diameter tube, the rate is actually slower due to the overall diameter of all the combined capillaries being far
greater than the diameter of the individual aorta.
Theslowrateoftravelthroughthecapillarybeds,whichreachalmosteverycellinthebody,assistswithgasand
nutrientexchangeandalsopromotesthediffusionoffluidintotheinterstitialspace.Afterthebloodhaspassed
throughthecapillarybedstothevenules,veins,andfinallytothemainvenaecavae,therateofflowincreases
againbutisstillmuchslowerthantheinitialrateintheaorta.Bloodprimarilymovesintheveinsbytherhythmic
movement of smooth muscle in the vessel wall and by the action of the skeletal muscle as the body moves.
Because most veins must move blood against the pull of gravity, blood is prevented from flowing backward in
the veins by one-way valves. Because skeletal muscle contraction aids in venous blood flow, it is important to
get up and move frequently after long periods of sitting so that blood will not pool in the extremities.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1280
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1269
Bloodflowthroughthecapillarybedsisregulateddependingonthebody’sneedsandisdirectedbynerveand
hormone signals. For example, after a large meal, most of the blood is diverted to the stomach by vasodilation
of vessels of the digestive system and vasoconstriction of other vessels. During exercise, blood is diverted
to the skeletal muscles through vasodilation while blood to the digestive system would be lessened through
vasoconstriction. The blood entering some capillary beds is controlled by small muscles, called precapillary
sphincters,illustratedinFigure40.17.Ifthesphinctersareopen,thebloodwillflowintotheassociatedbranches
ofthecapillaryblood.Ifallofthesphinctersareclosed,thenthebloodwillflowdirectlyfromthearterioletothe
venulethroughthethoroughfarechannel(seeFigure40.17).Thesemusclesallowthebodytopreciselycontrol
when capillary beds receive blood flow. At any given moment only about 5–10% of our capillary beds actually
have blood flowing through them.
Figure 40.17 (a) Precapillary sphincters are rings of smooth muscle that regulate the flow of blood through
capillaries;theyhelpcontrolthelocationofbloodflowtowhereitisneeded.(b)Valvesintheveinspreventblood
from moving backward. (credit a: modification of work by NCI)
Varicoseveinsareveinsthatbecomeenlargedbecausethevalvesnolongercloseproperly,allowingblood
to flow backward. Varicose veins are often most prominent on the legs. Why do you think this is the case?
See the circulatory system’s blood flow. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://
cnx.org/content/m66654/1.3/#eip-id1171733853207)
Proteins and other large solutes cannot leave the capillaries. The loss of the watery plasma creates a
hyperosmoticsolutionwithinthecapillaries,especiallynearthevenules.Thiscausesabout85%oftheplasma
that leaves the capillaries to eventually diffuse back into the capillaries near the venules. The remaining 15%
of blood plasma drains out from the interstitial fluid into nearby lymphatic vessels (Figure 40.18). The fluid in
thelymphissimilarincompositiontotheinterstitialfluid.Thelymphfluidpassesthroughlymphnodesbeforeit
returnstotheheartviathevenacava.Lymphnodesarespecializedorgansthatfilterthelymphbypercolation
throughamazeofconnectivetissuefilledwithwhitebloodcells.Thewhitebloodcellsremoveinfectiousagents,
such as bacteria and viruses, to clean the lymph before it returns to the bloodstream. After it is cleaned, the
lymphreturnstotheheartbytheactionofsmoothmusclepumping,skeletalmuscleaction,andone-wayvalves
joining the returning blood near the junction of the venae cavae entering the right atrium of the heart.
PAGE: 1281
1270 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
Figure 40.18 Fluid from the capillaries moves into the interstitial space and lymph capillaries by diffusion down a
pressuregradientandalsobyosmosis.Outof7,200litersoffluidpumpedbytheaverageheartinaday,over1,500
liters is filtered. (credit: modification of work by NCI, NIH)
Vertebrate Diversity in Blood Circulation
Blood circulation has evolved differently in vertebrates and may show variation in different animals for the
requiredamountofpressure,organandvessellocation,andorgansize.Animalswithlongsnecksandthose
that live in cold environments have distinct blood pressure adaptations.
Long necked animals, such as giraffes, need to pump blood upward from the heart against gravity. The
blood pressure required from the pumping of the left ventricle would be equivalent to 250 mm Hg (mm Hg
= millimeters of mercury, a unit of pressure) to reach the height of a giraffe’s head, which is 2.5 meters
higherthantheheart.However,ifchecksandbalanceswerenotinplace,thisbloodpressurewoulddamage
the giraffe’s brain, particularly if it was bending down to drink. These checks and balances include valves
and feedback mechanisms that reduce the rate of cardiac output. Long-necked dinosaurs such as the
sauropods had to pump blood even higher, up to ten meters above the heart. This would have required
a blood pressure of more than 600 mm Hg, which could only have been achieved by an enormous heart.
Evidenceforsuchanenormousheartdoesnotexistandmechanismstoreducethebloodpressurerequired
include the slowing of metabolism as these animals grew larger. It is likely that they did not routinely feed
on tree tops but grazed on the ground.
Living in cold water, whales need to maintain the temperature in their blood. This is achieved by the
veins and arteries being close together so that heat exchange can occur. This mechanism is called a
countercurrent heat exchanger. The blood vessels and the whole body are also protected by thick layers
ofblubbertopreventheatloss.Inlandanimalsthatliveincoldenvironments,thickfurandhibernationare
used to retain heat and slow metabolism.
Blood Pressure
The pressure of the blood flow in the body is produced by the hydrostatic pressure of the fluid (blood) against
the walls of the blood vessels. Fluid will move from areas of high to low hydrostatic pressures. In the arteries,
the hydrostatic pressure near the heart is very high and blood flows to the arterioles where the rate of flow is
slowed by the narrow openings of the arterioles. During systole, when new blood is entering the arteries, the
arterywallsstretchtoaccommodatetheincreaseofpressureoftheextrablood;duringdiastole,thewallsreturn
to normal because of their elastic properties. The blood pressure of the systole phase and the diastole phase,
graphed in Figure 40.19, gives the two pressure readings for blood pressure. For example, 120/80 indicates a
readingof120mmHgduringthesystoleand80mmHgduringdiastole.Throughoutthecardiaccycle,theblood
continuestoemptyintothearteriolesatarelativelyevenrate.Thisresistancetobloodflowiscalledperipheral
resistance.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1282
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1271
Figure40.19Bloodpressureisrelatedtothebloodvelocityinthearteriesandarterioles.Inthecapillariesandveins,
the blood pressure continues to decrease but velocity increases.
Blood Pressure Regulation
Cardiac output is the volume of blood pumped by the heart in one minute. It is calculated by multiplying the
number of heart contractions that occur per minute (heart rate) times the stroke volume (the volume of blood
pumped into the aorta per contraction of the left ventricle). Therefore, cardiac output can be increased by
increasing heart rate, as when exercising. However, cardiac output can also be increased by increasing stroke
volume, such as if the heart contracts with greater strength. Stroke volume can also be increased by speeding
blood circulation through the body so that more blood enters the heart between contractions. During heavy
exertion, the blood vessels relax and increase in diameter, offsetting the increased heart rate and ensuring
adequateoxygenatedbloodgetstothemuscles.Stresstriggersadecreaseinthediameterofthebloodvessels,
consequentlyincreasingbloodpressure.Thesechangescanalsobecausedbynervesignalsorhormones,and
even standing up or lying down can have a great effect on blood pressure.
PAGE: 1283
1272 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
KEY TERMS
angina paincausedbypartialblockageofthecoronaryarteriesbythebuildupofplaqueandlackofoxygento
the heart muscle
aorta major artery of the body that takes blood away from the heart
arteriole small vessel that connects an artery to a capillary bed
artery blood vessel that takes blood away from the heart
atherosclerosis buildup of fatty plaques in the coronary arteries in the heart
atrioventricular valve one-waymembranousflapofconnectivetissuebetweentheatriumandtheventriclein
the right side of the heart; also known as tricuspid valve
atrium (plural: atria) chamber of the heart that receives blood from the veins and sends blood to the ventricles
bicuspid valve (also,mitralvalve;leftatrioventricularvalve)one-waymembranousflapbetweentheatriumand
the ventricle in the left side of the heart
blood pressure (BP) pressure of blood in the arteries that helps to push blood through the body
capillary smallest blood vessel that allows the passage of individual blood cells and the site of diffusion of
oxygen and nutrient exchange
capillary bed large number of capillaries that converge to take blood to a particular organ or tissue
cardiac cycle filling and emptying the heart of blood by electrical signals that cause the heart muscles to
contract and relax
cardiac output thevolumeofbloodpumpedbytheheartinoneminuteasaproductofheartratemultipliedby
stroke volume
cardiomyocyte specialized heart muscle cell that is striated but contracts involuntarily like smooth muscle
closed circulatory system system in which the blood is separated from the bodily interstitial fluid and
contained in blood vessels
coronary artery vessel that supplies the heart tissue with blood
coronary vein vessel that takes blood away from the heart tissue back to the chambers in the heart
diastole relaxation phase of the cardiac cycle when the heart is relaxed and the ventricles are filling with blood
double circulation flowofbloodintwocircuits:thepulmonarycircuitthroughthelungsandthesystemiccircuit
through the organs and body
electrocardiogram (ECG) recording of the electrical impulses of the cardiac muscle
endocardium innermost layer of tissue in the heart
epicardium outermost tissue layer of the heart
gill circulation circulatorysystemthatisspecifictoanimalswithgillsforgasexchange;thebloodflowsthrough
the gills for oxygenation
hemocoel cavity into which blood is pumped in an open circulatory system
hemolymph mixture of bloodandinterstitial fluid that isfound ininsects andother arthropods aswellasmost
mollusks
inferior vena cava drains blood from the veins that come from the lower organs and the legs
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1284
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1273
interstitial fluid fluid between cells
lymph node specialized organ that contains a large number of macrophages that clean the lymph before the
fluid is returned to the heart
myocardial infarction (also,heartattack)completeblockageofthecoronaryarteriesanddeathofthecardiac
muscle tissue
myocardium heart muscle cells that make up the middle layer and the bulk of the heart wall
open circulatory system systeminwhichthebloodismixedwithinterstitialfluidanddirectlycoverstheorgans
ostium (plural:ostia)holesbetweenbloodvesselsthatallowthemovementofhemolymphthroughthebodyof
insects, arthropods, and mollusks with open circulatory systems
pericardium membrane layer protecting the heart; also part of the epicardium
peripheral resistance resistance of the artery and blood vessel walls to the pressure placed on them by the
force of the heart pumping
plasma liquid component of blood that is left after the cells are removed
platelet (also, thrombocyte) small cellular fragment that collects at wounds, cross-reacts with clotting factors,
and forms a plug to prevent blood loss
precapillary sphincter small muscle that controls blood circulation in the capillary beds
pulmocutaneous circulation circulatorysysteminamphibians;theflowofbloodtothelungsandthemoistskin
for gas exchange
pulmonary circulation flowofbloodawayfromtheheartthroughthelungswhereoxygenationoccursandthen
returns to the heart again
red blood cell small (7–8 μm) biconcave cell without mitochondria (and in mammals without nuclei) that is
packed with hemoglobin, giving the cell its red color; transports oxygen through the body
semilunar valve membranousflapofconnectivetissuebetweentheaortaandaventricleoftheheart(theaortic
or pulmonary semilunar valves)
serum plasma without the coagulation factors
sinoatrial (SA) node the heart’s internal pacemaker; located near the wall of the right atrium
stroke volume the volume of blood pumped into the aorta per contraction of the left ventricle
superior vena cava drainsbloodfromthejugularveinthatcomesfromthebrainandfromtheveinsthatcome
from the arms
systemic circulation flowofbloodawayfromthehearttothebrain,liver,kidneys,stomach,andotherorgans,
the limbs, and the muscles of the body, and then the return of this blood to the heart
systole contraction phase of cardiac cycle when the ventricles are pumping blood into the arteries
tricuspid valve one-waymembranousflapofconnectivetissuebetweentheatriumandtheventricleintheright
side of the heart; also known as atrioventricular valve
unidirectional circulation flowofbloodinasinglecircuit;occursinfishwherethebloodflowsthroughthegills,
then past the organs and the rest of the body, before returning to the heart
vasoconstriction narrowing of a blood vessel
vasodilation widening of a blood vessel
PAGE: 1285
1274 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
vein blood vessel that brings blood back to the heart
vena cava majorveinofthebodyreturningbloodfromtheupperandlowerpartsofthebody;seethesuperior
vena cava and inferior vena cava
ventricle (heart) large inferior chamber of the heart that pumps blood into arteries
venule blood vessel that connects a capillary bed to a vein
white blood cell large (30 μm) cell with nuclei of which there are many types with different roles including the
protection of the body from viruses and bacteria, and cleaning up dead cells and other waste
CHAPTER SUMMARY
40.1Overview of the Circulatory System
In most animals, the circulatory system is used to transport blood through the body. Some primitive animals use
diffusion for the exchange of water, nutrients, and gases. However, complex organisms use the circulatory
system to carry gases, nutrients, and waste through the body. Circulatory systems may be open (mixed with
the interstitial fluid) or closed (separated from the interstitial fluid). Closed circulatory systems are a
characteristic of vertebrates; however, there are significant differences in the structure of the heart and the
circulation of blood between the different vertebrate groups due to adaptions during evolution and associated
differences in anatomy. Fish have a two-chambered heart with unidirectional circulation. Amphibians have a
three-chambered heart, which has some mixing of the blood, and they have double circulation. Most non-avian
reptiles have a three-chambered heart, but have little mixing of the blood; they have double circulation.
Mammals and birds have a four-chambered heart with no mixing of the blood and double circulation.
40.2Components of the Blood
Specific components of the blood include red blood cells, white blood cells, platelets, and the plasma, which
contains coagulation factors and serum. Blood is important for regulation of the body’s pH, temperature,
osmotic pressure, the circulation of nutrients and removal of waste, the distribution of hormones from endocrine
glands, and the elimination of excess heat; it also contains components for blood clotting. Red blood cells are
specialized cells that contain hemoglobin and circulate through the body delivering oxygen to cells. White blood
cells are involved in the immune response to identify and target invading bacteria, viruses, and other foreign
organisms; they also recycle waste components, such as old red blood cells. Platelets and blood clotting
factors cause the change of the soluble protein fibrinogen to the insoluble protein fibrin at a wound site forming
a plug. Plasma consists of 90 percent water along with various substances, such as coagulation factors and
antibodies. The serum is the plasma component of the blood without the coagulation factors.
40.3Mammalian Heart and Blood Vessels
The heart muscle pumps blood through three divisions of the circulatory system: coronary, pulmonary, and
systemic. There is one atrium and one ventricle on the right side and one atrium and one ventricle on the left
side. The pumping of the heart is a function of cardiomyocytes, distinctive muscle cells that are striated like
skeletal muscle but pump rhythmically and involuntarily like smooth muscle. The internal pacemaker starts at
the sinoatrial node, which is located near the wall of the right atrium. Electrical charges pulse from the SA node
causing the two atria to contract in unison; then the pulse reaches the atrioventricular node between the right
atrium and right ventricle. A pause in the electric signal allows the atria to empty completely into the ventricles
before the ventricles pump out the blood. The blood from the heart is carried through the body by a complex
network of blood vessels; arteries take blood away from the heart, and veins bring blood back to the heart.
40.4Blood Flow and Blood Pressure Regulation
Blood primarily moves through the body by the rhythmic movement of smooth muscle in the vessel wall and by
the action of the skeletal muscle as the body moves. Blood is prevented from flowing backward in the veins by
one-way valves. Blood flow through the capillary beds is controlled by precapillary sphincters to increase and
decrease flow depending on the body’s needs and is directed by nerve and hormone signals. Lymph vessels
take fluid that has leaked out of the blood to the lymph nodes where it is cleaned before returning to the heart.
During systole, blood enters the arteries, and the artery walls stretch to accommodate the extra blood. During
diastole, the artery walls return to normal. The blood pressure of the systole phase and the diastole phase
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1286
Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System 1275
gives the two pressure readings for blood pressure.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 40.10Which of the following statements a. The mitral valve separates the left ventricle
about the circulatory system is false? from the left atrium.
a. Blood in the pulmonary vein is b. Blood travels through the bicuspid valve to
deoxygenated. the left atrium.
b. Blood in the inferior vena cava is c. Both the aortic and the pulmonary valves
deoxygenated. are semilunar valves.
c. Blood in the pulmonary artery is d. The mitral valve is an atrioventricular valve.
deoxygenated.
3.Figure 40.17Varicose veins are veins that
d. Blood in the aorta is oxygenated.
become enlarged because the valves no longer close
2.Figure 40.11Which of the following statements properly, allowing blood to flow backward. Varicose
about the heart is false? veins are often most prominent on the legs. Why do
you think this is the case?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Why are open circulatory systems advantageous a. 45 percent
to some animals? b. 55 percent
a. They use less metabolic energy. c. 25 percent
b. They help the animal move faster. d. 90 percent
c. They do not need a heart.
10.The red blood cells of birds differ from
d. They help large insects develop.
mammalian red blood cells because:
5.Some animals use diffusion instead of a circulatory a. they are white and have nuclei
system. Examples include: b. they do not have nuclei
a. birds and jellyfish c. they have nuclei
b. flatworms and arthropods d. they fight disease
c. mollusks and jellyfish
11.The heart’s internal pacemaker beats by:
d. none of the above
6.Blood flow that is directed through the lungs and a. an internal implant that sends an electrical
back to the heart is called ________. impulse through the heart
a. unidirectional circulation b. the excitation of cardiac muscle cells at the
b. gill circulation sinoatrial node followed by the
c. pulmonary circulation atrioventricular node
d. pulmocutaneous circulation c. the excitation of cardiac muscle cells at the
atrioventricular node followed by the
7.White blood cells:
sinoatrial node
a. can be classified as granulocytes or
d. the action of the sinus
agranulocytes
b. defend the body against bacteria and 12.During the systolic phase of the cardiac cycle, the
viruses heart is ________.
c. are also called leucocytes a. contracting
d. all of the above b. relaxing
c. contracting and relaxing
8.Platelet plug formation occurs at which point?
d. filling with blood
a. when large megakaryocytes break up into 13.Cardiomyocytes are similar to skeletal muscle
thousands of smaller fragments because:
b. when platelets are dispersed through the a. they beat involuntarily
bloodstream b. they are used for weight lifting
c. when platelets are attracted to a site of c. they pulse rhythmically
blood vessel damage d. they are striated
d. none of the above
14.How do arteries differ from veins?
9.In humans, the plasma comprises what
percentage of the blood?
PAGE: 1287
1276 Chapter 40 | The Circulatory System
a. Arteries have thicker smooth muscle layers ________.
to accommodate the changes in pressure a. a high cardiac output and high peripheral
from the heart. resistance
b. Arteries carry blood. b. a high cardiac output and low peripheral
c. Arteries have thinner smooth muscle layers resistance
and valves and move blood by the action of c. a low cardiac output and high peripheral
skeletal muscle. resistance
d. Arteries are thin walled and are used for gas d. a low cardiac output and low peripheral
exchange. resistance
15.High blood pressure would be a result of
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
16.Describe a closed circulatory system. flow?
17.Describe systemic circulation. 21.Describe the cardiac cycle.
18.Describe the cause of different blood type 22.What happens in capillaries?
groups.
23.How does blood pressure change during heavy
19.List some of the functions of blood in the body. exercise?
20.How does the lymphatic system work with blood
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1288
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1277
41 | OSMOTIC
REGULATION AND
EXCRETION
Figure41.1Justashumansrecyclewhatwecananddumptheremainsintolandfills,ourbodiesuseandrecyclewhat
theycanandexcretetheremainingwasteproducts.Ourbodies’complexsystemshavedevelopedwaystotreatwaste
and maintain a balanced internal environment. (credit: modification of work by Redwin Law)
Chapter Outline
41.1:Osmoregulation and Osmotic Balance
41.2:The Kidneys and Osmoregulatory Organs
41.3:Excretion Systems
41.4:Nitrogenous Wastes
41.5:Hormonal Control of Osmoregulatory Functions
Introduction
The daily intake recommendation for human water consumption is eight to ten glasses of water. In order to
achieve a healthy balance, the human body should excrete the eight to ten glasses of water every day. This
occurs via the processes of urination, defecation, sweating and, to a small extent, respiration. The organs
and tissues of the human body are soaked in fluids that are maintained at constant temperature, pH, and
solute concentration, all crucial elements of homeostasis. The solutes in body fluids are mainly mineral salts
and sugars, and osmotic regulation is the process by which the mineral salts and water are kept in balance.
Osmotichomeostasisismaintaineddespitetheinfluenceofexternalfactorsliketemperature,diet,andweather
conditions.
PAGE: 1289
1278 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
41.1 | Osmoregulation and Osmotic Balance
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define osmosis and explain its role within molecules
• Explain why osmoregulation and osmotic balance are important body functions
• Describe active transport mechanisms
• Explain osmolarity and the way in which it is measured
• Describe osmoregulators or osmoconformers and how these tools allow animals to adapt to different
environments
Osmosisisthediffusionofwateracrossamembraneinresponsetoosmoticpressurecausedbyanimbalance
ofmoleculesoneithersideofthemembrane.Osmoregulationistheprocessofmaintenanceofsaltandwater
balance ( osmotic balance) across membranes within the body’s fluids, which are composed of water, plus
electrolytes and non-electrolytes. An electrolyte is a solute that dissociates into ions when dissolved in water.
Anon-electrolyte,incontrast, doesn’t dissociate into ionsduringwater dissolution. Both electrolytes andnon-
electrolytes contribute to the osmotic balance. The body’s fluids include blood plasma, the cytosol within cells,
andinterstitialfluid,thefluidthatexistsinthespacesbetweencellsandtissuesofthebody.Themembranesof
thebody(suchasthepleural,serous,andcellmembranes)aresemi-permeablemembranes.Semi-permeable
membranes are permeable (or permissive) to certain types of solutes and water. Solutions on two sides of a
semi-permeablemembranetendtoequalizeinsoluteconcentrationbymovementofsolutesand/orwateracross
the membrane. As seen in Figure 41.2, a cell placed in water tends to swell due to gain of water from the
hypotonicor“lowsalt”environment.Acellplacedinasolutionwithhighersaltconcentration,ontheotherhand,
tends to make the membrane shrivel up due to loss of water into the hypertonic or “high salt” environment.
Isotonic cells have an equal concentration of solutes inside and outside the cell; this equalizes the osmotic
pressure on either side of the cell membrane which is a semi-permeable membrane.
Figure41.2Cellsplacedinahypertonicenvironmenttendtoshrinkduetolossofwater.Inahypotonicenvironment,
cellstendtoswellduetointakeofwater.Thebloodmaintainsanisotonicenvironmentsothatcellsneithershrinknor
swell. (credit: Mariana Ruiz Villareal)
The body does not exist in isolation. There is a constant input of water and electrolytes into the system. While
osmoregulationisachievedacrossmembraneswithinthebody,excesselectrolytesandwastesaretransported
to the kidneys and excreted, helping to maintain osmotic balance.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1290
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1279
Need for Osmoregulation
Biological systems constantly interact and exchange water and nutrients with the environment by way of
consumption of food and water and through excretion in the form of sweat, urine, and feces. Without a
mechanism to regulate osmotic pressure, or when a disease damages this mechanism, there is a tendency to
accumulate toxic waste and water, which can have dire consequences.
Mammalian systems have evolved to regulate not only the overall osmotic pressure across membranes, but
also specific concentrations of important electrolytes in the three major fluid compartments: blood plasma,
extracellular fluid, and intracellular fluid. Since osmotic pressure is regulated by the movement of water across
membranes, the volume of the fluid compartments can also change temporarily. Because blood plasma is one
of the fluid components, osmotic pressures have a direct bearing on blood pressure.
Transport of Electrolytes across Cell Membranes
Electrolytes, such as sodium chloride, ionize in water, meaning that they dissociate into their component
+ –
ions. In water, sodium chloride (NaCl), dissociates into the sodium ion (Na ) and the chloride ion (Cl ). The
most important ions, whose concentrations are very closely regulated in body fluids, are the cations sodium
+ + +2 +2 - -2
(Na ), potassium (K ), calcium (Ca ), magnesium (Mg ), and the anions chloride (Cl), carbonate (CO3 ),
- -
bicarbonate(HCO3),andphosphate(PO3).Electrolytesarelostfromthebodyduringurinationandperspiration.
For this reason, athletes are encouraged to replace electrolytes and fluids during periods of increased activity
and perspiration.
Osmotic pressure is influenced by the concentration of solutes in a solution. It is directly proportional to
the number of solute atoms or molecules and not dependent on the size of the solute molecules. Because
electrolytes dissociate into their component ions, they, in essence, add more solute particles into the solution
andhaveagreatereffectonosmoticpressure,permassthancompoundsthatdonotdissociateinwater,such
as glucose.
Water can pass through membranes by passive diffusion. If electrolyte ions could passively diffuse across
membranes, it would be impossible to maintain specific concentrations of ions in each fluid compartment
thereforetheyrequirespecialmechanismstocrossthesemi-permeablemembranesinthebody.Thismovement
can be accomplished by facilitated diffusion and active transport. Facilitated diffusion requires protein-based
channelsformovingthesolute.ActivetransportrequiresenergyintheformofATPconversion,carrierproteins,
or pumps in order to move ions against the concentration gradient.
Concept of Osmolality and Milliequivalent
In order to calculate osmotic pressure, it is necessary to understand how solute concentrations are measured.
The unit for measuring solutes is the mole. One mole is defined as the gram molecular weight of the solute.
Forexample,themolecularweightofsodiumchlorideis58.44.Thus,onemoleofsodiumchlorideweighs58.44
grams.Themolarityofasolutionisthenumberofmolesofsoluteperliterofsolution.Themolalityofasolution
is the number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent. If the solvent is water, one kilogram of water is equal
to one liter of water. While molarity and molality are used to express the concentration of solutions, electrolyte
concentrationsareusuallyexpressedintermsofmilliequivalentsperliter(mEq/L):themEq/Lisequaltotheion
concentration(inmillimoles)multipliedbythenumberofelectricalchargesontheion.Theunitofmilliequivalent
takesintoconsiderationtheionspresentinthesolution(sinceelectrolytes formionsinaqueoussolutions)and
the charge on the ions.
Thus, for ions that have a charge of one, one milliequivalent is equal to one millimole. For ions that have
a charge of two (like calcium), one milliequivalent is equal to 0.5 millimoles. Another unit for the expression
of electrolyte concentration is the milliosmole (mOsm), which is the number of milliequivalents of solute per
kilogram of solvent. Body fluids are usually maintained within the range of 280 to 300 mOsm.
Osmoregulators and Osmoconformers
Persons lost at sea without any freshwater to drink are at risk of severe dehydration because the human
body cannot adapt to drinking seawater, which is hypertonic in comparison to body fluids. Organisms such as
goldfish that can tolerate only a relatively narrow range of salinity are referred to as stenohaline. About 90
percentofallbonyfisharerestrictedtoeitherfreshwaterorseawater.Theyareincapableofosmoticregulation
in the opposite environment. It is possible, however, for a few fishes like salmon to spend part of their life
in freshwater and part in seawater. Organisms like the salmon and molly that can tolerate a relatively wide
PAGE: 1291
1280 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
range of salinity are referred to as euryhaline organisms. This is possible because some fish have evolved
osmoregulatory mechanisms to survive in all kinds of aquatic environments. When they live in freshwater,
their bodies tend to take up water because the environment is relatively hypotonic, as illustrated in Figure
41.3a. In such hypotonic environments, these fish do not drink much water. Instead, they pass a lot of very
diluteurine,andtheyachieveelectrolytebalancebyactivetransportofsaltsthroughthegills.Whentheymove
to a hypertonic marine environment, these fish start drinking seawater; they excrete the excess salts through
their gills and their urine, as illustrated in Figure 41.3b. Most marine invertebrates, on the other hand, may be
isotonic with seawater ( osmoconformers). Their body fluid concentrations conform to changes in seawater
concentration. Cartilaginous fishes’ salt composition of the blood is similar to bony fishes; however, the blood
of sharks contains the organic compounds urea and trimethylamine oxide (TMAO). This does not mean that
theirelectrolytecompositionissimilartothatofseawater.Theyachieveisotonicitywiththeseabystoringlarge
concentrationsofurea.Theseanimalsthatsecreteureaarecalledureotelicanimals.TMAOstabilizesproteins
inthepresenceofhighurealevels,preventingthedisruptionofpeptidebondsthatwouldoccurinotheranimals
exposed to similar levels of urea. Sharks are cartilaginous fish with a rectal gland to secrete salt and assist in
osmoregulation.
Figure41.3Fishareosmoregulators,butmustusedifferentmechanismstosurvivein(a)freshwateror(b)saltwater
environments. (credit: modification of work by Duane Raver, NOAA)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1292
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1281
Dialysis Technician
Dialysis is a medical process of removing wastes and excess water from the blood by diffusion and
ultrafiltration.Whenkidneyfunctionfails,dialysismustbedonetoartificiallyridthebodyofwastes.Thisis
a vital process to keep patients alive. In some cases, the patients undergo artificial dialysis until they are
eligibleforakidneytransplant.Inotherswhoarenotcandidatesforkidneytransplants,dialysisisalife-long
necessity.
Dialysistechnicianstypicallyworkinhospitalsandclinics.Whilesomerolesinthisfieldincludeequipment
development and maintenance, most dialysis technicians work in direct patient care. Their on-the-job
duties, which typically occur under the direct supervision of a registered nurse, focus on providing dialysis
treatments. This can include reviewing patient history and current condition, assessing and responding to
patient needs before and during treatment, and monitoring the dialysis process. Treatment may include
taking and reporting a patient’s vital signs and preparing solutions and equipment to ensure accurate and
sterile procedures.
41.2 | The Kidneys and Osmoregulatory Organs
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how the kidneys serve as the main osmoregulatory organs in mammalian systems
• Describe the structure of the kidneys and the functions of the parts of the kidney
• Describehowthenephronisthefunctionalunitofthekidneyandexplainhowitactivelyfiltersbloodand
generates urine
• Detail the three steps in the formation of urine: glomerular filtration, tubular reabsorption, and tubular
secretion
Although the kidneys are the major osmoregulatory organ, the skin and lungs also play a role in the process.
Water and electrolytes are lost through sweat glands in the skin, which helps moisturize and cool the skin
surface,whilethelungsexpelasmallamountofwaterintheformofmucoussecretionsandviaevaporationof
water vapor.
Kidneys: The Main Osmoregulatory Organ
The kidneys, illustrated in Figure 41.4, are a pair of bean-shaped structures that are located just below and
posteriortotheliverintheperitonealcavity.Theadrenalglandssitontopofeachkidneyandarealsocalledthe
suprarenalglands.Kidneysfilterbloodandpurifyit.Allthebloodinthehumanbodyisfilteredmanytimesaday
bythekidneys;theseorgansuseupalmost25percentoftheoxygenabsorbedthroughthelungstoperformthis
function. Oxygen allows the kidney cells to efficiently manufacture chemical energy in the form of ATP through
aerobic respiration. The filtrate coming out of the kidneys is calledurine.
PAGE: 1293
1282 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Figure 41.4 Kidneys filter the blood, producing urine that is stored in the bladder prior to elimination through the
urethra. (credit: modification of work by NCI)
Kidney Structure
Externally,thekidneysaresurroundedbythreelayers,illustratedinFigure41.5.Theoutermostlayerisatough
connective tissue layer called the renal fascia. The second layer is called the perirenal fat capsule, which
helps anchor the kidneys in place. The third and innermost layer is the renal capsule. Internally, the kidney
has three regions—an outer cortex, a medulla in the middle, and the renal pelvis in the region called the
hilum of the kidney. The hilum is the concave part of the bean-shape where blood vessels and nerves enter
andexitthekidney;itisalsothepointofexitfortheureters.Therenalcortexisgranularduetothepresenceof
nephrons—the functional unit of the kidney. The medulla consists of multiple pyramidal tissue masses, called
therenalpyramids.Inbetweenthepyramidsarespacescalledrenalcolumnsthroughwhichthebloodvessels
pass.Thetipsofthepyramids,calledrenalpapillae,pointtowardtherenalpelvis.Thereare,onaverage,eight
renalpyramidsineachkidney.Therenalpyramidsalongwiththeadjoiningcorticalregionarecalledthelobes
ofthekidney.Therenalpelvisleadstotheureterontheoutsideofthekidney.Ontheinsideofthekidney,the
renal pelvis branches out into two or three extensions called the major calyces, which further branch into the
minor calyces. The ureters are urine-bearing tubes that exit the kidney and empty into theurinary bladder.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1294
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1283
Figure 41.5The internal structure of the kidney is shown. (credit: modification of work by NCI)
Which of the following statements about the kidney is false?
a. The renal pelvis drains into the ureter.
b. The renal pyramids are in the medulla.
c. The cortex covers the capsule.
d. Nephrons are in the renal cortex.
Because the kidney filters blood, its network of blood vessels is an important component of its structure and
function. The arteries, veins, and nerves that supply the kidney enter and exit at the renal hilum. Renal blood
supply starts with the branching of the aorta into the renal arteries (which are each named based on the
region of the kidney they pass through) and ends with the exiting of the renal veins to join the inferior vena
cava.Therenalarteriessplitintoseveralsegmentalarteriesuponenteringthekidneys.Eachsegmentalartery
splits further into several interlobar arteries and enters the renal columns, which supply the renal lobes. The
interlobararteriessplitatthejunctionoftherenalcortexandmedullatoformthearcuatearteries.Thearcuate
“bow shaped” arteries form arcs along the base of the medullary pyramids. Cortical radiate arteries, as the
namesuggests,radiateoutfromthearcuatearteries.Thecorticalradiatearteriesbranchintonumerousafferent
arterioles, and then enter the capillaries supplying the nephrons. Veins trace the path of the arteries and have
similar names, except there are no segmental veins.
Asmentionedpreviously,thefunctionalunitofthekidneyisthenephron,illustratedinFigure41.6.Eachkidney
ismadeupofoveronemillionnephronsthatdottherenalcortex,givingitagranularappearancewhensectioned
sagittally. There are two types of nephrons— cortical nephrons (85 percent), which are deep in the renal
cortex, and juxtamedullary nephrons (15 percent), which lie in the renal cortex close to the renal medulla. A
nephronconsistsofthreeparts—arenalcorpuscle,arenaltubule,andtheassociatedcapillarynetwork,which
originates from the cortical radiate arteries.
PAGE: 1295
1284 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Figure41.6Thenephronisthefunctionalunitofthekidney.Theglomerulusandconvolutedtubulesarelocated
inthekidneycortex,whilecollectingductsarelocatedinthepyramidsofthemedulla.(credit:modificationofwork
by NIDDK)
Which of the following statements about the nephron is false?
a. The collecting duct empties into the distal convoluted tubule.
b. The Bowman’s capsule surrounds the glomerulus.
c. The loop of Henle is between the proximal and distal convoluted tubules.
d. The loop of Henle empties into the distal convoluted tubule.
Renal Corpuscle
Therenalcorpuscle,locatedintherenalcortex,ismadeupofanetworkofcapillariesknownastheglomerulus
and the capsule, a cup-shaped chamber that surrounds it, called the glomerular orBowman's capsule.
Renal Tubule
The renal tubule is a long and convoluted structure that emerges from the glomerulus and can be divided into
threepartsbasedonfunction.Thefirstpartiscalledtheproximalconvolutedtubule(PCT)duetoitsproximity
to the glomerulus; it stays in the renal cortex. The second part is called the loop of Henle, or nephritic loop,
becauseitformsaloop(withdescendingandascendinglimbs)thatgoesthroughtherenalmedulla.Thethird
partoftherenaltubuleiscalledthedistalconvolutedtubule(DCT)andthispartisalsorestrictedtotherenal
cortex. The DCT, which is the last part of the nephron, connects and empties its contents into collecting ducts
thatlinethemedullarypyramids.Thecollectingductsamasscontentsfrommultiplenephronsandfusetogether
as they enter the papillae of the renal medulla.
Capillary Network within the Nephron
The capillary network that originates from the renal arteries supplies the nephron with blood that needs to
be filtered. The branch that enters the glomerulus is called the afferent arteriole. The branch that exits the
glomerulus is called the efferent arteriole. Within the glomerulus, the network of capillaries is called the
glomerular capillary bed. Once the efferent arteriole exits the glomerulus, it forms the peritubular capillary
network, which surrounds and interacts with parts of the renal tubule. In cortical nephrons, the peritubular
capillary network surrounds the PCT and DCT. In juxtamedullary nephrons, the peritubular capillary network
forms a network around the loop of Henle and is called thevasa recta.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1296
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1285
Go to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/kidney_section) to see another coronal section of the
kidney and to explore an animation of the workings of nephrons.
Kidney Function and Physiology
Kidneysfilterbloodinathree-stepprocess.First,thenephronsfilterbloodthatrunsthroughthecapillarynetwork
intheglomerulus.Almostallsolutes,exceptforproteins,arefilteredoutintotheglomerulusbyaprocesscalled
glomerular filtration. Second, the filtrate is collected in the renal tubules. Most of the solutes get reabsorbed
in the PCT by a process called tubular reabsorption. In the loop of Henle, the filtrate continues to exchange
solutesandwaterwiththerenalmedullaandtheperitubularcapillarynetwork.Waterisalsoreabsorbedduring
this step. Then, additional solutes and wastes are secreted into the kidney tubules during tubular secretion,
which is, in essence, the opposite process to tubular reabsorption. The collecting ducts collect filtrate coming
from the nephrons and fuse in the medullary papillae. From here, the papillae deliver the filtrate, now called
urine,intotheminorcalycesthateventuallyconnecttotheuretersthroughtherenalpelvis.Thisentireprocess
is illustrated inFigure 41.7.
PAGE: 1297
1286 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Figure 41.7 Each part of the nephron performs a different function in filtering waste and maintaining homeostatic
balance. (1) The glomerulus forces small solutes out of the blood by pressure. (2) The proximal convoluted tubule
reabsorbsions,water,andnutrientsfromthefiltrateintotheinterstitialfluid,andactivelytransportstoxinsanddrugs
fromtheinterstitialfluidintothefiltrate.TheproximalconvolutedtubulealsoadjustsbloodpHbyselectivelysecreting
ammonia(NH3)intothefiltrate,whereitreactswithH+toformNH4 +.Themoreacidicthefiltrate,themoreammonia
issecreted. (3)ThedescendingloopofHenleislinedwithcellscontaining aquaporinsthat allowwatertopassfrom
thefiltrateintotheinterstitialfluid.(4)InthethinpartoftheascendingloopofHenle,Na+andCl-ionsdiffuseintothe
interstitialfluid.Inthethickpart,thesesameionsareactivelytransportedintotheinterstitialfluid.Becausesaltbutnot
waterislost,thefiltratebecomesmorediluteasittravelsupthelimb.(5)Inthedistalconvolutedtubule,K+andH+ions
areselectivelysecretedintothefiltrate,whileNa+,Cl-,andHCO3 -ionsarereabsorbedtomaintainpHandelectrolyte
balanceintheblood.(6)Thecollectingductreabsorbssolutesandwaterfromthefiltrate,formingdiluteurine.(credit:
modification of work by NIDDK)
Glomerular Filtration
Glomerular filtration filters out most of the solutes due to high blood pressure and specialized membranes in
the afferent arteriole. The blood pressure in the glomerulus is maintained independent of factors that affect
systemic blood pressure. The “leaky” connections between the endothelial cells of the glomerular capillary
networkallowsolutestopassthrougheasily.Allsolutesintheglomerularcapillaries,exceptformacromolecules
like proteins, pass through by passive diffusion. There is no energy requirement at this stage of the filtration
process.Glomerularfiltrationrate(GFR)isthevolumeofglomerularfiltrateformedperminutebythekidneys.
GFR is regulated by multiple mechanisms and is an important indicator of kidney function.
Tolearnmoreaboutthevascularsystemofkidneys,clickthroughthisreview(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/
kidneys)and the steps of blood flow.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1298
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1287
Tubular Reabsorption and Secretion
Tubular reabsorption occurs in the PCT part of the renal tubule. Almost all nutrients are reabsorbed, and this
occurs either by passive or active transport. Reabsorption of water and some key electrolytes are regulated
+
and can be influenced by hormones. Sodium (Na ) is the most abundant ion and most of it is reabsorbed by
+
active transport and then transported to the peritubular capillaries. Because Na is actively transported out of
the tubule, water follows it to even out the osmotic pressure. Water is also independently reabsorbed into the
peritubular capillaries due to the presence of aquaporins, or water channels, in the PCT. This occurs due to
the low blood pressure and high osmotic pressure in the peritubular capillaries. However, every solute has a
transport maximumand the excess is not reabsorbed.
In the loop of Henle, the permeability of the membrane changes. The descending limb is permeable to water,
notsolutes;theoppositeistruefortheascendinglimb.Additionally,theloopofHenleinvadestherenalmedulla,
which is naturally high in salt concentration and tends to absorb water from the renal tubule and concentrate
thefiltrate.Theosmoticgradientincreasesasitmovesdeeperintothemedulla.Becausetwosidesoftheloop
of Henle perform opposing functions, as illustrated in Figure 41.8, it acts as a countercurrent multiplier. The
vasa recta around it acts as thecountercurrent exchanger.
Figure 41.8 The loop of Henle acts as a countercurrent multiplier that uses energy to create concentration
gradients. The descending limb is water permeable. Water flows from the filtrate to the interstitial fluid, so
osmolalityinsidethelimbincreasesasitdescendsintotherenalmedulla.Atthebottom,theosmolalityishigher
insidetheloopthanintheinterstitialfluid.Thus,asfiltrateenterstheascendinglimb,Na+andCl-ionsexitthrough
ionchannelspresentinthecellmembrane.Furtherup,Na+isactivelytransportedoutofthefiltrateandCl-follows.
Osmolarity is given in units of milliosmoles per liter (mOsm/L).
+
Loopdiureticsaredrugssometimesusedtotreathypertension.ThesedrugsinhibitthereabsorptionofNa
-
andCl ionsbytheascendinglimboftheloopofHenle.Asideeffectisthattheyincreaseurination.Whydo
you think this is the case?
By the time the filtrate reaches the DCT, most of the urine and solutes have been reabsorbed. If the body
requiresadditionalwater,allofitcanbereabsorbedatthispoint.Furtherreabsorptioniscontrolledbyhormones,
whichwillbediscussedinalatersection.Excretionofwastesoccursduetolackofreabsorptioncombinedwith
tubular secretion. Undesirable products like metabolic wastes, urea, uric acid, and certain drugs, are excreted
bytubularsecretion.MostofthetubularsecretionhappensintheDCT,butsomeoccursintheearlypartofthe
+
collecting duct. Kidneys also maintain an acid-base balance by secreting excess H ions.
PAGE: 1299
1288 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Although parts of the renal tubules are named proximal and distal, in a cross-section of the kidney, the tubules
are placed close together and in contact with each other and the glomerulus. This allows for exchange of
chemical messengers between the different cell types. For example, the DCT ascending limb of the loop of
Henlehasmassesofcellscalledmaculadensa,whichareincontactwithcellsoftheafferentarteriolescalled
juxtaglomerularcells.Together,themaculadensaandjuxtaglomerularcellsformthejuxtaglomerularcomplex
(JGC).TheJGCisanendocrinestructurethatsecretestheenzymereninandthehormoneerythropoietin.When
hormones trigger the macula densa cells in the DCT due to variations in blood volume, blood pressure, or
electrolyte balance,thesecellscanimmediatelycommunicatetheproblemtothecapillariesintheafferentand
efferent arterioles, which can constrict or relax to change the glomerular filtration rate of the kidneys.
Nephrologist
Anephrologiststudiesanddealswithdiseasesofthekidneys—boththosethatcausekidneyfailure(suchas
diabetes)andtheconditionsthatareproducedbykidneydisease(suchashypertension).Bloodpressure,
blood volume, and changes in electrolyte balance come under the purview of a nephrologist.
Nephrologists usually work with other physicians who refer patients to them or consult with them about
specific diagnoses and treatment plans. Patients are usually referred to a nephrologist for symptoms such
as blood or protein in the urine, very high blood pressure, kidney stones, or renal failure.
Nephrology is a subspecialty of internal medicine. To become a nephrologist, medical school is followed
by additional training to become certified in internal medicine. An additional two or more years is spent
specifically studying kidney disorders and their accompanying effects on the body.
41.3 | Excretion Systems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how vacuoles, present in microorganisms, work to excrete waste
• Describethewayinwhichflamecellsandnephridiainwormsperformexcretoryfunctionsandmaintain
osmotic balance
• Explain how insects use Malpighian tubules to excrete wastes and maintain osmotic balance
Microorganismsandinvertebrateanimalsusemoreprimitiveandsimplemechanismstogetridoftheirmetabolic
wastes than the mammalian system of kidney and urinary function. Three excretory systems evolved in
organisms before complex kidneys: vacuoles, flame cells, and Malpighian tubules.
Contractile Vacuoles in Microorganisms
The most fundamental feature of life is the presence of a cell. In other words, a cell is the simplest functional
unitofalife.Bacteriaareunicellular,prokaryoticorganismsthathavesomeoftheleastcomplexlifeprocesses
in place; however, prokaryotes such as bacteria do not contain membrane-bound vacuoles. The cells of
microorganisms like bacteria, protozoa, and fungi are bound by cell membranes and use them to interact with
theenvironment.Somecells,includingsomeleucocytesinhumans,areabletoengulffoodbyendocytosis—the
formationofvesiclesbyinvolutionofthecellmembranewithinthecells.Thesamevesiclesareabletointeract
andexchangemetaboliteswiththeintracellularenvironment.Insomeunicellulareukaryoticorganismssuchas
the amoeba, shown in Figure 41.9, cellular wastes and excess water are excreted by exocytosis, when the
contractilevacuolesmergewiththecellmembraneandexpelwastesintotheenvironment.Contractilevacuoles
(CV) should not be confused with vacuoles, which store food or water.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1300
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1289
Figure41.9Someunicellularorganisms,suchastheamoeba,ingestfoodbyendocytosis.Thefoodvesiclefuseswith
a lysosome, which digests the food. Waste is excreted by exocytosis.
Flame Cells of Planaria and Nephridia of Worms
Asmulticellularsystemsevolvedtohaveorgansystemsthatdividedthemetabolicneedsofthebody,individual
organsevolvedtoperformtheexcretoryfunction.Planariaareflatwormsthatliveinfreshwater.Theirexcretory
systemconsistsoftwotubulesconnectedtoahighlybranchedductsystem.Thecellsinthetubulesarecalled
flame cells (or protonephridia) because they have a cluster of cilia that looks like a flickering flame when
viewedunderthemicroscope,asillustratedinFigure41.10a.Theciliapropelwastematterdownthetubulesand
outofthebodythroughexcretoryporesthatopenonthebodysurface;ciliaalsodrawwaterfromtheinterstitial
fluid, allowing for filtration. Any valuable metabolites are recovered by reabsorption. Flame cells are found in
flatworms, including parasitic tapeworms and free-living planaria. They also maintain the organism’s osmotic
balance.
Figure 41.10 In the excretory system of the (a) planaria, cilia of flame cells propel waste through a tubule formed
by a tube cell. Tubules are connected into branched structures that lead to pores located all along the sides of the
body. The filtrate is secreted through these pores. In (b) annelids such as earthworms, nephridia filter fluid from the
coelom, or body cavity. Beating cilia at the opening of the nephridium draw water from the coelom into a tubule. As
thefiltratepassesdownthetubules,nutrientsandothersolutesarereabsorbedbycapillaries.Filteredfluidcontaining
nitrogenous and other wastes is stored in a bladder and then secreted through a pore in the side of the body.
Earthworms (annelids) have slightly more evolved excretory structures called nephridia, illustrated in Figure
41.10b.Apairofnephridiaispresentoneachsegmentoftheearthworm.Theyaresimilartoflamecellsinthat
theyhaveatubulewithcilia.Excretionoccursthroughaporecalledthenephridiopore.Theyaremoreevolved
than the flame cells in that they have a system for tubular reabsorption by a capillary network before excretion.
Malpighian Tubules of Insects
Malpighiantubulesarefoundliningthegutofsomespeciesofarthropods,suchasthebeeillustratedinFigure
41.11. They are usually found in pairs and the number of tubules varies with the species of insect. Malpighian
tubules are convoluted, which increases their surface area, and they are lined with microvilli for reabsorption
andmaintenanceofosmoticbalance.Malpighiantubulesworkcooperativelywithspecializedglandsinthewall
of the rectum. Body fluids are not filtered as in the case of nephridia; urine is produced by tubular secretion
mechanisms by the cells lining the Malpighian tubules that are bathed in hemolymph (a mixture of blood and
interstitial fluid that is found in insects and other arthropods as well as most mollusks). Metabolic wastes like
PAGE: 1301
1290 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
uric acid freely diffuse into the tubules. There are exchange pumps lining the tubules, which actively transport
+ + +
H ions into the cell and K or Na ions out; water passively follows to form urine. The secretion of ions alters
theosmoticpressurewhichdrawswater,electrolytes,andnitrogenouswaste(uricacid)intothetubules.Water
andelectrolytesarereabsorbedwhentheseorganismsarefacedwithlow-waterenvironments,anduricacidis
excreted as a thick paste or powder. Not dissolving wastes in water helps these organisms to conserve water;
this is especially important for life in dry environments.
Figure 41.11 Malpighian tubules of insects and other terrestrial arthropods remove nitrogenous wastes and other
solutes from the hemolymph. Na+ and/or K+ ions are actively transported into the lumen of the tubules. Water then
enters the tubules via osmosis, forming urine. The urine passes through the intestine, and into the rectum. There,
nutrients diffuse back into the hemolymph. Na+ and/or K+ ions are pumped into the hemolymph, and water follows.
The concentrated waste is then excreted.
See a dissected cockroach, including a close-up look at its Malpighian tubules, in this video
(https://openstax.org/l/malpighian).
41.4 | Nitrogenous Wastes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare and contrast the way in which aquatic animals and terrestrial animals can eliminate toxic
ammonia from their systems
• Comparethemajorbyproductofammoniametabolisminvertebrateanimalstothatofbirds,insects,and
reptiles
Of the four major macromolecules in biological systems, both proteins and nucleic acids contain nitrogen.
During the catabolism, or breakdown, of nitrogen-containing macromolecules, carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen
are extracted and stored in the form of carbohydrates and fats. Excess nitrogen is excreted from the body.
Nitrogenouswastestendtoformtoxicammonia,whichraisesthepHofbodyfluids.Theformationofammonia
itself requires energy in the form of ATP and large quantities of water to dilute it out of a biological system.
Animalsthatliveinaquaticenvironmentstendtoreleaseammoniaintothewater.Animalsthatexcreteammonia
are said to be ammonotelic. Terrestrial organisms have evolved other mechanisms to excrete nitrogenous
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1302
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1291
wastes.Theanimalsmustdetoxifyammoniabyconvertingitintoarelativelynontoxicformsuchasureaoruric
acid. Mammals, including humans, produce urea, whereas reptiles and many terrestrial invertebrates produce
uric acid. Animals that secrete urea as the primary nitrogenous waste material are calledureotelicanimals.
Nitrogenous Waste in Terrestrial Animals: The Urea Cycle
Theureacycleistheprimarymechanismbywhichmammalsconvertammoniatourea.Ureaismadeintheliver
andexcretedinurine.Theoverallchemicalreactionbywhichammoniaisconvertedtoureais2NH3(ammonia)
+ CO2+ 3 ATP + H2O → H2N-CO-NH2(urea) + 2 ADP + 4 Pi+ AMP.
The urea cycle utilizes five intermediate steps, catalyzed by five different enzymes, to convert ammonia to
urea, as shown in Figure 41.12. The amino acid L-ornithine gets converted into different intermediates before
beingregeneratedattheendoftheureacycle.Hence,theureacycleisalsoreferredtoastheornithinecycle.
The enzyme ornithine transcarbamylase catalyzes a key step in the urea cycle and its deficiency can lead to
accumulation of toxic levels of ammonia in the body. The first two reactions occur in the mitochondria and the
lastthreereactionsoccurinthecytosol.Ureaconcentrationintheblood,calledbloodureanitrogenorBUN,is
used as an indicator of kidney function.
Figure 41.12The urea cycle converts ammonia to urea.
PAGE: 1303
1292 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Excretion of Nitrogenous Waste
The theory of evolution proposes that life started in an aquatic environment. It is not surprising to see
thatbiochemicalpathwaysliketheureacycleevolvedtoadapttoachangingenvironmentwhenterrestrial
life forms evolved. Arid conditions probably led to the evolution of the uric acid pathway as a means of
conserving water.
Nitrogenous Waste in Birds and Reptiles: Uric Acid
Birds, reptiles, and most terrestrial arthropods convert toxic ammonia to uric acid or the closely related
compound guanine (guano) instead of urea. Mammals also form some uric acid during breakdown of nucleic
acids.Uricacidisacompoundsimilartopurinesfoundinnucleicacids.Itiswaterinsolubleandtendstoforma
whitepasteorpowder;itisexcretedbybirds,insects,andreptiles.Conversionofammoniatouricacidrequires
more energy and is much more complex than conversion of ammonia to ureaFigure 41.13.
Figure 41.13 Nitrogenous waste is excreted in different forms by different species. These include (a) ammonia, (b)
urea,and(c)uricacid.(credita:modificationofworkbyEricEngbretson,USFWS;creditb:modificationofworkbyB.
"Moose" Peterson, USFWS; credit c: modification of work by Dave Menke, USFWS)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1304
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1293
Gout
Mammalsuseuricacidcrystalsasanantioxidantintheircells.However,toomuchuricacidtendstoform
kidneystonesandmayalsocauseapainfulconditioncalledgout,whereuricacidcrystalsaccumulateinthe
joints,asillustratedinFigure41.14.Foodchoicesthatreducetheamountofnitrogenousbasesinthediet
help reduce the risk of gout. For example, tea, coffee, and chocolate have purine-like compounds, called
xanthines, and should be avoided by people with gout and kidney stones.
Figure41.14Goutcausestheinflammationvisibleinthisperson’sleftbigtoejoint.(credit:"Gonzosft"/Wikimedia
Commons)
41.5 | Hormonal Control of Osmoregulatory Functions
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain how hormonal cues help the kidneys synchronize the osmotic needs of the body
• Describe how hormones like epinephrine, norepinephrine, renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, anti-diuretic
hormone,andatrialnatriureticpeptidehelpregulatewasteelimination,maintaincorrectosmolarity,and
perform other osmoregulatory functions
Whilethekidneysoperatetomaintainosmoticbalanceandbloodpressureinthebody,theyalsoactinconcert
withhormones.Hormonesaresmallmoleculesthatactasmessengerswithinthebody.Hormonesaretypically
secretedfromonecellandtravelinthebloodstreamtoaffectatargetcellinanotherportionofthebody.Different
regions of the nephron bear specialized cells that have receptors to respond to chemical messengers and
hormones.Table 41.1summarizes the hormones that control the osmoregulatory functions.
Hormones That Affect Osmoregulation
Hormone Where produced Function
Epinephrine and
Adrenal medulla Can decrease kidney function temporarily by vasoconstriction
Norepinephrine
Renin Kidney nephrons Increases blood pressure by acting on angiotensinogen
Table 41.1
PAGE: 1305
1294 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
Hormones That Affect Osmoregulation
Hormone Where produced Function
Angiotensin II affects multiple processes and increases blood
Angiotensin Liver
pressure
Aldosterone Adrenal cortex Prevents loss of sodium and water
Anti-diuretic Hypothalamus (stored
hormone in the posterior Prevents water loss
(vasopressin) pituitary)
Decreases blood pressure by acting as a vasodilator and
Atrial natriuretic
Heart atrium increasing glomerular filtration rate; decreases sodium
peptide
reabsorption in kidneys
Table 41.1
Epinephrine and Norepinephrine
Epinephrine and norepinephrine are released by the adrenal medulla and nervous system respectively. They
are the flight/fight hormones that are released when the body is under extreme stress. During stress, much of
thebody’senergyisusedtocombatimminentdanger.Kidneyfunctionishaltedtemporarilybyepinephrineand
norepinephrine.Thesehormonesfunctionbyactingdirectlyonthesmoothmusclesofbloodvesselstoconstrict
them.Oncetheafferentarteriolesareconstricted,bloodflowintothenephronsstops.Thesehormonesgoone
step further and trigger therenin-angiotensin-aldosteronesystem.
Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, illustrated in Figure 41.15 proceeds through several steps to
produce angiotensin II, which acts to stabilize blood pressure and volume. Renin (secreted by a part of
the juxtaglomerular complex) is produced by the granular cells of the afferent and efferent arterioles. Thus,
the kidneys control blood pressure and volume directly. Renin acts on angiotensinogen, which is made in
the liver and converts it to angiotensin I. Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) converts angiotensin I to
angiotensin II. Angiotensin II raises blood pressure by constricting blood vessels. It also triggers the release of
themineralocorticoidaldosteronefromtheadrenalcortex,whichinturnstimulatestherenaltubulestoreabsorb
moresodium.AngiotensinIIalsotriggersthereleaseofanti-diuretichormone(ADH)fromthehypothalamus,
leadingtowaterretentioninthekidneys.Itactsdirectlyonthenephronsanddecreasesglomerularfiltrationrate.
Medically, blood pressure can be controlled by drugs that inhibit ACE (called ACE inhibitors).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1306
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1295
Figure41.15Therenin-angiotensin-aldosteronesystemincreasesbloodpressureandvolume.ThehormoneANPhas
antagonistic effects. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Mineralocorticoids
Mineralocorticoidsarehormonessynthesizedbytheadrenalcortexthataffectosmoticbalance.Aldosteroneisa
mineralocorticoidthatregulatessodiumlevelsintheblood.Almostallofthesodiuminthebloodisreclaimedby
therenaltubulesundertheinfluenceofaldosterone.Becausesodiumisalwaysreabsorbedbyactivetransport
and water follows sodium to maintain osmotic balance, aldosterone manages not only sodium levels but also
the water levels in body fluids. In contrast, the aldosterone also stimulates potassium secretion concurrently
with sodium reabsorption. In contrast, absence of aldosterone means that no sodium gets reabsorbed in the
renaltubulesandallofitgetsexcretedintheurine.Inaddition,thedailydietarypotassiumloadisnotsecreted
+ +
and the retention of K can cause a dangerous increase in plasma K concentration. Patients who have
Addison'sdiseasehaveafailingadrenalcortexandcannotproducealdosterone.Theylosesodiumintheirurine
constantly, and if the supply is not replenished, the consequences can be fatal.
Antidiurectic Hormone
As previously discussed, antidiuretic hormone or ADH (also called vasopressin), as the name suggests,
helps the body conserve water when body fluid volume, especially that of blood, is low. It is formed by the
hypothalamus and is stored and released from the posterior pituitary. It acts by inserting aquaporins in the
collecting ducts and promotes reabsorption of water. ADH also acts as a vasoconstrictor and increases blood
pressure during hemorrhaging.
Atrial Natriuretic Peptide Hormone
The atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) lowers blood pressure by acting as a vasodilator. It is released by cells in
the atrium of the heart in response to high blood pressure and in patients with sleep apnea. ANP affects salt
release,andbecausewaterpassivelyfollowssalttomaintainosmoticbalance,italsohasadiureticeffect.ANP
alsopreventssodiumreabsorptionbytherenaltubules,decreasingwaterreabsorption(thusactingasadiuretic)
and lowering blood pressure. Its actions suppress the actions of aldosterone, ADH, and renin.
PAGE: 1307
1296 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
KEY TERMS
afferent arteriole arteriole that branches from the cortical radiate artery and enters the glomerulus
ammonia compound made of one nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms
ammonotelic describes an animal that excretes ammonia as the primary waste material
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) enzyme that converts angiotensin I to angiotensin II
angiotensin I product in the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pathway
angiotensin II molecule that affects different organs to increase blood pressure
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) hormone that prevents the loss of water
antioxidant agent that prevents cell destruction by reactive oxygen species
arcuate artery artery that branches from the interlobar artery and arches over the base of the renal pyramids
ascending limb part of the loop of Henle that ascends from the renal medulla to the renal cortex
blood urea nitrogen (BUN) estimate of urea in the blood and an indicator of kidney function
Bowman's capsule structure that encloses the glomerulus
calyx structure that connects the renal pelvis to the renal medulla
cortex (animal) outer layer of an organ like the kidney or adrenal gland
cortical nephron nephron that lies in the renal cortex
cortical radiate artery artery that radiates from the arcuate arteries into the renal cortex
countercurrent exchanger peritubular capillary network that allows exchange of solutes and water from the
renal tubules
countercurrent multiplier osmotic gradient in the renal medulla that is responsible for concentration of urine
descending limb part of the loop of Henle that descends from the renal cortex into the renal medulla
distal convoluted tubule (DCT) part of the renal tubule that is the most distant from the glomerulus
efferent arteriole arteriole that exits from the glomerulus
electrolyte solute that breaks down into ions when dissolved in water
flame cell (also, protonephridia) excretory cell found in flatworms
glomerular filtration filtration of blood in the glomerular capillary network into the glomerulus
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) amount of filtrate formed by the glomerulus per minute
glomerulus (renal) part of the renal corpuscle that contains the capillary network
hilum region in the renal pelvis where blood vessels, nerves, and ureters bunch before entering or exiting the
kidney
inferior vena cava one of the main veins in the human body
interlobar artery artery that branches from the segmental artery and travels in between the renal lobes
juxtaglomerular cell cell in the afferent and efferent arterioles that responds to stimuli from the macula densa
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1308
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1297
juxtamedullary nephron nephron that lies in the cortex but close to the renal medulla
kidney organ that performs excretory and osmoregulatory functions
lobes of the kidney renal pyramid along with the adjoining cortical region
loop of Henle part of the renal tubule that loops into the renal medulla
macula densa group of cells that senses changes in sodium ion concentration; present in parts of the renal
tubule and collecting ducts
Malpighian tubule excretory tubules found in arthropods
medulla middle layer of an organ like the kidney or adrenal gland
microvilli cellular processes that increase the surface area of cells
molality number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent
molarity number of moles of solute per liter of solution
mole gram equivalent of the molecular weight of a substance
nephridia excretory structures found in annelids
nephridiopore pore found at the end of nephridia
nephron functional unit of the kidney
non-electrolyte solute that does not break down into ions when dissolved in water
osmoconformer organism that changes its tonicity based on its environment
osmoregulation mechanism by which water and solute concentrations are maintained at desired levels
osmoregulator organism that maintains its tonicity irrespective of its environment
osmotic balance balance of the amount of water and salt input and output to and from a biological system
without disturbing the desired osmotic pressure and solute concentration in every compartment
osmotic pressure pressure exerted on a membrane to equalize solute concentration on either side
perirenal fat capsule fat layer that suspends the kidneys
peritubular capillary network capillary network that surrounds the renal tubule after the efferent artery exits
the glomerulus
proximal convoluted tubule (PCT) part of the renal tubule that lies close to the glomerulus
renal artery branch of the artery that enters the kidney
renal capsule layer that encapsulates the kidneys
renal column areaofthekidneythroughwhichtheinterlobararteriestravelintheprocessofsupplyingbloodto
the renal lobes
renal corpuscle glomerulus and the Bowman's capsule together
renal fascia connective tissue that supports the kidneys
renal pelvis region in the kidney where the calyces join the ureters
renal pyramid conical structure in the renal medulla
PAGE: 1309
1298 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
renal tubule tubule of the nephron that arises from the glomerulus
renal vein branch of a vein that exits the kidney and joins the inferior vena cava
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone biochemical pathway that activates angiotensin II, which increases blood
pressure
segmental artery artery that branches from the renal artery
semi-permeable membrane membrane that allows only certain solutes to pass through
transport maximum maximum amount of solute that can be transported out of the renal tubules during
reabsorption
tubular reabsorption reclamation of water and solutes that got filtered out in the glomerulus
tubular secretion process of secretion of wastes that do not get reabsorbed
urea cycle pathway by which ammonia is converted to urea
ureotelic describes animals that secrete urea as the primary nitrogenous waste material
ureter urine-bearing tube coming out of the kidney; carries urine to the bladder
uric acid byproduct of ammonia metabolism in birds, insects, and reptiles
urinary bladder structure that the ureters empty the urine into; stores urine
urine filtrate produced by kidneys that gets excreted out of the body
vasa recta peritubular network that surrounds the loop of Henle of the juxtamedullary nephrons
vasodilator compound that increases the diameter of blood vessels
vasopressin another name for anti-diuretic hormone
CHAPTER SUMMARY
41.1Osmoregulation and Osmotic Balance
Solute concentrations across semi-permeable membranes influence the movement of water and solutes across
the membrane. It is the number of solute molecules and not the molecular size that is important in osmosis.
Osmoregulation and osmotic balance are important bodily functions, resulting in water and salt balance. Not all
solutes can pass through a semi-permeable membrane. Osmosis is the movement of water across the
membrane. Osmosis occurs to equalize the number of solute molecules across a semi-permeable membrane
by the movement of water to the side of higher solute concentration. Facilitated diffusion utilizes protein
channels to move solute molecules from areas of higher to lower concentration while active transport
mechanisms are required to move solutes against concentration gradients. Osmolarity is measured in units of
milliequivalents or milliosmoles, both of which take into consideration the number of solute particles and the
charge on them. Fish that live in freshwater or saltwater adapt by being osmoregulators or osmoconformers.
41.2The Kidneys and Osmoregulatory Organs
The kidneys are the main osmoregulatory organs in mammalian systems; they function to filter blood and
maintain the osmolarity of body fluids at 300 mOsm. They are surrounded by three layers and are made up
internally of three distinct regions—the cortex, medulla, and pelvis.
The blood vessels that transport blood into and out of the kidneys arise from and merge with the aorta and
inferior vena cava, respectively. The renal arteries branch out from the aorta and enter the kidney where they
further divide into segmental, interlobar, arcuate, and cortical radiate arteries.
The nephron is the functional unit of the kidney, which actively filters blood and generates urine. The nephron is
made up of the renal corpuscle and renal tubule. Cortical nephrons are found in the renal cortex, while
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1310
Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion 1299
juxtamedullary nephrons are found in the renal cortex close to the renal medulla. The nephron filters and
exchanges water and solutes with two sets of blood vessels and the tissue fluid in the kidneys.
There are three steps in the formation of urine: glomerular filtration, which occurs in the glomerulus; tubular
reabsorption, which occurs in the renal tubules; and tubular secretion, which also occurs in the renal tubules.
41.3Excretion Systems
Many systems have evolved for excreting wastes that are simpler than the kidney and urinary systems of
vertebrate animals. The simplest system is that of contractile vacuoles present in microorganisms. Flame cells
and nephridia in worms perform excretory functions and maintain osmotic balance. Some insects have evolved
Malpighian tubules to excrete wastes and maintain osmotic balance.
41.4Nitrogenous Wastes
Ammonia is the waste produced by metabolism of nitrogen-containing compounds like proteins and nucleic
acids. While aquatic animals can easily excrete ammonia into their watery surroundings, terrestrial animals
have evolved special mechanisms to eliminate the toxic ammonia from their systems. Urea is the major
byproduct of ammonia metabolism in vertebrate animals. Uric acid is the major byproduct of ammonia
metabolism in birds, terrestrial arthropods, and reptiles.
41.5Hormonal Control of Osmoregulatory Functions
Hormonal cues help the kidneys synchronize the osmotic needs of the body. Hormones like epinephrine,
norepinephrine, renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, anti-diuretic hormone, and atrial natriuretic peptide help
regulate the needs of the body as well as the communication between the different organ systems.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 41.5Which of the following statements a. The collecting duct empties into the distal
about the kidney is false? convoluted tubule.
a. The renal pelvis drains into the ureter. b. The Bowman’s capsule surrounds the
b. The renal pyramids are in the medulla. glomerulus.
c. The cortex covers the capsule. c. The loop of Henle is between the proximal
d. Nephrons are in the renal cortex. and distal convoluted tubules.
d. The loop of Henle empties into the distal
2.Figure 41.6Which of the following statements
convoluted tubule.
about the nephron is false?
3.Figure 41.8Loop diuretics are drugs sometimes
used to treat hypertension. These drugs inhibit the
+ -
reabsorption of Na and Cl ions by the ascending
limb of the loop of Henle. A side effect is that they
increase urination. Why do you think this is the case?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.When a dehydrated human patient needs to be a. intracellular fluid
given fluids intravenously, he or she is given: b. extracellular fluid
c. blood plasma
a. water, which is hypotonic with respect to d. none of the above
body fluids
6.Cells in a hypertonic solution tend to:
b. saline at a concentration that is isotonic with
a. shrink due to water loss
respect to body fluids
b. swell due to water gain
c. glucose because it is a non-electrolyte
c. stay the same size due to water moving into
d. blood
and out of the cell at the same rate
5.The sodium ion is at the highest concentration in: d. none of the above
7.The macula densa is/are:
PAGE: 1311
1300 Chapter 41 | Osmotic Regulation and Excretion
a. present in the renal medulla. a. arthropods
b. dense tissue present in the outer layer of b. annelids
the kidney. c. mammals
c. cells present in the DCT and collecting d. flatworms
tubules.
13.BUN is ________.
d. present in blood capillaries.
a. blood urea nitrogen
8.The osmolarity of body fluids is maintained at b. blood uric acid nitrogen
________. c. an indicator of blood volume
a. 100 mOsm d. an indicator of blood pressure
b. 300 mOsm
14.Human beings accumulate ________ before
c. 1000 mOsm
excreting nitrogenous waste.
d. it is not constantly maintained
a. nitrogen
9.The gland located at the top of the kidney is the b. ammonia
________ gland. c. urea
a. adrenal d. uric acid
b. pituitary
15.Renin is made by ________.
c. thyroid
a. granular cells of the juxtaglomerular
d. thymus
apparatus
10.Active transport of K + in Malpighian tubules b. the kidneys
ensures that: c. the nephrons
+ d. all of the above
a. water follows K to make urine
b. osmotic balance is maintained between 16.Patients with Addison's disease ________.
waste matter and bodily fluids
c. both a and b a. retain water
d. neither a nor b b. retain salts
c. lose salts and water
11.Contractile vacuoles in microorganisms:
d. have too much aldosterone
a. exclusively perform an excretory function
b. can perform many functions, one of which is 17.Which hormone elicits the “fight or flight”
excretion of metabolic wastes response?
c. originate from the cell membrane a. epinephrine
d. both b and c b. mineralcorticoids
c. anti-diuretic hormone
12.Flame cells are primitive excretory organs found
d. thyroxine
in ________.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
18.Why is excretion important in order to achieve than the kidneys.
osmotic balance?
24.In terms of evolution, why might the urea cycle
19.Why do electrolyte ions move across membranes have evolved in organisms?
by active transport?
25.Compare and contrast the formation of urea and
20.Why are the loop of Henle and vasa recta uric acid.
important for the formation of concentrated urine?
26.Describe how hormones regulate blood pressure,
21.Describe the structure of the kidney. blood volume, and kidney function.
22.Why might specialized organs have evolved for 27.How does the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
excretion of wastes? mechanism function? Why is it controlled by the
kidneys?
23.Explain two different excretory systems other
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1312
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1301
42 | THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Figure 42.1 In this compound light micrograph purple-stained neutrophil (upper left) and eosinophil (lower right)
are white blood cells that float among red blood cells in this blood smear. Neutrophils provide an early, rapid, and
nonspecific defense against invading pathogens. Eosinophils play a variety of roles in the immune response. Red
bloodcellsareabout7–8µmindiameter,andaneutrophilisabout10–12µm.(credit:modificationofworkbyDr.David
Csaba)
Chapter Outline
42.1:Innate Immune Response
42.2:Adaptive Immune Response
42.3:Antibodies
42.4:Disruptions in the Immune System
Introduction
The environment consists of numerous pathogens, which are agents, usually microorganisms, that cause
diseases in their hosts. A host is the organism that is invaded and often harmed by a pathogen. Pathogens
includebacteria,protists,fungiandotherinfectiousorganisms.Weareconstantlyexposedtopathogensinfood
andwater,onsurfaces,andintheair.Mammalianimmunesystemsevolvedforprotectionfromsuchpathogens;
they are composed of an extremely diverse array of specialized cells and soluble molecules that coordinate a
rapid and flexible defense system capable of providing protection from a majority of these disease agents.
Components of the immune system constantly search the body for signs of pathogens. When pathogens are
found, immune factors are mobilized to the site of an infection. The immune factors identify the nature of
the pathogen, strengthen the corresponding cells and molecules to combat it efficiently, and then halt the
immuneresponseaftertheinfectionisclearedtoavoidunnecessaryhostcelldamage.Theimmunesystemcan
remember pathogens to which it has been exposed to create a more efficient response upon reexposure. This
memory can last several decades. Features of the immune system, such as pathogen identification, specific
response, amplification, retreat, and remembrance are essential for survival against pathogens. The immune
response can be classified as either innate or active. The innate immune response is always present and
attemptstodefendagainstallpathogensratherthanfocusingonspecificones.Conversely,theadaptiveimmune
response stores information about past infections and mounts pathogen-specific defenses.
PAGE: 1313
1302 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
42.1 | Innate Immune Response
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe physical and chemical immune barriers
• Explain immediate and induced innate immune responses
• Discuss natural killer cells
• Describe major histocompatibility class I molecules
• Summarize how the proteins in a complement system function to destroy extracellular pathogens
Theimmunesystemcomprisesbothinnateandadaptiveimmuneresponses.Innateimmunityoccursnaturally
because of genetic factors or physiology; it is not induced by infection or vaccination but works to reduce the
workloadfortheadaptiveimmuneresponse.Boththeinnateandadaptivelevelsoftheimmuneresponseinvolve
secreted proteins, receptor-mediated signaling, and intricate cell-to-cell communication. The innate immune
system developed early in animal evolution, roughly a billion years ago, as an essential response to infection.
Innate immunity has a limited number of specific targets: any pathogenic threat triggers a consistent sequence
ofeventsthatcanidentifythetypeofpathogenandeithercleartheinfectionindependentlyormobilizeahighly
specialized adaptive immune response. For example, tears and mucus secretions contain microbicidal factors.
Physical and Chemical Barriers
Before any immune factors are triggered, the skin functions as a continuous, impassable barrier to potentially
infectious pathogens. Pathogens are killed or inactivated on the skin by desiccation (drying out) and by the
skin’s acidity. In addition, beneficial microorganisms that coexist on the skin compete with invading pathogens,
preventing infection. Regions of the body that are not protected by skin (such as the eyes and mucus
membranes)havealternativemethodsofdefense,suchastearsandmucussecretionsthattrapandrinseaway
pathogens,andciliainthenasalpassagesandrespiratorytractthatpushthemucuswiththepathogensoutof
thebody.Throughoutthebodyareotherdefenses,suchasthelowpHofthestomach(whichinhibitsthegrowth
ofpathogens),bloodproteinsthatbindanddisruptbacterialcellmembranes,andtheprocessofurination(which
flushes pathogens from the urinary tract).
Despite these barriers, pathogens may enter the body through skin abrasions or punctures, or by collecting on
mucosal surfaces in large numbers that overcome the mucus or cilia. Some pathogens have evolved specific
mechanisms that allow them to overcome physical and chemical barriers. When pathogens do enter the body,
theinnateimmunesystemrespondswithinflammation, pathogenengulfment, andsecretionofimmunefactors
and proteins.
Pathogen Recognition
An infection may be intracellular or extracellular, depending on the pathogen. All viruses infect cells and
replicatewithinthosecells(intracellularly),whereasbacteriaandotherparasitesmayreplicateintracellularlyor
extracellularly, depending on the species. The innate immune system must respond accordingly: by identifying
the extracellular pathogen and/or by identifying host cells that have already been infected. When a pathogen
enters the body, cells in the blood and lymph detect the specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) on the pathogen’s surface. PAMPs are carbohydrate, polypeptide, and nucleic acid “signatures”
that are expressed by viruses, bacteria, and parasites but which differ from molecules on host cells. The
immune system has specific cells, described in Figure 42.2 and shown in Figure 42.3, with receptors that
recognizethesePAMPs.Amacrophageisalargephagocyticcellthatengulfsforeignparticlesandpathogens.
Macrophages recognize PAMPs via complementary pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). PRRs are
moleculesonmacrophagesanddendriticcellswhichareincontactwiththeexternalenvironment.Amonocyte
is a type of white blood cell that circulates in the blood and lymph and differentiates into macrophages after
it moves into infected tissue. Dendritic cells bind molecular signatures of pathogens and promote pathogen
engulfment and destruction. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a type of PRR that recognizes molecules that are
shared by pathogens but distinguishable from host molecules. TLRs are present in invertebrates as well as
vertebrates,andappeartobeoneofthemostancientcomponentsoftheimmunesystem.TLRshavealsobeen
identified in the mammalian nervous system.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1314
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1303
Figure 42.2 The characteristics and location of cells involved in the innate immune system are described. (credit:
modification of work by NIH)
PAGE: 1315
1304 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure 42.3 Cells of the blood include (1) monocytes, (2) lymphocytes, (3) neutrophils, (4) red blood cells, and (5)
platelets.Notetheverysimilarmorphologiesoftheleukocytes(1,2,3).(credit:modificationofworkbyBruceWetzel,
Harry Schaefer, NCI; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Cytokine Release Effect
ThebindingofPRRswithPAMPstriggersthereleaseofcytokines,whichsignalthatapathogenispresentand
needs to be destroyed along with any infected cells. A cytokine is a chemical messenger that regulates cell
differentiation (form and function), proliferation (production), and gene expression to affect immune responses.
Atleast40typesofcytokinesexistinhumansthatdifferintermsofthecelltypethatproducesthem,thecelltype
that responds to them, and the changes they produce. One type of cytokine, interferon, is illustrated in Figure
42.4.
One subclass of cytokines is the interleukin (IL), so named because they mediate interactions between
leukocytes(whitebloodcells).Interleukinsareinvolvedinbridgingtheinnateandadaptiveimmuneresponses.
In addition to being released from cells after PAMP recognition, cytokines are released by the infected cells
which bind to nearby uninfected cells and induce those cells to release cytokines, which results in a cytokine
burst.
A second class of early-acting cytokines is interferons, which are released by infected cells as a warning to
nearby uninfected cells. One of the functions of an interferon is to inhibit viral replication. They also have
other important functions, such as tumor surveillance. Interferons work by signaling neighboring uninfected
cells to destroy RNA and reduce protein synthesis, signaling neighboring infected cells to undergo apoptosis
(programmed cell death), and activating immune cells.
In response to interferons, uninfected cells alter their gene expression, which increases the cells’ resistance to
infection.Oneeffectofinterferon-inducedgeneexpressionisasharplyreducedcellularproteinsynthesis.Virally
infectedcellsproducemorevirusesbysynthesizinglargequantitiesofviralproteins.Thus,byreducingprotein
synthesis, a cell becomes resistant to viral infection.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1316
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1305
Figure42.4Interferonsarecytokinesthatarereleasedbyacellinfectedwithavirus.Responseofneighboringcells
to interferon helps stem the infection.
Phagocytosis and Inflammation
The first cytokines to be produced are pro-inflammatory; that is, they encourage inflammation, the localized
redness, swelling, heat, and pain that result from the movement of leukocytes and fluid through increasingly
permeablecapillariestoasiteofinfection.Thepopulationofleukocytesthatarrivesataninfectionsitedepends
on the nature of the infecting pathogen. Both macrophages and dendritic cells engulf pathogens and cellular
debris through phagocytosis. A neutrophil is also a phagocytic leukocyte that engulfs and digests pathogens.
Neutrophils,showninFigure42.3,arethemostabundantleukocytesoftheimmunesystem.Neutrophilshave
anucleuswithtwotofivelobes,andtheycontainorganelles,calledlysosomes,thatdigestengulfedpathogens.
Aneosinophilisaleukocytethatworkswithothereosinophilstosurroundaparasite;itisinvolvedintheallergic
response and in protection against helminthes (parasitic worms).
Neutrophilsandeosinophilsareparticularlyimportantleukocytesthatengulflargepathogens,suchasbacteria
and fungi. A mast cell is a leukocyte that produces inflammatory molecules, such as histamine, in response
to large pathogens. A basophil is a leukocyte that, like a neutrophil, releases chemicals to stimulate the
inflammatory response as illustrated in Figure 42.5. Basophils are also involved in allergy and hypersensitivity
responses and induce specific types of inflammatory responses. Eosinophils and basophils produce additional
inflammatory mediators to recruit more leukocytes. A hypersensitive immune response to harmless antigens,
such as in pollen, often involves the release of histamine by basophils and mast cells.
PAGE: 1317
1306 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure42.5Inresponsetoacut,mastcellssecretehistaminesthatcausenearbycapillariestodilate.Neutrophilsand
monocytesleavethecapillaries.Monocytesmatureintomacrophages.Neutrophils,dendriticcells,andmacrophages
release chemicals to stimulate the inflammatory response. Neutrophils and macrophages also consume invading
bacteria by phagocytosis.
Cytokines also send feedback to cells of the nervous system to bring about the overall symptoms of feeling
sick,whichincludelethargy,musclepain,andnausea.Theseeffectsmayhaveevolvedbecausethesymptoms
encourage the individual to rest and prevent the spreading of the infection to others. Cytokines also increase
thecorebodytemperature,causingafever,whichcausesthelivertowithholdironfromtheblood.Withoutiron,
certain pathogens, such as some bacteria, are unable to replicate; this is called nutritional immunity.
Watch this 23-second stop-motion video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/conidia) showing a neutrophil that
searches for and engulfs fungus spores during an elapsed time of about 79 minutes.
Natural Killer Cells
Lymphocytes are leukocytes that are histologically identifiable by their large, darkly staining nuclei; they are
small cells with very little cytoplasm, as shown in Figure 42.6. Infected cells are identified and destroyed by
natural killer (NK) cells, lymphocytes that can kill cells infected with viruses or tumor cells (abnormal cells
that uncontrollably divide and invade other tissue). T cells and B cells of the adaptive immune system also
are classified as lymphocytes. T cells are lymphocytes that mature in the thymus gland, and B cells are
lymphocytesthatmatureinthebonemarrow.NKcellsidentifyintracellularinfections,especiallyfromviruses,by
the altered expression of major histocompatibility class (MHC) I molecules on the surface of infected cells.
MHCImoleculesareproteinsonthesurfacesofallnucleatedcells,thustheyarescarceonredbloodcellsand
plateletswhicharenon-nucleated.ThefunctionofMHCImoleculesistodisplayfragmentsofproteinsfromthe
infectious agents within the cell to T cells; healthy cells will be ignored, while “non-self” or foreign proteins will
be attacked by the immune system. MHC II molecules are found mainly on cells containing antigens (“non-self
proteins”)andonlymphocytes.MHCIImoleculesinteractwithhelperTcellstotriggertheappropriateimmune
response, which may include the inflammatory response.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1318
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1307
Figure 42.6 Lymphocytes, such as NK cells, are characterized by their large nuclei that actively absorb Wright stain
and therefore appear dark colored under a microscope.
An infected cell (or a tumor cell) is usually incapable of synthesizing and displaying MHC I molecules
appropriately. The metabolic resources of cells infected by some viruses produce proteins that interfere with
MHCIprocessingand/ortraffickingtothecellsurface.ThereducedMHCIonhostcellsvariesfromvirustovirus
andresultsfromactiveinhibitorsbeingproducedbytheviruses.ThisprocesscandepletehostMHCImolecules
on the cell surface, which NK cells detect as “unhealthy” or “abnormal” while searching for cellular MHC I
molecules. Similarly, the dramatically altered gene expression of tumor cells leads to expression of extremely
deformed or absent MHC I molecules that also signal “unhealthy” or “abnormal.”
NK cells are always active; an interaction with normal, intact MHC I molecules on a healthy cell disables the
killing sequence, and the NK cell moves on. After the NK cell detects an infected or tumor cell, its cytoplasm
secretesgranulescomprisedofperforin,adestructiveproteinthatcreatesaporeinthetargetcell.Granzymes
are released along with the perforin in the immunological synapse. A granzyme is a protease that digests
cellular proteins and induces the target cell to undergo programmed cell death, or apoptosis. Phagocytic cells
thendigestthecelldebrisleftbehind.NKcellsareconstantlypatrollingthebodyandareaneffectivemechanism
for controlling potential infections and preventing cancer progression.
Complement
An array of approximately 20 types of soluble proteins, called a complement system, functions to destroy
extracellular pathogens. Cells of the liver and macrophages synthesize complement proteins continuously;
these proteins are abundant in the blood serum and are capable of responding immediately to infecting
microorganisms.Thecomplementsystemissonamedbecauseitiscomplementarytotheantibodyresponseof
theadaptiveimmunesystem.Complementproteinsbindtothesurfacesofmicroorganismsandareparticularly
attractedtopathogensthatarealreadyboundbyantibodies.Bindingofcomplementproteinsoccursinaspecific
and highly regulated sequence, with each successive protein being activated by cleavage and/or structural
changes induced upon binding of the preceding protein(s). After the first few complement proteins bind, a
cascade of sequential binding events follows in which the pathogen rapidly becomes coated in complement
proteins.
Complement proteins perform several functions. The proteins serve as a marker to indicate the presence of a
pathogentophagocyticcells,suchasmacrophagesandBcells,andenhanceengulfment;thisprocessiscalled
opsonization.Certaincomplementproteinscancombinetoformattackcomplexesthatopenporesinmicrobial
cell membranes. These structures destroy pathogens by causing their contents to leak, as illustrated in Figure
42.7.
PAGE: 1319
1308 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure 42.7 The classic pathway for the complement cascade involves the attachment of several initial complement
proteinstoanantibody-boundpathogenfollowedbyrapidactivationandbindingofmanymorecomplementproteins
and the creation of destructive pores in the microbial cell envelope and cell wall. The alternate pathway does not
involve antibody activation. Rather, C3 convertase spontaneously breaks down C3. Endogenous regulatory proteins
prevent the complement complex from binding to host cells. Pathogens lacking these regulatory proteins are lysed.
(credit: modification of work by NIH)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1320
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1309
42.2 | Adaptive Immune Response
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain adaptive immunity
• Compare and contrast adaptive and innate immunity
• Describe cell-mediated immune response and humoral immune response
• Describe immune tolerance
The adaptive, or acquired, immune response takes days or even weeks to become established—much longer
thantheinnateresponse;however,adaptiveimmunityismorespecifictopathogensandhasmemory.Adaptive
immunityisanimmunitythatoccursafterexposuretoanantigeneitherfromapathogenoravaccination.This
partoftheimmunesystemisactivatedwhentheinnateimmuneresponseisinsufficienttocontrolaninfection.
Infact,withoutinformationfromtheinnateimmunesystem,theadaptiveresponsecouldnotbemobilized.There
aretwotypesofadaptiveresponses:thecell-mediatedimmuneresponse,whichiscarriedoutbyTcells,and
the humoral immune response, which is controlled by activated B cells and antibodies. Activated T cells and
B cells that are specific to molecular structures on the pathogen proliferate and attack the invading pathogen.
Their attack can kill pathogens directly or secrete antibodies that enhance the phagocytosis of pathogens and
disrupt the infection. Adaptive immunity also involves a memory to provide the host with long-term protection
fromreinfectionwiththesametypeofpathogen;onreexposure,thismemorywillfacilitateanefficientandquick
response.
Antigen-presenting Cells
UnlikeNKcellsoftheinnateimmunesystem,Bcells(Blymphocytes)areatypeofwhitebloodcellthatgivesrise
toantibodies,whereasTcells(Tlymphocytes)areatypeofwhitebloodcellthatplaysanimportantroleinthe
immune response. T cells are a key component in the cell-mediated response—the specific immune response
thatutilizesTcellstoneutralizecellsthathavebeeninfectedwithvirusesandcertainbacteria.Therearethree
types of T cells: cytotoxic, helper, and suppressor T cells. Cytotoxic T cells destroy virus-infected cells in the
cell-mediated immune response, and helper T cells play a part in activating both the antibody and the cell-
mediatedimmuneresponses.SuppressorTcellsdeactivateTcellsandBcellswhenneeded,andthusprevent
the immune response from becoming too intense.
Anantigenisaforeignor“non-self”macromoleculethatreactswithcellsoftheimmunesystem.Notallantigens
will provoke a response. For instance, individuals produce innumerable “self” antigens and are constantly
exposed to harmless foreign antigens, such as food proteins, pollen, or dust components. The suppression of
immuneresponsestoharmlessmacromoleculesishighlyregulatedandtypicallypreventsprocessesthatcould
be damaging to the host, known as tolerance.
Theinnateimmunesystemcontainscellsthatdetectpotentiallyharmfulantigens,andtheninformtheadaptive
immune response about the presence of these antigens. An antigen-presenting cell (APC) is an immune
cell that detects, engulfs, and informs the adaptive immune response about an infection. When a pathogen
is detected, these APCs will phagocytose the pathogen and digest it to form many different fragments of the
antigen. Antigen fragments will then be transported to the surface of the APC, where they will serve as an
indicatortootherimmunecells.Dendriticcellsareimmunecellsthatprocessantigenmaterial;theyarepresent
intheskin(Langerhanscells)andtheliningofthenose,lungs,stomach,andintestines.Sometimesadendritic
cell presents on the surface of other cells to induce an immune response, thus functioning as an antigen-
presenting cell. Macrophages also function as APCs. Before activation and differentiation, B cells can also
function as APCs.
After phagocytosis by APCs, the phagocytic vesicle fuses with an intracellular lysosome forming
phagolysosome. Within the phagolysosome, the components are broken down into fragments; the fragments
arethenloadedontoMHCclassIorMHCclassIImoleculesandaretransportedtothecellsurfaceforantigen
presentation, as illustrated in Figure 42.8. Note that T lymphocytes cannot properly respond to the antigen
unlessitisprocessedandembeddedinanMHCIImolecule.APCsexpressMHContheirsurfaces,andwhen
combined with a foreign antigen, these complexes signal a “non-self” invader. Once the fragment of antigen is
embeddedintheMHCIImolecule,theimmunecellcanrespond.HelperTcellsareoneofthemainlymphocytes
PAGE: 1321
1310 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
that respond to antigen-presenting cells. Recall that all other nucleated cells of the body expressed MHC I
molecules, which signal “healthy” or “normal.”
Figure42.8AnAPC,suchasamacrophage,engulfsanddigestsaforeignbacterium.Anantigenfromthebacteriumis
presentedonthecellsurfaceinconjunctionwithanMHCIImolecule.Lymphocytesoftheadaptiveimmuneresponse
interact with antigen-embedded MHC II molecules to mature into functional immune cells.
This animation (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/immune_system) from Rockefeller University shows how
dendritic cells act as sentinels in the body's immune system.
T and B Lymphocytes
Lymphocytesinhumancirculatingbloodareapproximately80to90percentTcells,showninFigure42.9,and
10to20percentBcells.RecallthattheTcellsareinvolvedinthecell-mediatedimmuneresponse,whereasB
cells are part of the humoral immune response.
Tcellsencompassaheterogeneouspopulationofcellswithextremelydiversefunctions.SomeTcellsrespond
to APCs of the innate immune system, and indirectly induce immune responses by releasing cytokines. Other
T cells stimulate B cells to prepare their own response. Another population of T cells detects APC signals and
directly kills the infected cells. Other T cells are involved in suppressing inappropriate immune reactions to
harmless or “self” antigens.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1322
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1311
Figure 42.9 This scanning electron micrograph shows a T lymphocyte, which is responsible for the cell-mediated
immuneresponse.Tcellsareabletorecognizeantigens.(credit:modificationofworkbyNCI;scale-bardatafromMatt
Russell)
TandBcellsexhibitacommonthemeofrecognition/bindingofspecificantigensviaacomplementaryreceptor,
followed by activation and self-amplification/maturation to specifically bind to the particular antigen of the
infecting pathogen. T and B lymphocytes are also similar in that each cell only expresses one type of antigen
receptor.AnyindividualmaypossessapopulationofTandBcellsthattogetherexpressanearlimitlessvariety
ofantigenreceptorsthatarecapableofrecognizingvirtuallyanyinfectingpathogen.TandBcellsareactivated
when they recognize small components of antigens, called epitopes, presented by APCs, illustrated in Figure
42.10. Note that recognition occurs at a specific epitope rather than on the entire antigen; for this reason,
epitopesareknownas“antigenicdeterminants.”IntheabsenceofinformationfromAPCs,TandBcellsremain
inactive, or naïve, and are unable to prepare an immune response. The requirement for information from the
APCsofinnateimmunitytotriggerBcellorTcellactivationillustratestheessentialnatureoftheinnateimmune
response to the functioning of the entire immune system.
Figure42.10Anantigenisamacromoleculethatreactswithcomponentsoftheimmunesystem.Agivenantigenmay
containseveralmotifsthatarerecognizedbyimmunecells.Eachmotifisanepitope.Inthisfigure,theentirestructure
is an antigen, and the orange, salmon and green components projecting from it represent potential epitopes.
Naïve T cells can express one of two different molecules, CD4 or CD8, on their surface, as shown in Figure
+ +
42.11, and are accordingly classified as CD4 or CD8 cells. These molecules are important because they
+
regulate how a T cell will interact with and respond to an APC. Naïve CD4 cells bind APCs via their antigen-
embedded MHC II molecules and are stimulated to become helper T (TH) lymphocytes, cells that go on to
stimulateBcells(orcytotoxicTcells)directlyorsecretecytokinestoinformmoreandvarioustargetcellsabout
+
the pathogenic threat. In contrast, CD8 cells engage antigen-embedded MHC I molecules on APCs and are
stimulatedtobecomecytotoxicTlymphocytes(CTLs),whichdirectlykillinfectedcellsbyapoptosisandemit
cytokinestoamplifytheimmuneresponse.ThetwopopulationsofTcellshavedifferentmechanismsofimmune
protection,butbothbindMHCmoleculesviatheirantigenreceptorscalledTcellreceptors(TCRs).TheCD4or
CD8 surface molecules differentiate whether the TCR will engage an MHC II or an MHC I molecule. Because
they assist in binding specificity, the CD4 and CD8 molecules are described as coreceptors.
PAGE: 1323
1312 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure 42.11 Naïve CD4+ T cells engage MHC II molecules on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and become
activated.ClonesoftheactivatedhelperTcell,inturn,activateBcellsandCD8+Tcells,whichbecomecytotoxic
T cells. Cytotoxic T cells kill infected cells.
Which of the following statements about T cells is false?
a. Helper T cells release cytokines while cytotoxic T cells kill the infected cell.
+ +
b. Helper T cells are CD4 , while cytotoxic T cells are CD8 .
c. MHC II is a receptor found on most body cells, while MHC I is a receptor found on immune cells only.
+ +
d. The T cell receptor is found on both CD4 and CD8 T cells.
Consider the innumerable possible antigens that an individual will be exposed to during a lifetime. The
mammalian adaptive immune system is adept in responding appropriately to each antigen. Mammals have
an enormous diversity of T cell populations, resulting from the diversity of TCRs. Each TCR consists of two
polypeptide chains that span the T cell membrane, as illustrated in Figure 42.12; the chains are linked by a
disulfide bridge. Each polypeptide chain is comprised of a constant domain and a variable domain: a domain,
in this sense, is a specific region of a protein that may be regulatory or structural. The intracellular domain is
involvedinintracellularsignaling.AsingleTcellwillexpressthousandsofidenticalcopiesofonespecificTCR
variantonitscellsurface.Thespecificityoftheadaptiveimmunesystemoccursbecauseitsynthesizesmillions
of different T cell populations, each expressing a TCR that differs in its variable domain. This TCR diversity is
achievedbythemutationandrecombinationofgenesthatencodethesereceptorsinstemcellprecursorsofT
cells. The binding between an antigen-displaying MHC molecule and a complementary TCR “match” indicates
that the adaptive immune system needs to activate and produce that specific T cell because its structure is
appropriate to recognize and destroy the invading pathogen.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1324
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1313
Figure42.12ATcellreceptorspansthemembraneandprojectsvariablebindingregionsintotheextracellularspace
to bind processed antigens via MHC molecules on APCs.
Helper T Lymphocytes
The TH lymphocytes function indirectly to identify potential pathogens for other cells of the immune system.
These cells are important for extracellular infections, such as those caused by certain bacteria, helminths,
and protozoa. THlymphocytes recognize specific antigens displayed in the MHC II complexes of APCs. There
are two major populations of TH cells: TH1 and TH2. TH1 cells secrete cytokines to enhance the activities of
macrophages and other T cells. TH1 cells activate the action of cyotoxic T cells, as well as macrophages. TH2
cellsstimulatenaïveBcellstodestroyforeigninvadersviaantibodysecretion.WhetheraTH1oraTH2immune
response develops depends on the specific types of cytokines secreted by cells of the innate immune system,
which in turn depends on the nature of the invading pathogen.
The TH1-mediated response involves macrophages and is associated with inflammation. Recall the frontline
defenses of macrophages involved in the innate immune response. Some intracellular bacteria, such as
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, have evolved to multiply in macrophages after they have been engulfed. These
pathogensevadeattemptsbymacrophagestodestroyanddigestthepathogen.WhenM.tuberculosisinfection
occurs,macrophagescanstimulatenaïveTcellstobecomeTH1cells.ThesestimulatedTcellssecretespecific
cytokinesthatsendfeedbacktothemacrophagetostimulateitsdigestivecapabilitiesandallowittodestroythe
colonizingM.tuberculosis.Inthesamemanner,TH1-activatedmacrophagesalsobecomebettersuitedtoingest
andkilltumorcells.Insummary;TH1responsesaredirectedtowardintracellularinvaderswhileTH2responses
are aimed at those that are extracellular.
B Lymphocytes
WhenstimulatedbytheTH2pathway,naïveBcellsdifferentiateintoantibody-secretingplasmacells.Aplasma
cell is an immune cell that secrets antibodies; these cells arise from B cells that were stimulated by antigens.
SimilartoTcells,naïveBcellsinitiallyarecoatedinthousandsofBcellreceptors(BCRs),whicharemembrane-
bound forms of Ig (immunoglobulin, or an antibody). The B cell receptor has two heavy chains and two light
chainsconnectedbydisulfidelinkages.Eachchainhasaconstantandavariableregion;thelatterisinvolvedin
antigenbinding.Twoothermembraneproteins,IgalphaandIgbeta,areinvolvedinsignaling.Thereceptorsof
anyparticularBcell,asshowninFigure42.13areallthesame,butthehundredsofmillionsofdifferentBcells
inanindividualhavedistinctrecognitiondomainsthatcontributetoextensivediversityinthetypesofmolecular
structurestowhichtheycanbind.Inthisstate,BcellsfunctionasAPCs.Theybindandengulfforeignantigens
via their BCRs and then display processed antigens in the context of MHC II molecules to TH2 cells. When a
TH2celldetectsthataBcellisboundtoarelevantantigen,itsecretesspecificcytokinesthatinducetheBcellto
proliferaterapidly,whichmakesthousandsofidentical(clonal)copiesofit,andthenitsynthesizesandsecretes
antibodies with the same antigen recognition pattern as the BCRs. The activation of B cells corresponding
to one specific BCR variant and the dramatic proliferation of that variant is known as clonal selection. This
phenomenondrastically,butbriefly,changestheproportionsofBCRvariantsexpressedbytheimmunesystem,
and shifts the balance toward BCRs specific to the infecting pathogen.
PAGE: 1325
1314 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure42.13BcellreceptorsareembeddedinthemembranesofBcellsandbindavarietyofantigensthroughtheir
variable regions. The signal transduction region transfers the signal into the cell.
T and B cells differ in one fundamental way: whereas T cells bind antigens that have been digested and
embedded in MHC molecules by APCs, B cells function as APCs that bind intact antigens that have not been
processed. Although T and B cells both react with molecules that are termed “antigens,” these lymphocytes
actuallyrespondtoverydifferenttypesofmolecules.Bcellsmustbeabletobindintactantigensbecausethey
secrete antibodies that must recognize the pathogen directly, rather than digested remnants of the pathogen.
Bacterial carbohydrate and lipid molecules can activate B cells independently from the T cells.
Cytotoxic T Lymphocytes
CTLs, a subclass of T cells, function to clear infections directly. The cell-mediated part of the adaptive immune
system consists of CTLs that attack and destroy infected cells. CTLs are particularly important in protecting
against viral infections; this is because viruses replicate within cells where they are shielded from extracellular
contactwithcirculatingantibodies.WhenAPCsphagocytizepathogensandpresentMHCI-embeddedantigens
+ +
to naïve CD8 T cells that express complementary TCRs, the CD8 T cells become activated to proliferate
according to clonal selection. These resulting CTLs then identify non-APCs displaying the same MHC I-
embedded antigens (for example, viral proteins)—for example, the CTLs identify infected host cells.
Intracellularly,infectedcellstypicallydieaftertheinfectingpathogenreplicatestoasufficientconcentrationand
lyses the cell, as many viruses do. CTLs attempt to identify and destroy infected cells before the pathogen
can replicate and escape, thereby halting the progression of intracellular infections. CTLs also support NK
lymphocytes to destroy early cancers. Cytokines secreted by the TH1 response that stimulates macrophages
also stimulate CTLs and enhance their ability to identify and destroy infected cells and tumors.
CTLssenseMHCI-embeddedantigensbydirectlyinteractingwithinfectedcellsviatheirTCRs.BindingofTCRs
withantigensactivatesCTLstoreleaseperforinandgranzyme,degradativeenzymesthatwillinduceapoptosis
oftheinfectedcell.RecallthatthisisasimilardestructionmechanismtothatusedbyNKcells.Inthisprocess,
the CTL does not become infected and is not harmed by the secretion of perforin and granzymes. In fact, the
functions of NK cells and CTLs are complementary and maximize the removal of infected cells, as illustrated
in Figure 42.14. If the NK cell cannot identify the “missing self” pattern of down-regulated MHC I molecules,
thentheCTLcanidentifyitbythecomplexofMHCIwithforeignantigens,whichsignals“alteredself.”Similarly,
if the CTL cannot detect antigen-embedded MHC I because the receptors are depleted from the cell surface,
NK cells will destroy the cell instead. CTLs also emit cytokines, such as interferons, that alter surface protein
expressioninotherinfectedcells,suchthattheinfectedcellscanbeeasilyidentifiedanddestroyed.Moreover,
these interferons can also prevent virally infected cells from releasing virus particles.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1326
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1315
Figure42.14Naturalkiller(NK)cellsrecognizetheMHCIreceptoronhealthycells.IfMHCIisabsent,thecellis
lysed.
Based on what you know about MHC receptors, why do you think an organ transplanted from an
incompatible donor to a recipient will be rejected?
PlasmacellsandCTLsarecollectivelycalledeffectorcells:theyrepresentdifferentiatedversionsoftheirnaïve
counterparts,andtheyareinvolvedinbringingabouttheimmunedefenseofkillingpathogensandinfectedhost
cells.
Mucosal Surfaces and Immune Tolerance
Theinnateandadaptiveimmuneresponsesdiscussedthusfarcomprisethesystemicimmunesystem(affecting
the whole body), which is distinct from the mucosal immune system. Mucosal immunity is formed by mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue, which functions independently of the systemic immune system, and which has
its own innate and adaptive components. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT), illustrated in Figure
42.15, is a collection of lymphatic tissue that combines with epithelial tissue lining the mucosa throughout the
body. This tissue functions as the immune barrier and response in areas of the body with direct contact to the
external environment. The systemic and mucosal immune systems use many of the same cell types. Foreign
particlesthatmaketheirwaytoMALTaretakenupbyabsorptiveepithelialcellscalledMcellsanddeliveredto
APCs located directly below the mucosal tissue. M cells function in the transport described, and are located in
the Peyer’s patch, a lymphoid nodule. APCs of the mucosal immune system are primarily dendritic cells, with
B cells and macrophages having minor roles. Processed antigens displayed on APCs are detected by T cells
intheMALTandatvariousmucosalinductionsites,suchasthetonsils,adenoids,appendix,orthemesenteric
lymphnodesoftheintestine.ActivatedTcellsthenmigratethroughthelymphaticsystemandintothecirculatory
system to mucosal sites of infection.
PAGE: 1327
1316 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure42.15ThetopologyandfunctionofintestinalMALTisshown.PathogensaretakenupbyMcellsintheintestinal
epitheliumandexcretedintoapocketformedbytheinnersurfaceofthecell.Thepocketcontainsantigen-presenting
cellssuchasdendriticcells,whichengulftheantigens,thenpresentthemwithMHCIImoleculesonthecellsurface.
ThedendriticcellsmigratetoanunderlyingtissuecalledaPeyer’spatch.Antigen-presentingcells,Tcells,andBcells
aggregatewithinthePeyer’spatch,formingorganizedlymphoidfollicles.There,someTcellsandBcellsareactivated.
Other antigen-loaded dendritic cells migrate through the lymphatic system where they activate B cells, T cells, and
plasmacellsinthelymphnodes.TheactivatedcellsthenreturntoMALTtissueeffectorsites.IgAandotherantibodies
are secreted into the intestinal lumen.
MALT is a crucial component of a functional immune system because mucosal surfaces, such as the nasal
passages, are the first tissues onto which inhaled or ingested pathogens are deposited. The mucosal tissue
includes the mouth, pharynx, and esophagus, and the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and urogenital tracts.
The immune system has to be regulated to prevent wasteful, unnecessary responses to harmless substances,
and more importantly so that it does not attack “self.” The acquired ability to prevent an unnecessary or
harmfulimmuneresponsetoadetectedforeignsubstanceknownnottocausediseaseisdescribedasimmune
tolerance. Immune tolerance is crucial for maintaining mucosal homeostasis given the tremendous number
of foreign substances (such as food proteins) that APCs of the oral cavity, pharynx, and gastrointestinal
mucosa encounter. Immune tolerance is brought about by specialized APCs in the liver, lymph nodes, small
intestine, and lung that present harmless antigens to an exceptionally diverse population of regulatory T
(Treg) cells, specialized lymphocytes that suppress local inflammation and inhibit the secretion of stimulatory
immune factors. The combined result of Treg cells is to prevent immunologic activation and inflammation in
undesired tissue compartments and to allow the immune system to focus on pathogens instead. In addition to
promoting immunetolerance of harmlessantigens, other subsets of Tregcellsareinvolved inthe prevention of
theautoimmuneresponse,whichisaninappropriateimmuneresponsetohostcellsorself-antigens.Another
Tregclasssuppressesimmuneresponsestoharmfulpathogensaftertheinfectionhasclearedtominimizehost
cell damage induced by inflammation and cell lysis.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1328
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1317
Immunological Memory
The adaptive immune system possesses a memory component that allows for an efficient and dramatic
responseuponreinvasionofthesamepathogen.Memoryishandledbytheadaptiveimmunesystemwithlittle
reliance on cues from the innate response. During the adaptive immune response to a pathogen that has not
beenencounteredbefore,calledaprimaryresponse,plasmacellssecretingantibodiesanddifferentiatedTcells
increase, then plateau over time. As B and T cells mature into effector cells, a subset of the naïve populations
differentiates into B and T memory cells with the same antigen specificities, as illustrated inFigure 42.16.
A memory cell is an antigen-specific B or T lymphocyte that does not differentiate into effector cells during
the primary immune response, but that can immediately become effector cells upon reexposure to the same
pathogen.Duringtheprimaryimmuneresponse,memorycellsdonotrespondtoantigensanddonotcontribute
tohostdefenses.Astheinfectionisclearedandpathogenicstimulisubside,theeffectorsarenolongerneeded,
and they undergo apoptosis. In contrast, the memory cells persist in the circulation.
Figure 42.16 After initially binding an antigen to the B cell receptor (BCR), a B cell internalizes the antigen and
presentsitonMHCII.AhelperTcellrecognizestheMHCII–antigencomplexandactivatestheBcell.Asaresult,
memory B cells and plasma cells are made.
The Rh antigen is found on Rh-positive red blood cells. An Rh-negative female can usually carry an Rh-
positivefetustotermwithoutdifficulty.However,ifshehasasecondRh-positivefetus,herbodymaylaunch
an immune attack that causes hemolytic disease of the newborn. Why do you think hemolytic disease is
only a problem during the second or subsequent pregnancies?
PAGE: 1329
1318 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
If the pathogen is never encountered again during the individual’s lifetime, B and T memory cells will circulate
for a few years or even several decades and will gradually die off, having never functioned as effector cells.
However, if the host is reexposed to the same pathogen type, circulating memory cells will immediately
differentiateintoplasmacellsandCTLswithoutinputfromAPCsorTHcells.Onereasontheadaptiveimmune
response is delayed is because it takes time for naïve B and T cells with the appropriate antigen specificities
to be identified and activated. Upon reinfection, this step is skipped, and the result is a more rapid production
of immune defenses. Memory B cells that differentiate into plasma cells output tens to hundreds-fold greater
antibodyamountsthanweresecretedduringtheprimaryresponse,asthegraphinFigure42.17illustrates.This
rapid and dramatic antibody response may stop the infection before it can even become established, and the
individual may not realize he or she had been exposed.
Figure 42.17 In the primary response to infection, antibodies are secreted first from plasma cells. Upon reexposure
tothesamepathogen,memorycellsdifferentiateintoantibody-secretingplasmacellsthatoutputagreateramountof
antibody for a longer period of time.
Vaccinationisbasedontheknowledgethatexposuretononinfectiousantigens,derivedfromknownpathogens,
generatesamildprimaryimmuneresponse.Theimmuneresponsetovaccinationmaynotbeperceivedbythe
host as illness but still confers immune memory. When exposed to the corresponding pathogen to which an
individualwasvaccinated,thereactionissimilartoasecondaryexposure.Becauseeachreinfectiongenerates
more memory cells and increased resistance to the pathogen, and because some memory cells die, certain
vaccine courses involve one or more booster vaccinations to mimic repeat exposures: for instance, tetanus
boosters are necessary every ten years because the memory cells only live that long.
Mucosal Immune Memory
A subset of T and B cells of the mucosal immune system differentiates into memory cells just as in the
systemicimmunesystem.Uponreinvasionofthesamepathogentype,apronouncedimmuneresponseoccurs
at the mucosal site where the original pathogen deposited, but a collective defense is also organized within
interconnected or adjacent mucosal tissue. For instance, the immune memory of an infection in the oral cavity
would also elicit a response in the pharynx if the oral cavity was exposed to the same pathogen.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1330
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1319
Vaccinologist
Vaccination (or immunization) involves the delivery, usually by injection as shown in Figure 42.18, of
noninfectiousantigen(s)derivedfromknownpathogens.Othercomponents,calledadjuvants,aredelivered
in parallel to help stimulate the immune response. Immunological memory is the reason vaccines work.
Ideally,theeffectofvaccinationistoelicitimmunologicalmemory,andthusresistancetospecificpathogens
without the individual having to experience an infection.
Figure 42.18 Vaccines are often delivered by injection into the arm. (credit: U.S. Navy Photographer's Mate
Airman Apprentice Christopher D. Blachly)
Vaccinologists are involved in the process of vaccine development from the initial idea to the availability
of the completed vaccine. This process can take decades, can cost millions of dollars, and can involve
many obstacles along the way. For instance, injected vaccines stimulate the systemic immune system,
elicitinghumoralandcell-mediatedimmunity,buthavelittleeffectonthemucosalresponse,whichpresents
a challenge because many pathogens are deposited and replicate in mucosal compartments, and the
injection does not provide the most efficient immune memory for these disease agents. For this reason,
vaccinologists are actively involved in developing new vaccines that are applied via intranasal, aerosol,
oral, or transcutaneous (absorbed through the skin) delivery methods. Importantly, mucosal-administered
vaccines elicit both mucosal and systemic immunity and produce the same level of disease resistance as
injected vaccines.
PAGE: 1331
1320 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure 42.19The polio vaccine can be administered orally. (credit: modification of work by UNICEF Sverige)
Currently, a version of intranasal influenza vaccine is available, and the polio and typhoid vaccines can
be administered orally, as shown in Figure 42.19. Similarly, the measles and rubella vaccines are being
adapted to aerosol delivery using inhalation devices. Eventually, transgenic plants may be engineered to
producevaccineantigensthatcanbeeatentoconferdiseaseresistance.Othervaccinesmaybeadapted
to rectal or vaginal application to elicit immune responses in rectal, genitourinary, or reproductive mucosa.
Finally, vaccine antigens may be adapted to transdermal application in which the skin is lightly scraped
and microneedles are used to pierce the outermost layer. In addition to mobilizing the mucosal immune
response, this new generation of vaccines may end the anxiety associated with injections and, in turn,
improve patient participation.
Primary Centers of the Immune System
Althoughtheimmunesystemischaracterizedbycirculatingcellsthroughoutthebody,theregulation,maturation,
and intercommunication of immune factors occur at specific sites. The blood circulates immune cells, proteins,
and other factors through the body. Approximately 0.1 percent of all cells in the blood are leukocytes, which
encompassmonocytes(theprecursorofmacrophages)andlymphocytes.Themajorityofcellsinthebloodare
erythrocytes(redbloodcells).Lymphisawateryfluidthatbathestissuesandorganswithprotectivewhiteblood
cells and does not contain erythrocytes. Cells of the immune system can travel between the distinct lymphatic
and blood circulatory systems, which are separated by interstitial space, by a process called extravasation
(passing through to surrounding tissue).
Thecellsoftheimmunesystemoriginatefromhematopoieticstemcellsinthebonemarrow.Cytokinesstimulate
thesestemcellstodifferentiateintoimmunecells.Bcellmaturationoccursinthebonemarrow,whereasnaïve
Tcellstransitfromthebonemarrowtothethymusformaturation.Inthethymus,immatureTcellsthatexpress
TCRs complementary to self-antigens are destroyed. This process helps prevent autoimmune responses.
On maturation, T and B lymphocytes circulate to various destinations. Lymph nodes scattered throughout the
body,asillustratedinFigure42.20,houselargepopulationsofTandBcells,dendriticcells,andmacrophages.
Lymphgathersantigensasitdrainsfromtissues.Theseantigensthenarefilteredthroughlymphnodesbefore
thelymphisreturnedtocirculation.APCsinthelymphnodescaptureandprocessantigensandinformnearby
lymphocytes about potential pathogens.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1332
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1321
Figure 42.20 (a) Lymphatic vessels carry a clear fluid called lymph throughout the body. The liquid enters (b) lymph
nodes through afferent vessels. Lymph nodes are filled with lymphocytes that purge infecting cells. The lymph then
exits through efferent vessels. (credit: modification of work by NIH, NCI)
The spleen houses B and T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and NK cells. The spleen, shown in Figure
42.21, is the site where APCs that have trapped foreign particles in the blood can communicate with
lymphocytes. Antibodies are synthesized and secreted by activated plasma cells in the spleen, and the spleen
filters foreign substances and antibody-complexed pathogens from the blood. Functionally, the spleen is to the
blood as lymph nodes are to the lymph.
Figure42.21Thespleenissimilartoalymphnodebutismuchlargerandfiltersbloodinsteadoflymph.Bloodenters
the spleen through arteries and exits through veins. The spleen contains two types of tissue: red pulp and white
pulp. Red pulp consists of cavities that store blood. Within the red pulp, damaged red blood cells are removed and
replacedbynewones.Whitepulpisrichinlymphocytesthatremoveantigen-coatedbacteriafromtheblood.(credit:
modification of work by NCI)
42.3 | Antibodies
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain cross-reactivity
• Describe the structure and function of antibodies
• Discuss antibody production
PAGE: 1333
1322 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
An antibody, also known as an immunoglobulin (Ig), is a protein that is produced by plasma cells after
stimulationbyanantigen.Antibodiesarethefunctionalbasisofhumoralimmunity.Antibodiesoccurintheblood,
in gastric and mucus secretions, and in breast milk. Antibodies in these bodily fluids can bind pathogens and
mark them for destruction by phagocytes before they can infect cells.
Antibody Structure
Anantibodymoleculeiscomprisedoffourpolypeptides:twoidenticalheavychains(largepeptideunits)thatare
partially bound to each other in a “Y” formation, which are flanked by two identical light chains (small peptide
units), as illustrated in Figure 42.22. Bonds between the cysteine amino acids in the antibody molecule attach
thepolypeptidestoeachother.Theareaswheretheantigenisrecognizedontheantibodyarevariabledomains
and the antibody base is composed of constant domains.
Ingerm-lineBcells,thevariableregionofthelightchaingenehas40variable(V)andfivejoining(J)segments.
An enzyme called DNA recombinase randomly excises most of these segments out of the gene, and splices
one V segment to one J segment. During RNA processing, all but one V and J segment are spliced out.
6
Recombinationandsplicingmayresultinover10 possibleVJcombinations.Asaresult,eachdifferentiatedB
cellinthehumanbodytypicallyhasauniquevariablechain.Theconstantdomain,whichdoesnotbindantibody,
is the same for all antibodies.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1334
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1323
Figure 42.22 (a) As a germ-line B cell matures, an enzyme called DNA recombinase randomly excises V and J
segmentsfromthelightchaingene.SplicingatthemRNAlevelresultsinfurthergenerearrangement.Asaresult,(b)
each antibody has a unique variable region capable of binding a different antigen.
SimilartoTCRsandBCRs,antibodydiversityisproducedbythemutationandrecombinationofapproximately
300 different gene segments encoding the light and heavy chain variable domains in precursor cells that are
destined to become B cells. The variable domains from the heavy and light chains interact to form the binding
site through which an antibody can bind a specific epitope on an antigen. The numbers of repeated constant
domainsinIgclassesarethesameforallantibodiescorrespondingtoaspecificclass.Antibodiesarestructurally
similar to the extracellular component of the BCRs, and B cell maturation to plasma cells can be visualized in
simple terms as the cell acquires the ability to secrete the extracellular portion of its BCR in large quantities.
Antibody Classes
Antibodiescanbedividedintofiveclasses—IgM,IgG,IgA,IgD,IgE—basedontheirphysiochemical,structural,
andimmunologicalproperties.IgGs,whichmakeupabout80percentofallantibodies,haveheavychainsthat
consist of one variable domain and three identical constant domains. IgA and IgD also have three constant
domainsperheavychain,whereasIgMandIgEeachhavefourconstantdomainsperheavychain.Thevariable
domaindeterminesbindingspecificityandtheconstantdomainoftheheavychaindeterminestheimmunological
mechanism of action of the corresponding antibody class. It is possible for two antibodies to have the same
binding specificities but be in different classes and, therefore, to be involved in different functions.
Afteranadaptivedefenseisproducedagainstapathogen,typicallyplasmacellsfirstsecreteIgMintotheblood.
PAGE: 1335
1324 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
BCRsonnaïveBcellsareoftheIgMclassandoccasionallyIgDclass.IgMmoleculesmakeupapproximately
ten percent of all antibodies. Prior to antibody secretion, plasma cells assemble IgM molecules into pentamers
(five individual antibodies) linked by a joining (J) chain, as shown in Figure 42.23. The pentamer arrangement
means that these macromolecules can bind ten identical antigens. However, IgM molecules released early in
the adaptive immune response do not bind to antigens as stably as IgGs, which are one of the possible types
ofantibodiessecretedinlargequantitiesuponreexposuretothesamepathogen.Figure42.23summarizesthe
properties of immunoglobulins and illustrates their basic structures.
Figure 42.23 Immunoglobulins have different functions, but all are composed of light and heavy chains that form a
Y-shaped structure.
IgAs populate the saliva, tears, breast milk, and mucus secretions of the gastrointestinal, respiratory, and
genitourinary tracts. Collectively, these bodily fluids coat and protect the extensive mucosa (4000 square feet
in humans). The total number of IgA molecules in these bodily secretions is greater than the number of IgG
molecules in the blood serum. A small amount of IgA is also secreted into the serum in monomeric form.
Conversely, some IgM is secreted into bodily fluids of the mucosa. Similar to IgM, IgA molecules are secreted
as polymeric structures linked with a J chain. However, IgAs are secreted mostly as dimeric molecules, not
pentamers.
IgEispresentintheseruminsmallquantitiesandisbestcharacterizedinitsroleasanallergymediator.IgDis
alsopresentinsmallquantities.SimilartoIgM,BCRsoftheIgDclassarefoundonthesurfaceofnaïveBcells.
This class supports antigen recognition and maturation of B cells to plasma cells.
Antibody Functions
Differentiated plasma cells are crucial players in the humoral response, and the antibodies they secrete
are particularly significant against extracellular pathogens and toxins. Antibodies circulate freely and act
independentlyofplasmacells.Antibodiescanbetransferredfromoneindividualtoanothertotemporarilyprotect
against infectious disease. For instance, a person who has recently produced a successful immune response
against a particular disease agent can donate blood to a nonimmune recipient and confer temporary immunity
through antibodies in the donor’s blood serum. This phenomenon is called passive immunity; it also occurs
naturally during breastfeeding, which makes breastfed infants highly resistant to infections during the first few
months of life.
Antibodies coat extracellular pathogens and neutralize them, as illustrated in Figure 42.24, by blocking key
sites on the pathogen that enhance their infectivity (such as receptors that “dock” pathogens on host cells).
Antibody neutralization can prevent pathogens from entering and infecting host cells, as opposed to the CTL-
mediated approach of killing cells that are already infected to prevent progression of an established infection.
The neutralized antibody-coated pathogens can then be filtered by the spleen and eliminated in urine or feces.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1336
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1325
Figure 42.24 Antibodies may inhibit infection by (a) preventing the antigen from binding its target, (b) tagging a
pathogen for destruction by macrophages or neutrophils, or (c) activating the complement cascade.
Antibodies also mark pathogens for destruction by phagocytic cells, such as macrophages or neutrophils,
because phagocytic cells are highly attracted to macromolecules complexed with antibodies. Phagocytic
enhancement by antibodies is called opsonization. In a process called complement fixation, IgM and IgG in
serum bind to antigens and provide docking sites onto which sequential complement proteins can bind. The
combinationofantibodiesandcomplementenhancesopsonizationevenfurtherandpromotesrapidclearingof
pathogens.
Affinity, Avidity, and Cross Reactivity
Not all antibodies bind with the same strength, specificity, and stability. In fact, antibodies exhibit different
affinities(attraction)dependingonthemolecularcomplementaritybetweenantigenandantibodymolecules,as
illustratedinFigure42.25.Anantibodywithahigheraffinityforaparticularantigenwouldbindmorestronglyand
stably,andthuswouldbeexpectedtopresentamorechallengingdefenseagainstthepathogencorresponding
to the specific antigen.
PAGE: 1337
1326 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
Figure42.25(a)Affinityreferstothestrengthofsingleinteractionbetweenantigenandantibody,whileavidityrefers
to the strength of all interactions combined. (b) An antibody may cross react with different epitopes.
Thetermaviditydescribesbindingbyantibodyclassesthataresecretedasjoined,multivalentstructures(such
asIgMandIgA).Althoughaviditymeasuresthestrengthofbinding,justasaffinitydoes,theavidityisnotsimply
thesumoftheaffinitiesoftheantibodiesinamultimericstructure.Theaviditydependsonthenumberofidentical
bindingsitesontheantigenbeingdetected,aswellasotherphysicalandchemicalfactors.Typically,multimeric
antibodies,suchaspentamericIgM,areclassifiedashavingloweraffinitythanmonomericantibodies,buthigh
avidity. Essentially, the fact that multimeric antibodies can bind many antigens simultaneously balances their
slightly lower binding strength for each antibody/antigen interaction.
Antibodiessecretedafterbindingtooneepitopeonanantigenmayexhibitcrossreactivityforthesameorsimilar
epitopes on different antigens. Because an epitope corresponds to such a small region (the surface area of
aboutfourtosixaminoacids),itispossiblefordifferentmacromoleculestoexhibitthesamemolecularidentities
andorientationsovershortregions.Crossreactivitydescribeswhenanantibodybindsnottotheantigenthat
elicited its synthesis and secretion, but to a different antigen.
Crossreactivitycanbebeneficialifanindividualdevelopsimmunitytoseveralrelatedpathogensdespitehaving
only been exposed to or vaccinated against one of them. For instance, antibody cross reactivity may occur
against the similar surface structures of various Gram-negative bacteria. Conversely, antibodies raised against
pathogenic molecular components that resemble self molecules may incorrectly mark host cells for destruction
andcauseautoimmunedamage.Patientswhodevelopsystemiclupuserythematosus(SLE)commonlyexhibit
antibodies that react with their own DNA. These antibodies may have been initially raised against the nucleic
acid of microorganisms but later cross-reacted with self-antigens. This phenomenon is also called molecular
mimicry.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1338
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1327
Antibodies of the Mucosal Immune System
AntibodiessynthesizedbythemucosalimmunesystemincludeIgAandIgM.ActivatedBcellsdifferentiateinto
mucosalplasmacellsthatsynthesizeandsecretedimericIgA,andtoalesserextent,pentamericIgM.Secreted
IgA is abundant in tears, saliva, breast milk, and in secretions of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts.
Antibodysecretionresultsinalocalhumoralresponseatepithelialsurfacesandpreventsinfectionofthemucosa
by binding and neutralizing pathogens.
42.4 | Disruptions in the Immune System
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe hypersensitivity
• Define autoimmunity
Afunctioningimmunesystemisessentialforsurvival,buteventhesophisticatedcellularandmoleculardefenses
of the mammalian immune response can be defeated by pathogens at virtually every step. In the competition
between immune protection and pathogen evasion, pathogens have the advantage of more rapid evolution
because of their shorter generation time and other characteristics. For instance, Streptococcus pneumoniae
(bacterium that cause pneumonia and meningitis) surrounds itself with a capsule that inhibits phagocytes from
engulfingitanddisplayingantigenstotheadaptiveimmunesystem.Staphylococcusaureus(bacteriumthatcan
causeskininfections,abscesses,andmeningitis)synthesizesatoxincalledleukocidinthatkillsphagocytesafter
they engulf the bacterium. Other pathogens can also hinder the adaptive immune system. HIV infects TH cells
viatheirCD4surfacemolecules,graduallydepletingthenumberofTHcellsinthebody;thisinhibitstheadaptive
immune system’s capacity to generate sufficient responses to infection or tumors. As a result, HIV-infected
individuals often suffer from infections that would not cause illness in people with healthy immune systems but
which can cause devastating illness to immune-compromised individuals. Maladaptive responses of immune
cellsandmoleculesthemselvescanalsodisrupttheproperfunctioningoftheentiresystem,leadingtohostcell
damage that could become fatal.
Immunodeficiency
Failures, insufficiencies, or delays at any level of the immune response can allow pathogens or tumor cells to
gainafootholdandreplicateorproliferatetohighenoughlevelsthattheimmunesystembecomesoverwhelmed.
Immunodeficiency is the failure, insufficiency, or delay in the response of the immune system, which may
be acquired or inherited. Immunodeficiency can be acquired as a result of infection with certain pathogens
(such as HIV), chemical exposure (including certain medical treatments), malnutrition, or possibly by extreme
stress. For instance, radiation exposure can destroy populations of lymphocytes and elevate an individual’s
susceptibility to infections and cancer. Dozens of genetic disorders result in immunodeficiencies, including
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency (SCID), Bare lymphocyte syndrome, and MHC II deficiencies. Rarely,
primaryimmunodeficienciesthatarepresentfrombirthmayoccur.Neutropeniaisoneforminwhichtheimmune
system produces a below-average number of neutrophils, the body’s most abundant phagocytes. As a result,
bacterial infections may go unrestricted in the blood, causing serious complications.
Hypersensitivities
Maladaptive immune responses toward harmless foreign substances or self antigens that occur after tissue
sensitization are termed hypersensitivities. The types of hypersensitivities include immediate, delayed, and
autoimmunity. A large proportion of the population is affected by one or more types of hypersensitivity.
Allergies
The immune reaction that results from immediate hypersensitivities in which an antibody-mediated immune
response occurs within minutes of exposure to a harmless antigen is called an allergy. In the United States,
20 percent of the population exhibits symptoms of allergy or asthma, whereas 55 percent test positive against
oneormoreallergens.Uponinitialexposuretoapotentialallergen,anallergicindividualsynthesizesantibodies
of the IgE class via the typical process of APCs presenting processed antigen to TH cells that stimulate B
cells to produce IgE. This class of antibodies also mediates the immune response to parasitic worms. The
PAGE: 1339
1328 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
constant domain of the IgE molecules interact with mast cells embedded in connective tissues. This process
primes,orsensitizes,thetissue.Uponsubsequentexposuretothesameallergen,IgEmoleculesonmastcells
bind the antigen via their variable domains and stimulate the mast cell to release the modified amino acids
histamine and serotonin; these chemical mediators then recruit eosinophils which mediate allergic responses.
Figure 42.26 shows an example of an allergic response to ragweed pollen. The effects of an allergic reaction
rangefrommildsymptomslikesneezinganditchy,wateryeyestomoresevereorevenlife-threateningreactions
involvingintenselyitchyweltsorhives,airwaycontractionwithsevererespiratorydistress,andplummetingblood
pressure. This extreme reaction is known as anaphylactic shock. If not treated with epinephrine to counter the
blood pressure and breathing effects, this condition can be fatal.
Figure 42.26 On first exposure to an allergen, an IgE antibody is synthesized by plasma cells in response to a
harmlessantigen.TheIgEmoleculesbindtomastcells,andonsecondaryexposure,themastcellsreleasehistamines
and other modulators that affect the symptoms of allergy. (credit: modification of work by NIH)
Delayed hypersensitivity is a cell-mediated immune response that takes approximately one to two days after
secondary exposure for a maximal reaction to be observed. This type of hypersensitivity involves the TH1
cytokine-mediated inflammatory response and may manifest as local tissue lesions or contact dermatitis (rash
or skin irritation). Delayed hypersensitivity occurs in some individuals in response to contact with certain types
of jewelry or cosmetics. Delayed hypersensitivity facilitates the immune response to poison ivy and is also the
reason why the skin test for tuberculosis results in a small region of inflammation on individuals who were
previouslyexposedtoMycobacteriumtuberculosis.Thatisalsowhycortisoneisusedtotreatsuchresponses:
it will inhibit cytokine production.
Autoimmunity
Autoimmunity is a type of hypersensitivity to self antigens that affects approximately five percent of the
population. Most types of autoimmunity involve the humoral immune response. Antibodies that inappropriately
mark self components as foreign are termed autoantibodies. In patients with the autoimmune disease
myasthenia gravis, muscle cell receptors that induce contraction in response to acetylcholine are targeted by
antibodies. The result is muscle weakness that may include marked difficultly with fine and/or gross motor
functions. In systemic lupus erythematosus, a diffuse autoantibody response to the individual’s own DNA and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1340
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1329
proteinsresultsinvarioussystemicdiseases.AsillustratedinFigure42.27,systemiclupuserythematosusmay
affecttheheart,joints,lungs,skin,kidneys,centralnervoussystem,orothertissues,causingtissuedamagevia
antibody binding, complement recruitment, lysis, and inflammation.
Figure 42.27 Systemic lupus erythematosus is characterized by autoimmunity to the individual’s own DNA and/or
proteins, which leads to varied dysfunction of the organs. (credit: modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Autoimmunitycandevelopwithtime,anditscausesmayberootedinmolecularmimicry.AntibodiesandTCRs
maybindselfantigensthatarestructurallysimilartopathogenantigens,whichtheimmunereceptorsfirstraised.
As an example, infection with Streptococcus pyogenes (bacterium that causes strep throat) may generate
antibodies or T cells that react with heart muscle, which has a similar structure to the surface of S. pyogenes.
These antibodies can damage heart muscle with autoimmune attacks, leading to rheumatic fever. Insulin-
dependent (Type 1) diabetes mellitus arises from a destructive inflammatory TH1 response against insulin-
producingcellsofthepancreas.Patientswiththisautoimmunitymustbeinjectedwithinsulinthatoriginatesfrom
other sources.
PAGE: 1341
1330 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
KEY TERMS
adaptive immunity immunitythathasmemoryandoccursafterexposuretoanantigeneitherfromapathogen
or a vaccination
affinity attraction of molecular complementarity between antigen and antibody molecules
allergy immunereactionthatresultsfromimmediatehypersensitivitiesinwhichanantibody-mediatedimmune
response occurs within minutes of exposure to a harmless antigen
antibody protein that is produced by plasma cells after stimulation by an antigen; also known as an
immunoglobulin
antigen foreign or “non-self” protein that triggers the immune response
antigen-presenting cell (APC) immune cell that detects, engulfs, and informs the adaptive immune response
about an infection by presenting the processed antigen on the cell surface
autoantibody antibody that incorrectly marks “self” components as foreign and stimulates the immune
response
autoimmune response inappropriate immune response to host cells or self-antigens
autoimmunity type of hypersensitivity to self antigens
avidity total binding strength of a multivalent antibody with antigen
B cell lymphocyte that matures in the bone marrow and differentiates into antibody-secreting plasma cells
basophil leukocyte that releases chemicals usually involved in the inflammatory response
cell-mediated immune response adaptive immune response that is carried out by T cells
clonal selection activationofBcellscorrespondingtoonespecificBCRvariantandthedramaticproliferationof
that variant
complement system array of approximately 20 soluble proteins of the innate immune system that enhance
phagocytosis, bore holes in pathogens, and recruit lymphocytes; enhances the adaptive response when
antibodies are produced
cross reactivity bindingofanantibodytoanepitopecorrespondingtoanantigenthatisdifferentfromtheone
the antibody was raised against
cytokine chemical messenger that regulates cell differentiation, proliferation, gene expression, and cell
trafficking to effect immune responses
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) adaptive immune cell that directly kills infected cells via perforin and
granzymes, and releases cytokines to enhance the immune response
dendritic cell immunecellthatprocessesantigenmaterialandpresentsitonthesurfaceofothercellstoinduce
an immune response
effector cell lymphocyte that has differentiated, such as a B cell, plasma cell, or cytotoxic T lymphocyte
eosinophil leukocyte that responds to parasites and is involved in the allergic response
epitope small component of an antigen that is specifically recognized by antibodies, B cells, and T cells; the
antigenic determinant
granzyme protease that enters target cells through perforin and induces apoptosis in the target cells; used by
NK cells and killer T cells
helper T lymphocyte (TH) cell of the adaptive immune system that binds APCs via MHC II molecules and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1342
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1331
stimulates B cells or secretes cytokines to initiate the immune response
host an organism that is invaded by a pathogen or parasite
humoral immune response adaptive immune response that is controlled by activated B cells and antibodies
hypersensitivities spectrum of maladaptive immune responses toward harmless foreign particles or self
antigens; occurs after tissue sensitization and includes immediate-type (allergy), delayed-type, and
autoimmunity
immune tolerance acquired ability to prevent an unnecessary or harmful immune response to a detected
foreign body known not to cause disease or to self-antigens
immunodeficiency failure,insufficiency,ordelayatanyleveloftheimmunesystem,whichmaybeacquiredor
inherited
inflammation localizedredness,swelling,heat,andpainthatresultsfromthemovementofleukocytesandfluid
through opened capillaries to a site of infection
innate immunity immunitythatoccursnaturallybecauseofgeneticfactorsorphysiology,andisnotinducedby
infection or vaccination
interferon cytokine that inhibits viral replication and modulates the immune response
lymph watery fluid that bathes tissues and organs with protective white blood cells and does not contain
erythrocytes
lymphocyte leukocyte that is histologically identifiable by its large nuclei; it is a small cell with very little
cytoplasm
macrophage large phagocytic cell that engulfs foreign particles and pathogens
major histocompatibility class (MHC) I/II molecule protein found on the surface of all nucleated cells (I) or
specificallyonantigen-presentingcells(II)thatsignalstoimmunecellswhetherthecellishealthy/normalor
is infected/cancerous; it provides the appropriate template into which antigens can be loaded for
recognition by lymphocytes
mast cell leukocytethatproducesinflammatorymolecules,suchashistamine,inresponsetolargepathogens
and allergens
memory cell antigen-specificBorTlymphocytethatdoesnotdifferentiateintoeffectorcellsduringtheprimary
immuneresponsebutthatcanimmediatelybecomeaneffectorcelluponreexposuretothesamepathogen
monocyte type of white blood cell that circulates in the blood and lymph and differentiates into macrophages
after it moves into infected tissue
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) collection of lymphatic tissue that combines with epithelial
tissue lining the mucosa throughout the body
natural killer (NK) cell lymphocyte that can kill cells infected with viruses or tumor cells
neutrophil phagocytic leukocyte that engulfs and digests pathogens
opsonization process that enhances phagocytosis using proteins to indicate the presence of a pathogen to
phagocytic cells
passive immunity transferofantibodiesfromoneindividualtoanothertoprovidetemporaryprotectionagainst
pathogens
pathogen an agent, usually a microorganism, that causes disease in the organisms that it invades
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) carbohydrate,polypeptide,andnucleicacid“signature”that
is expressed by viruses, bacteria, and parasites but differs from molecules on host cells
PAGE: 1343
1332 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
pattern recognition receptor (PRR) molecule on macrophages and dendritic cells that binds molecular
signatures of pathogens and promotes pathogen engulfment and destruction
perforin destructive protein that creates a pore in the target cell; used by NK cells and killer T cells
plasma cell immunecellthatsecretsantibodies;thesecellsarisefromBcellsthatwerestimulatedbyantigens
regulatory T (Treg) cell specializedlymphocytethatsuppresseslocalinflammationandinhibitsthesecretionof
cytokines, antibodies, and other stimulatory immune factors; involved in immune
tolerance
T cell lymphocyte that matures in the thymus gland; one of the main cells involved in the adaptive immune
system
CHAPTER SUMMARY
42.1Innate Immune Response
The innate immune system serves as a first responder to pathogenic threats that bypass natural physical and
chemical barriers of the body. Using a combination of cellular and molecular attacks, the innate immune system
identifies the nature of a pathogen and responds with inflammation, phagocytosis, cytokine release, destruction
by NK cells, and/or a complement system. When innate mechanisms are insufficient to clear an infection, the
adaptive immune response is informed and mobilized.
42.2Adaptive Immune Response
The adaptive immune response is a slower-acting, longer-lasting, and more specific response than the innate
response. However, the adaptive response requires information from the innate immune system to function.
APCs display antigens via MHC molecules to complementary naïve T cells. In response, the T cells
differentiate and proliferate, becoming THcells or CTLs. THcells stimulate B cells that have engulfed and
presented pathogen-derived antigens. B cells differentiate into plasma cells that secrete antibodies, whereas
CTLs induce apoptosis in intracellularly infected or cancerous cells. Memory cells persist after a primary
exposure to a pathogen. If reexposure occurs, memory cells differentiate into effector cells without input from
the innate immune system. The mucosal immune system is largely independent from the systemic immune
system but functions in a parallel fashion to protect the extensive mucosal surfaces of the body.
42.3Antibodies
Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are the molecules secreted from plasma cells that mediate the humoral immune
response. There are five antibody classes; an antibody's class determines its mechanism of action and
production site but does not control its binding specificity. Antibodies bind antigens via variable domains and
can either neutralize pathogens or mark them for phagocytosis or activate the complement cascade.
42.4Disruptions in the Immune System
Immune disruptions may involve insufficient immune responses or inappropriate immune targets.
Immunodeficiency increases an individual's susceptibility to infections and cancers. Hypersensitivities are
misdirected responses either to harmless foreign particles, as in the case of allergies, or to host factors, as in
the case of autoimmunity. Reactions to self components may be the result of molecular mimicry.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 42.11Which of the following statements
about T cells is false?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1344
Chapter 42 | The Immune System 1333
a. Helper T cells release cytokines while from an incompatible donor to a recipient will be
cytotoxic T cells kill the infected cell. rejected?
b. Helper T cells are CD4+, while cytotoxic T
3.Figure 42.16The Rh antigen is found on Rh-
+
cells are CD8 . positive red blood cells. An Rh-negative female can
c. MHC II is a receptor found on most body usually carry an Rh-positive fetus to term without
cells, while MHC I is a receptor found on difficulty. However, if she has a second Rh-positive
immune cells only. fetus, her body may launch an immune attack that
d. The T cell receptor is found on both CD4 + causes hemolytic disease of the newborn. Why do
+ you think hemolytic disease is only a problem during
and CD8 T cells.
the second or subsequent pregnancies?
2.Figure 42.14Based on what you know about MHC
receptors, why do you think an organ transplanted
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following is a barrier against a. altered self
pathogens provided by the skin? b. missing self
a. high pH c. normal self
b. mucus d. non-self
c. tears
11.The acquired ability to prevent an unnecessary or
d. desiccation
destructive immune reaction to a harmless foreign
5.Although interferons have several effects, they are particle, such as a food protein, is called ________.
particularly useful against infections with which type
of pathogen? a. the TH2 response
a. bacteria b. allergy
b. viruses c. immune tolerance
c. fungi d. autoimmunity
d. helminths
12.A memory B cell can differentiate upon
6.Which organelle do phagocytes use to digest reexposure to a pathogen of which cell type?
engulfed particles?
a. lysosome a. CTL
b. nucleus b. naïve B cell
c. endoplasmic reticulum c. memory T cell
d. mitochondria d. plasma cell
7.Which innate immune system component uses 13.Foreign particles circulating in the blood are
MHC I molecules directly in its defense strategy? filtered by the ________.
a. spleen
a. macrophages b. lymph nodes
b. neutrophils c. MALT
c. NK cells d. lymph
d. interferon
14.The structure of an antibody is similar to the
8.Which of the following is both a phagocyte and an extracellular component of which receptor?
antigen-presenting cell? a. MHC I
a. NK cell b. MHC II
b. eosinophil c. BCR
c. neutrophil d. none of the above
d. macrophage
15.The first antibody class to appear in the serum in
9.Which immune cells bind MHC molecules on response to a newly encountered pathogen is
APCs via CD8 coreceptors on their cell surfaces? ________.
a. IgM
a. THcells b. IgA
b. CTLs c. IgG
c. mast cells d. IgE
d. basophils
16.What is the most abundant antibody class
10.What “self” pattern is identified by NK cells? detected in the serum upon reexposure to a
pathogen or in reaction to a vaccine?
PAGE: 1345
1334 Chapter 42 | The Immune System
a. IgM ________.
b. IgA a. tissue hypersensitivity
c. IgG b. molecular mimicry
d. IgE c. histamine release
d. radiation exposure
17.Breastfed infants typically are resistant to disease
because of ________. 20.Autoantibodies are probably involved in:
a. active immunity a. reactions to poison ivy
b. passive immunity b. pollen allergies
c. immune tolerance c. systemic lupus erythematosus
d. immune memory d. HIV/AIDS
18.Allergy to pollen is classified as: 21.Which of the following diseases is not due to
a. an autoimmune reaction autoimmunity?
b. immunodeficiency a. rheumatic fever
c. delayed hypersensitivity b. systemic lupus erythematosus
d. immediate hypersensitivity c. diabetes mellitus
d. HIV/AIDS
19.A potential cause of acquired autoimmunity is
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
22.Different MHC I molecules between donor and 27.In mammalian adaptive immune systems, T cell
recipient cells can lead to rejection of a transplanted receptors are extraordinarily diverse. What function
organ or tissue. Suggest a reason for this. of the immune system results from this diversity, and
how is this diversity achieved?
23.If a series of genetic mutations prevented some,
but not all, of the complement proteins from binding 28.How do B and T cells differ with respect to
antibodies or pathogens, would the entire antigens that they bind?
complement system be compromised?
29.Why is the immune response after reinfection
24.Explain the difference between an epitope and an much faster than the adaptive immune response after
antigen. the initial infection?
25.What is a naïve B or T cell? 30.What are the benefits and costs of antibody cross
reactivity?
26.How does the TH1 response differ from the TH2
response?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1346
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1335
43 | ANIMAL
REPRODUCTION AND
DEVELOPMENT
Figure 43.1 Female seahorses produce eggs for reproduction that are then fertilized by the male. Unlike almost all
other animals, the male seahorse then gestates the young until birth. (credit: modification of work by "cliff1066"/Flickr)
Chapter Outline
43.1:Reproduction Methods
43.2:Fertilization
43.3:Human Reproductive Anatomy and Gametogenesis
43.4:Hormonal Control of Human Reproduction
43.5:Human Pregnancy and Birth
43.6:Fertilization and Early Embryonic Development
43.7:Organogenesis and Vertebrate Formation
Introduction
Animal reproduction is necessary for the survival of a species. In the animal kingdom, there are innumerable
waysthatspeciesreproduce.Asexualreproductionproducesgeneticallyidenticalorganisms(clones),whereas
insexualreproduction,thegeneticmaterialoftwoindividualscombinestoproduceoffspringthataregenetically
different from their parents. During sexual reproduction the male gamete (sperm) may be placed inside the
female’sbodyforinternalfertilization,orthespermandeggsmaybereleasedintotheenvironmentforexternal
PAGE: 1347
1336 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
fertilization.Seahorses,liketheoneshowninFigure43.1,provideanexampleofthelatter.Followingamating
dance,thefemalelayseggsinthemaleseahorse’sabdominalbroodpouchwheretheyarefertilized.Theeggs
hatch and the offspring develop in the pouch for several weeks.
43.1 | Reproduction Methods
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe advantages and disadvantages of asexual and sexual reproduction
• Discuss asexual reproduction methods
• Discuss sexual reproduction methods
Animals produce offspring through asexual and/or sexual reproduction. Both methods have advantages and
disadvantages. Asexual reproduction produces offspring that are genetically identical to the parent because
the offspring are all clones of the original parent. A single individual can produce offspring asexually and large
numbers of offspring can be produced quickly. In a stable or predictable environment, asexual reproduction is
aneffectivemeansofreproductionbecausealltheoffspringwillbeadaptedtothatenvironment.Inanunstable
orunpredictableenvironmentasexually-reproducingspeciesmaybeatadisadvantagebecausealltheoffspring
aregeneticallyidenticalandmaynothavethegeneticvariationtosurviveinnewordifferentconditions.Onthe
otherhand,therapidratesofasexualreproductionmayallowforaspeedyresponsetoenvironmentalchangesif
individualshavemutations.Anadditionaladvantageofasexualreproductionisthatcolonizationofnewhabitats
may be easier when an individual does not need to find a mate to reproduce.
Duringsexualreproduction thegeneticmaterialoftwoindividualsiscombinedtoproducegeneticallydiverse
offspring that differ from their parents. The genetic diversity of sexually produced offspring is thought to give
species a better chance of surviving in an unpredictable or changing environment. Species that reproduce
sexually must maintain two different types of individuals, males and females, which can limit the ability to
colonize new habitats as both sexes must be present.
Asexual Reproduction
Asexualreproductionoccursinprokaryoticmicroorganisms(bacteria)andinsomeeukaryoticsingle-celledand
multi-celled organisms. There are a number of ways that animals reproduce asexually.
Fission
Fission,alsocalledbinaryfission,occursinprokaryoticmicroorganismsandinsomeinvertebrate,multi-celled
organisms.Afteraperiodofgrowth,anorganismsplitsintotwoseparateorganisms.Someunicellulareukaryotic
organisms undergo binary fission by mitosis. In other organisms, part of the individual separates and forms
a second individual. This process occurs, for example, in many asteroid echinoderms through splitting of the
central disk. Some sea anemones and some coral polyps (Figure 43.2) also reproduce through fission.
Figure 43.2Coral polyps reproduce asexually by fission. (credit: G. P. Schmahl, NOAA FGBNMS Manager)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1348
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1337
Budding
Budding is a form of asexual reproduction that results from the outgrowth of a part of a cell or body region
leading to a separation from the original organism into two individuals. Budding occurs commonly in some
invertebrate animals such ascorals and hydras. In hydras, abud forms that develops into an adult and breaks
awayfromthemainbody,asillustratedinFigure43.3,whereasincoralbudding,thebuddoesnotdetachand
multiplies as part of a new colony.
Figure 43.3Hydra reproduce asexually through budding.
Watch a video of a hydra budding. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/
content/m66668/1.3/#eip-id1170503731944)
Fragmentation
Fragmentationisthebreakingofthebodyintotwopartswithsubsequentregeneration.Iftheanimaliscapable
of fragmentation, and the part is big enough, a separate individual will regrow.
Forexample,inmanyseastars,asexualreproductionisaccomplishedbyfragmentation.Figure43.4illustrates
a sea star for which an arm of the individual is broken off and regenerates a new sea star. Fisheries workers
havebeenknowntotrytokilltheseastarseatingtheirclamoroysterbedsbycuttingtheminhalfandthrowing
thembackintotheocean.Unfortunatelyfortheworkers,thetwopartscaneachregenerateanewhalf,resulting
in twice as many sea stars to prey upon the oysters and clams. Fragmentation also occurs in annelid worms,
turbellarians, and poriferans.
PAGE: 1349
1338 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Figure 43.4 Sea stars can reproduce through fragmentation. The large arm, a fragment from another sea star, is
developing into a new individual.
Note that in fragmentation, there is generally a noticeable difference in the size of the individuals, whereas in
fission, two individuals of approximate size are formed.
Parthenogenesis
Parthenogenesis is a form of asexual reproduction where an egg develops into a complete individual without
being fertilized. The resulting offspring can be either haploid or diploid, depending on the process and the
species.Parthenogenesisoccursininvertebratessuchaswaterfleas,rotifers,aphids,stickinsects,someants,
wasps, and bees. Bees use parthenogenesis to produce haploid males (drones). If eggs are fertilized, diploid
females develop, and if the fertilized eggs are fed a special diet (so called royal jelly), a queen is produced.
Some vertebrate animals—such as certain reptiles, amphibians, and fish—also reproduce through
parthenogenesis.Althoughmorecommoninplants,parthenogenesishasbeenobservedinanimalspeciesthat
weresegregatedbysexinterrestrialormarinezoos.TwofemaleKomododragons,ahammerheadshark,and
a blacktop shark have produced parthenogenic young when the females have been isolated from males.
Sexual Reproduction
Sexualreproductionisthecombinationof(usuallyhaploid)reproductivecellsfromtwoindividualstoformathird
(usuallydiploid)uniqueoffspring.Sexualreproductionproducesoffspringwithnovelcombinationsofgenes.This
can be an adaptive advantage in unstable or unpredictable environments. As humans, we are used to thinking
ofanimalsashavingtwoseparatesexes—maleandfemale—determinedatconception.However,intheanimal
kingdom, there are many variations on this theme.
Hermaphroditism
Hermaphroditism occurs in animals where one individual has both male and female reproductive parts.
Invertebrates such as earthworms, slugs, tapeworms and snails, shown in Figure 43.5, are often
hermaphroditic.Hermaphroditesmayself-fertilizeormaymatewithanotheroftheirspecies,fertilizingeachother
andbothproducingoffspring.Selffertilizationiscommoninanimalsthathavelimitedmobilityorarenotmotile,
such as barnacles and clams.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1350
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1339
Figure43.5Manysnailsarehermaphrodites.Whentwoindividualsmate,theycanproduceuptoonehundredeggs
each. (credit: Assaf Shtilman)
Sex Determination
MammaliansexdeterminationisdeterminedgeneticallybythepresenceofXandYchromosomes.Individuals
homozygous for X (XX) are female and heterozygous individuals (XY) are male. The presence of a Y
chromosomecausesthedevelopmentofmalecharacteristicsanditsabsenceresultsinfemalecharacteristics.
The XY system is also found in some insects and plants.
AviansexdeterminationisdependentonthepresenceofZandWchromosomes.HomozygousforZ(ZZ)results
in a male and heterozygous (ZW) results in a female. The W appears to be essential in determining the sex of
the individual, similar to the Y chromosome in mammals. Some fish, crustaceans, insects (such as butterflies
and moths), and reptiles use this system.
The sex of some species is not determined by genetics but by some aspect of the environment. Sex
determinationinsomecrocodilesandturtles,forexample,isoftendependentonthetemperatureduringcritical
periods of egg development. This is referred to as environmental sex determination, or more specifically as
temperature-dependentsexdetermination.Inmanyturtles,coolertemperaturesduringeggincubationproduce
males and warm temperatures produce females. In some crocodiles, moderate temperatures produce males
andbothwarmandcooltemperaturesproducefemales.Insomespecies,sexisbothgenetic-andtemperature-
dependent.
Individuals of some species change their sex during their lives, alternating between male and female. If the
individual is female first, it is termed protogyny or “first female,” if it is male first, its termed protandry or “first
male.” Oysters, for example, are born male, grow, and become female and lay eggs; some oyster species
change sex multiple times.
43.2 | Fertilization
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss internal and external methods of fertilization
• Describe the methods used by animals for development of offspring during gestation
• Describe the anatomical adaptions that occurred in animals to facilitate reproduction
Sexualreproductionstartswiththecombinationofaspermandanegginaprocesscalledfertilization.Thiscan
occur either inside ( internal fertilization) or outside ( external fertilization) the body of the female. Humans
provide an example of the former whereas seahorse reproduction is an example of the latter.
External Fertilization
External fertilization usually occurs in aquatic environments where both eggs and sperm are released into the
PAGE: 1351
1340 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
water. After the sperm reaches the egg, fertilization takes place. Most external fertilization happens during the
process of spawning where one or several females release their eggs and the male(s) release sperm in the
same area, at the same time. The release of the reproductive material may be triggered by water temperature
or the length of daylight. Nearly all fish spawn, as do crustaceans (such as crabs and shrimp), mollusks (such
as oysters), squid, and echinoderms (such as sea urchins and sea cucumbers). Figure 43.6 shows salmon
spawninginashallowstream.Frogs,likethoseshowninFigure43.7,corals,molluscs,andseacucumbersalso
spawn.
Figure 43.6Salmon reproduce through spawning. (credit: Dan Bennett)
Figure43.7Duringsexualreproductionintoads,themalegraspsthefemalefrombehindandexternallyfertilizesthe
eggs as they are deposited. (credit: "OakleyOriginals"/Flickr)
Pairsoffishthatarenotbroadcastspawnersmayexhibitcourtshipbehavior.Thisallowsthefemaletoselecta
particularmale.Thetriggerforeggandspermrelease(spawning)causestheeggandspermtobeplacedina
small area, enhancing the possibility of fertilization.
Externalfertilizationinanaquaticenvironmentprotectstheeggsfromdryingout.Broadcastspawningcanresult
in a greater mixture of the genes within a group, leading to higher genetic diversity and a greater chance of
species survival in a hostile environment. For sessile aquatic organisms like sponges, broadcast spawning is
the only mechanism for fertilization and colonization of new environments. The presence of the fertilized eggs
anddevelopingyounginthewaterprovidesopportunitiesforpredationresultinginalossofoffspring.Therefore,
millionsofeggsmustbeproducedbyindividuals,andtheoffspringproducedthroughthismethodmustmature
rapidly. The survival rate of eggs produced through broadcast spawning is low.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1352
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1341
Internal Fertilization
Internal fertilization occurs most often in land-based animals, although some aquatic animals also use this
method. There are three ways that offspring are produced following internal fertilization. In oviparity, fertilized
eggs are laid outside the female’s body and develop there, receiving nourishment from the yolk that is a
part of the egg. This occurs in most bony fish, many reptiles, some cartilaginous fish, most amphibians, two
mammals, and all birds. Reptiles and insects produce leathery eggs, while birds and turtles produce eggs with
high concentrations of calcium carbonate in the shell, making them hard. Chicken eggs are an example of this
second type.
In ovoviparity, fertilized eggs are retained in the female, but the embryo obtains its nourishment from the
egg’s yolk and the young are fully developed when they are hatched. This occurs in some bony fish (like the
guppy Lebistes reticulatus), some sharks, some lizards, some snakes (such as the garter snake Thamnophis
sirtalis),somevipers,andsomeinvertebrateanimals(liketheMadagascarhissingcockroachGromphadorhina
portentosa).
In viviparity the young develop within the female, receiving nourishment from the mother’s blood through
a placenta. The offspring develops in the female and is born alive. This occurs in most mammals, some
cartilaginous fish, and a few reptiles.
Internal fertilization has the advantage of protecting the fertilized egg from dehydration on land. The embryo is
isolatedwithinthefemale,whichlimitspredationontheyoung.Internalfertilizationenhancesthefertilizationof
eggsbyaspecificmale.Feweroffspringareproducedthroughthismethod,buttheirsurvivalrateishigherthan
that for external fertilization.
The Evolution of Reproduction
Oncemulticellularorganismsevolvedanddevelopedspecializedcells,somealsodevelopedtissuesandorgans
with specialized functions. An early development in reproduction occurred in the Annelids. These organisms
produce sperm and eggs from undifferentiated cells in their coelom and store them in that cavity. When the
coelom becomes filled, the cells are released through an excretory opening or by the body splitting open.
Reproductive organs evolved with the development of gonads that produce sperm and eggs. These cells went
through meiosis, an adaption of mitosis, which reduced the number of chromosomes in each reproductive cell
by half, while increasing the number of cells through cell division.
Complete reproductive systems were developed in insects, with separate sexes. Sperm are made in testes
and then travel through coiled tubes to the epididymis for storage. Eggs mature in the ovary. When they are
released from the ovary, they travel to the uterine tubes for fertilization. Some insects have a specialized sac,
calledaspermatheca,whichstoresspermforlateruse,sometimesuptoayear.Fertilizationcanbetimedwith
environmental or food conditions that are optimal for offspring survival.
Vertebrates have similar structures, with a few differences. Non-mammals, such as birds and reptiles, have
a common body opening, called a cloaca, for the digestive, excretory and reproductive systems. Coupling
between birds usually involves positioning the cloaca openings opposite each other for transfer of sperm.
Mammalshaveseparateopeningsforthesystemsinthefemaleandauterusforsupportofdevelopingoffspring.
The uterus has two chambers in species that produce large numbers of offspring at a time, while species that
produce one offspring, such as primates, have a single uterus.
Spermtransferfromthemaletothefemaleduringreproductionrangesfromreleasingthespermintothewatery
environment for external fertilization, to the joining of cloaca in birds, to the development of a penis for direct
delivery into the female’s vagina in mammals.
43.3 | Human Reproductive Anatomy and
Gametogenesis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe human male and female reproductive anatomies
• Discuss the human sexual response
• Describe spermatogenesis and oogenesis and discuss their differences and similarities
PAGE: 1353
1342 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Asanimalsbecamemorecomplex, specific organsandorgansystemsdeveloped tosupport specific functions
for the organism. The reproductive structures that evolved in land animals allow males and females to mate,
fertilize internally, and support the growth and development of offspring.
Human Reproductive Anatomy
Thereproductivetissuesofmaleandfemalehumansdevelopsimilarlyinuterountilalowlevelofthehormone
testosterone is released from male gonads. Testosterone causes the undeveloped tissues to differentiate into
male sexual organs. When testosterone is absent, the tissues develop into female sexual tissues. Primitive
gonadsbecometestesorovaries.Tissuesthatproduceapenisinmalesproduceaclitorisinfemales.Thetissue
that will become the scrotum in a male becomes the labia in a female; that is, they are homologous structures.
Male Reproductive Anatomy
Inthemalereproductivesystem,thescrotumhousesthetesticlesortestes(singular:testis),includingproviding
passage for blood vessels, nerves, and muscles related to testicular function. The testes are a pair of male
reproductiveorgansthatproducespermandsomereproductivehormones.Eachtestisisapproximately2.5by
3.8cm(1.5by1in.)insizeanddividedintowedge-shapedlobulesbyconnectivetissuecalledsepta.Coiledin
each wedge are seminiferous tubules that produce sperm.
Spermareimmobileatbodytemperature;therefore,thescrotumandpenisareexternaltothebody,asillustrated
inFigure43.8sothatapropertemperatureismaintainedformotility.Inlandmammals,thepairoftestesmustbe
°
suspendedoutsidethebodyatabout2 Clowerthanbodytemperaturetoproduceviablesperm.Infertilitycan
occur in land mammals when the testes do not descend through the abdominal cavity during fetal development.
Figure 43.8The reproductive structures of the human male are shown.
Which of the following statements about the male reproductive system is false?
a. The vas deferens carries sperm from the testes to the penis.
b. Sperm mature in seminiferous tubules in the testes.
c. Both the prostate and the bulbourethral glands produce components of the semen.
d. The prostate gland is located in the testes.
Spermmatureinseminiferoustubulesthatarecoiledinsidethetestes,asillustratedinFigure43.8.Thewalls
of the seminiferous tubules are made up of the developing sperm cells, with the least developed sperm at the
peripheryofthetubuleandthefullydevelopedsperminthelumen.Thespermcellsaremixedwith“nursemaid”
cells called Sertoli cells which protect the germ cells and promote their development. Other cells mixed in the
wall of the tubules are the interstitial cells of Leydig. These cells produce high levels of testosterone once the
male reaches adolescence.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1354
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1343
When the sperm have developed flagella and are nearly mature, they leave the testicles and enter the
epididymis,showninFigure43.8.Thisstructureresemblesacommaandliesalongthetopandposteriorportion
of the testes; it is the site of sperm maturation. The sperm leave the epididymis and enter the vas deferens
(orductusdeferens),whichcarriesthesperm,behindthebladder,andformstheejaculatoryductwiththeduct
fromtheseminalvesicles.Duringavasectomy,asectionofthevasdeferensisremoved,preventingspermfrom
being passed out of the body during ejaculation and preventing fertilization.
Semen is a mixture of sperm and spermatic duct secretions (about 10 percent of the total) and fluids from
accessoryglandsthatcontributemostofthesemen’svolume.Spermarehaploidcells,consistingofaflagellum
as a tail, a neck that contains the cell’s energy-producing mitochondria, and a head that contains the genetic
material. Figure 43.9 shows a micrograph of human sperm as well as a diagram of the parts of the sperm. An
acrosomeisfoundatthetopoftheheadofthesperm.Thisstructurecontainslysosomalenzymesthatcandigest
theprotectivecoveringsthatsurroundtheeggtohelpthespermpenetrateandfertilizetheegg.Anejaculatewill
contain from two to five milliliters of fluid with from 50–120 million sperm per milliliter.
Figure43.9Humansperm,visualizedusingscanningelectronmicroscopy,haveaflagellum,neck,andhead.(credit
b: modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Thebulkofthesemencomesfromtheaccessoryglandsassociatedwiththemalereproductivesystem.These
are the seminal vesicles, the prostate gland, and the bulbourethral gland, all of which are illustrated in Figure
43.8. The seminal vesicles are a pair of glands that lie along the posterior border of the urinary bladder. The
glandsmakeasolutionthatisthick,yellowish,andalkaline.Asspermareonlymotileinanalkalineenvironment,
a basic pH is important to reverse the acidity of the vaginal environment. The solution also contains mucus,
fructose(aspermmitochondrialnutrient),acoagulatingenzyme,ascorbicacid,andlocal-actinghormonescalled
prostaglandins. The seminal vesicle glands account for 60 percent of the bulk of semen.
The penis, illustrated in Figure 43.8, is an organ that drains urine from the renal bladder and functions as
a copulatory organ during intercourse. The penis contains three tubes of erectile tissue running through the
length of the organ. These consist of a pair of tubes on the dorsal side, called the corpus cavernosum, and a
single tube of tissue on the ventral side, called the corpus spongiosum. This tissue will become engorged with
blood,becomingerectandhard,inpreparationforintercourse.Theorganisinsertedintothevaginaculminating
withanejaculation.Duringintercourse,thesmoothmusclesphinctersattheopeningtotherenalbladderclose
and prevent urine from entering the penis. An orgasm is a two-stage process: first, glands and accessory
organs connected to the testes contract, then semen (containing sperm) is expelled through the urethra during
ejaculation. After intercourse, the blood drains from the erectile tissue and the penis becomes flaccid.
Thewalnut-shapedprostateglandsurroundstheurethra,theconnectiontotheurinarybladder.Ithasaseries
ofshortductsthatdirectlyconnecttotheurethra.Theglandisamixtureofsmoothmuscleandglandulartissue.
Themuscleprovidesmuchoftheforceneededforejaculationtooccur.Theglandulartissuemakesathin,milky
fluidthatcontainscitrate(anutrient),enzymes,andprostatespecificantigen(PSA).PSAisaproteolyticenzyme
thathelpstoliquefytheejaculateseveralminutesafterreleasefromthemale.Prostateglandsecretionsaccount
for about 30 percent of the bulk of semen.
Thebulbourethralgland,orCowper’sgland,releasesitssecretionpriortothereleaseofthebulkofthesemen.
It neutralizes any acid residue in the urethra left over from urine. This usually accounts for a couple of drops
of fluid in the total ejaculate and may contain a few sperm. Withdrawal of the penis from the vagina before
ejaculation to prevent pregnancy may not work if sperm are present in the bulbourethral gland secretions. The
location and functions of the male reproductive organs are summarized inTable 43.1.
PAGE: 1355
1344 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Male Reproductive Anatomy
Organ Location Function
Scrotum External Carry and support testes
Penis External Deliver urine, copulating organ
Testes Internal Produce sperm and male hormones
Seminal Vesicles Internal Contribute to semen production
Prostate Gland Internal Contribute to semen production
Bulbourethral Glands Internal Clean urethra at ejaculation
Table 43.1
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Anumberofreproductivestructuresareexteriortothefemale’sbody.Theseincludethebreastsandthevulva,
whichconsistsofthemonspubis,clitoris,labiamajora,labiaminora,andthevestibularglands,allillustratedin
Figure43.10.ThelocationandfunctionsofthefemalereproductiveorgansaresummarizedinTable43.2.The
vulva is an area associated with the vestibule which includes the structures found in the inguinal (groin) area
of women. The mons pubis is a round, fatty area that overlies the pubic symphysis. The clitoris is a structure
witherectiletissuethatcontainsalargenumberofsensorynervesandservesasasourceofstimulationduring
intercourse. The labia majora are a pair of elongated folds of tissue that run posterior from the mons pubis
and enclose the other components of the vulva. The labia majora derive from the same tissue that produces
thescrotuminamale.Thelabiaminoraarethinfoldsoftissuecentrallylocatedwithinthelabiamajora.These
labiaprotecttheopeningstothevaginaandurethra.Themonspubisandtheanteriorportionofthelabiamajora
become covered with hair during adolescence; the labia minora is hairless. The greater vestibular glands are
found at the sides of the vaginal opening and provide lubrication during intercourse.
Figure 43.10 The reproductive structures of the human female are shown. (credit a: modification of work by Gray's
Anatomy; credit b: modification of work by CDC)
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Organ Location Function
Clitoris External Sensory organ
Table 43.2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1356
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1345
Female Reproductive Anatomy
Organ Location Function
Mons pubis External Fatty area overlying pubic bone
Labia majora External Covers labia minora
Labia minora External Covers vestibule
Greater vestibular glands External Secrete mucus; lubricate vagina
Breasts External Produce and deliver milk
Ovaries Internal Carry and develop eggs
Oviducts (Fallopian tubes) Internal Transport egg to uterus
Uterus Internal Support developing embryo
Vagina Internal Common tube for intercourse, birth canal, passing menstrual flow
Table 43.2
The breasts consist of mammary glands and fat. The size of the breast is determined by the amount of fat
depositedbehindthegland.Eachglandconsistsof15to25lobesthathaveductsthatemptyatthenippleand
that supply the nursing child with nutrient- and antibody-rich milk to aid development and protect the child.
Internal female reproductive structures include ovaries, oviducts, the uterus, and the vagina, shown in Figure
43.10. The pair of ovaries is held in place in the abdominal cavity by a system of ligaments. Ovaries consist of
a medulla and cortex: the medulla contains nerves and blood vessels to supply the cortex with nutrients and
removewaste.Theouterlayersofcellsofthecortexarethefunctionalpartsoftheovaries.Thecortexismade
up of follicular cells that surround eggs that develop during fetal development in utero. During the menstrual
period, a batch of follicular cells develops and prepares the eggs for release. At ovulation, one follicle ruptures
and one egg is released, as illustrated inFigure 43.11a.
Figure43.11Oocytesdevelopin(a)follicles,locatedintheovary.Atthebeginningofthemenstrualcycle,thefollicle
matures.Atovulation,thefollicleruptures,releasingtheegg.Thefolliclebecomesacorpusluteum,whicheventually
degenerates.The(b)follicleinthislightmicrographhasanoocyteatitscenter.(credita:modificationofworkbyNIH;
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
The oviducts, or fallopian tubes, extend from the uterus in the lower abdominal cavity to the ovaries, but they
are not in contact with the ovaries. The lateral ends of the oviducts flare out into a trumpet-like structure and
haveafringeoffinger-likeprojectionscalledfimbriae,illustratedinFigure43.10b.Whenaneggisreleasedat
ovulation, the fimbrae help the nonmotile egg enter into the tube and passage to the uterus. The walls of the
oviductsareciliatedandaremadeupmostlyofsmoothmuscle.Theciliabeattowardthemiddle,andthesmooth
musclecontractsinthesamedirection,movingtheeggtowardtheuterus.Fertilizationusuallytakesplacewithin
theoviductsandthedevelopingembryoismovedtowardtheuterusfordevelopment.Itusuallytakestheeggor
embryoaweektotravelthroughtheoviduct.Sterilizationinwomeniscalledatuballigation;itisanalogoustoa
PAGE: 1357
1346 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
vasectomy in males in that the oviducts are severed and sealed.
Theuterusisastructureaboutthesizeofawoman’sfist.Thisislinedwithanendometriumrichinbloodvessels
andmucusglands.Theuterussupportsthedevelopingembryoandfetusduringgestation.Thethickestportion
of the wall of the uterus is made of smooth muscle. Contractions of the smooth muscle in the uterus aid in
passing the baby through the vagina during labor. A portion of the lining of the uterus sloughs off during each
menstrualperiod,andthenbuildsupagaininpreparationforanimplantation.Partoftheuterus,calledthecervix,
protrudes into the top of the vagina. The cervix functions as the birth canal.
The vagina is a muscular tube that serves several purposes. It allows menstrual flow to leave the body. It is
thereceptacleforthepenisduringintercourseandthevesselforthedeliveryofoffspring.Itislinedbystratified
squamous epithelial cells to protect the underlying tissue.
Sexual Response during Intercourse
Thesexualresponseinhumansisbothpsychologicalandphysiological.Bothsexesexperiencesexualarousal
through psychological and physical stimulation. There are four phases of the sexual response. During phase
one, called excitement, vasodilation leads to vasocongestion in erectile tissues in both men and women. The
nipples, clitoris, labia, and penis engorge with blood and become enlarged. Vaginal secretions are released to
lubricatethevaginatofacilitateintercourse.Duringthesecondphase,calledtheplateau,stimulationcontinues,
the outer third of the vaginal wall enlarges with blood, and breathing and heart rate increase.
Duringphasethree, ororgasm,rhythmic, involuntarycontractions ofmusclesoccurinbothsexes.Inthemale,
thereproductiveaccessoryglandsandtubulesconstrictplacingsemenintheurethra,thentheurethracontracts
expelling the semen through the penis. In women, the uterus and vaginal muscles contract in waves that may
lastslightlylessthanasecondeach.Duringphasefour,orresolution,theprocessesdescribedinthefirstthree
phases reverse themselves and return to their normal state. Men experience a refractory period in which they
cannot maintain an erection or ejaculate for a period of time ranging from minutes to hours.
Gametogenesis (Spermatogenesis and Oogenesis)
Gametogenesis,theproductionofspermandeggs,takesplacethroughtheprocessofmeiosis.Duringmeiosis,
twocelldivisionsseparatethepairedchromosomesinthenucleusandthenseparatethechromatidsthatwere
made during an earlier stage of the cell’s life cycle. Meiosis produces haploid cells with half of each pair of
chromosomes normally found in diploid cells. The production of sperm is called spermatogenesis and the
production of eggs is calledoogenesis.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1358
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1347
Spermatogenesis
Figure 43.12During spermatogenesis, four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte.
Spermatogenesis, illustrated in Figure 43.12, occurs in the wall of the seminiferous tubules (Figure 43.8),
with stem cells at the periphery of the tube and the spermatozoa at the lumen of the tube. Immediately under
the capsule of the tubule are diploid, undifferentiated cells. These stem cells, called spermatogonia (singular:
spermatagonium),gothroughmitosiswithoneoffspringgoingontodifferentiateintoaspermcellandtheother
giving rise to the next generation of sperm.
Meiosis starts with a cell called a primary spermatocyte. At the end of the first meiotic division, a haploid cell
is produced called a secondary spermatocyte. This cell is haploid and must go through another meiotic cell
division. The cell produced at the end of meiosis is called a spermatid and when it reaches the lumen of the
tubule and grows a flagellum, it is called a sperm cell. Four sperm result from each primary spermatocyte that
goes through meiosis.
Stemcellsaredepositedduringgestationandarepresentatbirththroughthebeginningofadolescence,butin
aninactivestate.Duringadolescence,gonadotropichormonesfromtheanteriorpituitarycausetheactivationof
these cells and the production of viable sperm. This continues into old age.
Visitthis site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/spermatogenesis)to see the process of spermatogenesis.
PAGE: 1359
1348 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Oogenesis
Oogenesis,illustratedinFigure43.13,occursintheoutermostlayersoftheovaries.Aswithspermproduction,
oogenesis starts with a germ cell, called an oogonium (plural: oogonia), but this cell undergoes mitosis to
increase in number, eventually resulting in up to about one to two million cells in the embryo.
Figure 43.13The process of oogenesis occurs in the ovary’s outermost layer.
Thecellstartingmeiosisiscalledaprimaryoocyte,asshowninFigure43.13.Thiscellwillstartthefirstmeiotic
division and be arrested in its progress in the first prophase stage. At the time of birth, all future eggs are in
theprophasestage.Atadolescence,anteriorpituitaryhormonescausethedevelopmentofanumberoffollicles
in an ovary. This results in the primary oocyte finishing the first meiotic division. The cell divides unequally,
withmostofthecellularmaterialandorganellesgoingtoonecell,calledasecondaryoocyte,andonlyoneset
of chromosomes and a small amount of cytoplasm going to the other cell. This second cell is called a polar
bodyandusuallydies.Asecondarymeioticarrestoccurs,thistimeatthemetaphaseIIstage.Atovulation,this
secondary oocyte will be released and travel toward the uterus through the oviduct. If the secondary oocyte is
fertilized,thecellcontinuesthroughthemeiosisII,producingasecondpolarbodyandafertilizedeggcontaining
all 46 chromosomes of a human being, half of them coming from the sperm.
Egg production begins before birth, is arrested during meiosis until puberty, and then individual cells continue
throughateachmenstrualcycle.Oneeggisproducedfromeachmeioticprocess,withtheextrachromosomes
and chromatids going into polar bodies that degenerate and are reabsorbed by the body.
43.4 | Hormonal Control of Human Reproduction
By the end of this chapter, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the roles of male and female reproductive hormones
• Discuss the interplay of the ovarian and menstrual cycles
• Describe the process of menopause
The human male and female reproductive cycles are controlled by the interaction of hormones from the
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary with hormones from reproductive tissues and organs. In both sexes, the
hypothalamus monitors and causes the release of hormones from the pituitary gland. When the reproductive
hormone is required, the hypothalamus sends a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) to the anterior
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1360
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1349
pituitary. This causes the release of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from
theanteriorpituitaryintotheblood.Notethatthebodymustreachpubertyinorderfortheadrenalstoreleasethe
hormonesthatmustbepresentforGnRHtobeproduced.AlthoughFSHandLHarenamedaftertheirfunctions
in female reproduction, they are produced in both sexes and play important roles in controlling reproduction.
Other hormones have specific functions in the male and female reproductive systems.
Male Hormones
At the onset of puberty, the hypothalamus causes the release of FSH and LH into the male system for the first
time.FSHentersthetestesandstimulatestheSertolicellstobeginfacilitatingspermatogenesisusingnegative
feedback,asillustratedinFigure43.14.LHalsoentersthetestesandstimulatestheinterstitialcellsofLeydig
to make and release testosterone into the testes and the blood.
Testosterone,thehormoneresponsibleforthesecondarysexualcharacteristicsthatdevelopinthemaleduring
adolescence, stimulates spermatogenesis. These secondary sex characteristics include a deepening of the
voice, the growth of facial, axillary, and pubic hair, and the beginnings of the sex drive.
Figure 43.14Hormones control sperm production in a negative feedback system.
Anegativefeedbacksystemoccursinthemalewithrisinglevelsoftestosteroneactingonthehypothalamusand
anterior pituitary to inhibit the release of GnRH, FSH, and LH. The Sertoli cells produce the hormone inhibin,
whichisreleasedintothebloodwhenthespermcountistoohigh.ThisinhibitsthereleaseofGnRHandFSH,
whichwillcausespermatogenesistoslowdown.Ifthespermcountreaches20million/ml,theSertolicellscease
the release of inhibin, and the sperm count increases.
Female Hormones
The control of reproduction in females is more complex. As with the male, the anterior pituitary hormones
cause the release of the hormones FSH and LH. In addition, estrogens and progesterone are released from
the developing follicles. Estrogen isthe reproductive hormoneinfemales that assists inendometrial regrowth,
ovulation, and calcium absorption; it is also responsible for the secondary sexual characteristics of females.
These include breast development, flaring of the hips, and a shorter period necessary for bone maturation.
Progesteroneassists in endometrial regrowth and inhibition of FSH and LH release.
In females, FSH stimulates development of egg cells, called ova, which develop in structures called follicles.
Follicle cells produce the hormone inhibin, which inhibits FSH production. LH also plays a role in the
development of ova, induction of ovulation, and stimulation of estradiol and progesterone production by the
ovaries. Estradiol and progesterone are steroid hormones that prepare the body for pregnancy. Estradiol
producessecondarysexcharacteristicsinfemales,whilebothestradiolandprogesteroneregulatethemenstrual
cycle.
The Ovarian Cycle and the Menstrual Cycle
The ovarian cycle governs the preparation of endocrine tissues and release of eggs, while the menstrual
cycle governs the preparation and maintenance of the uterine lining. These cycles occur concurrently and are
coordinated over a 22–32 day cycle, with an average length of 28 days.
ThefirsthalfoftheovariancycleisthefollicularphaseshowninFigure43.15.SlowlyrisinglevelsofFSHand
PAGE: 1361
1350 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
LH cause the growth of follicles on the surface of the ovary. This process prepares the egg for ovulation. As
the follicles grow, they begin releasing estrogens and a low level of progesterone. Progesterone maintains the
endometriumtohelpensurepregnancy.Thetripthroughthefallopiantubetakesaboutsevendays.Atthisstage
ofdevelopment,calledthemorula,thereare30-60cells.Ifpregnancyimplantationdoesnotoccur,theliningis
sloughed off. After about five days, estrogen levels rise and the menstrual cycle enters the proliferative phase.
The endometrium begins to regrow, replacing the blood vessels and glands that deteriorated during the end of
the last cycle.
Figure43.15Theovarianandmenstrualcyclesoffemalereproductionareregulatedbyhormonesproducedby
the hypothalamus, pituitary, and ovaries.
Which of the following statements about hormone regulation of the female reproductive cycle is false?
a. LHandFSHareproducedinthepituitary,andestradiolandprogesteroneareproducedintheovaries.
b. Estradiol and progesterone secreted from the corpus luteum cause the endometrium to thicken.
c. Both progesterone and estradiol are produced by the follicles.
d. Secretion of GnRH by the hypothalamus is inhibited by low levels of estradiol but stimulated by high
levels of estradiol.
Justpriortothemiddleofthecycle(approximatelyday14),thehighlevelofestrogencausesFSHandespecially
LHtoriserapidly,thenfall.ThespikeinLHcausesovulation:themostmaturefollicle,likethatshowninFigure
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1362
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1351
43.16, ruptures and releases its egg. The follicles that did not rupture degenerate and their eggs are lost. The
level of estrogen decreases when the extra follicles degenerate.
Figure 43.16This mature egg follicle may rupture and release an egg. (credit: scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
Followingovulation,theovariancycleentersitslutealphase,illustratedinFigure43.15andthemenstrualcycle
enters its secretory phase, both of which run from about day 15 to 28. The luteal and secretory phases refer
to changes in the ruptured follicle. The cells in the follicle undergo physical changes and produce a structure
called a corpus luteum. The corpus luteum produces estrogen and progesterone. The progesterone facilitates
theregrowthoftheuterineliningandinhibitsthereleaseoffurtherFSHandLH.Theuterusisbeingpreparedto
acceptafertilizedegg,shoulditoccurduringthiscycle.TheinhibitionofFSHandLHpreventsanyfurthereggs
andfolliclesfromdeveloping,whiletheprogesteroneiselevated.Thelevelofestrogenproducedbythecorpus
luteum increases to a steady level for the next few days.
If no fertilized egg is implanted into the uterus, the corpus luteum degenerates and the levels of estrogen and
progesterone decrease. The endometrium begins to degenerate as the progesterone levels drop, initiating the
nextmenstrualcycle.ThedecreaseinprogesteronealsoallowsthehypothalamustosendGnRHtotheanterior
pituitary, releasing FSH and LH and starting the cycles again. Figure 43.17 visually compares the ovarian and
uterine cycles as well as the commensurate hormone levels.
PAGE: 1363
1352 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Figure43.17Risingandfallinghormonelevelsresultinprogressionoftheovarianandmenstrualcycles.(credit:
modification of work by Mikael Häggström)
Which of the following statements about the menstrual cycle is false?
a. Progesterone levels rise during the luteal phase of the ovarian cycle and the secretory phase of the
uterine cycle.
b. Menstruation occurs just after LH and FSH levels peak.
c. Menstruation occurs after progesterone levels drop.
d. Estrogen levels rise before ovulation, while progesterone levels rise after.
Menopause
As women approach their mid-40s to mid-50s, their ovaries begin to lose their sensitivity to FSH and LH.
Menstrualperiodsbecomelessfrequentandfinallycease;thisismenopause.Therearestilleggsandpotential
follicles on the ovaries, but without the stimulation of FSH and LH, they will not produce a viable egg to be
released. The outcome of this is the inability to have children.
Thesideeffectsofmenopauseincludehotflashes,heavysweating(especiallyatnight),headaches,somehair
loss, muscle pain, vaginal dryness, insomnia, depression, weight gain, and mood swings. Estrogen is involved
in calcium metabolism and, without it, blood levels of calcium decrease. To replenish the blood, calcium is lost
frombonewhichmaydecreasethebonedensityandleadtoosteoporosis.Supplementationofestrogeninthe
form of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) can prevent bone loss, but the therapy can have negative side
effects. While HRT is thought to give some protection from colon cancer, osteoporosis, heart disease, macular
degeneration,andpossiblydepression,itsnegativesideeffectsincludeincreasedriskof:strokeorheartattack,
blood clots, breast cancer, ovarian cancer, endometrial cancer, gall bladder disease, and possibly dementia.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1364
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1353
Reproductive Endocrinologist
A reproductive endocrinologist is a physician who treats a variety of hormonal disorders related to
reproduction and infertility in both men and women. The disorders include menstrual problems, infertility,
pregnancy loss, sexual dysfunction, and menopause. Doctors may use fertility drugs, surgery, or assisted
reproductive techniques (ART) in their therapy. ART involves the use of procedures to manipulate the egg
or sperm to facilitate reproduction, such asin vitrofertilization.
Reproductiveendocrinologistsundergoextensivemedicaltraining,firstinafour-yearresidencyinobstetrics
and gynecology, then in a three-year fellowship in reproductive endocrinology. To be board certified in this
area, the physician must pass written and oral exams in both areas.
43.5 | Human Pregnancy and Birth
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain fetal development during the three trimesters of gestation
• Describe labor and delivery
• Compare the efficacy and duration of various types of contraception
• Discuss causes of infertility and the therapeutic options available
Pregnancybeginswiththefertilizationofaneggandcontinuesthroughtothebirthoftheindividual.Thelength
of time of gestation varies among animals, but is very similar among the great apes: human gestation is 266
days,whilechimpanzeegestationis237days,agorilla’sis257days,andorangutangestationis260dayslong.
Thefoxhasa57-daygestation.Dogsandcatshavesimilargestationsaveraging60days.Thelongestgestation
foralandmammalisanAfricanelephantat640days.Thelongestgestationsamongmarinemammalsarethe
beluga and sperm whales at 460 days.
Human Gestation
Twenty-four hours before fertilization, the egg has finished meiosis and becomes a mature oocyte. When
fertilized (at conception) the egg becomes known as a zygote. The zygote travels through the oviduct to the
uterus (Figure 43.18). The developing embryo must implant into the wall of the uterus within seven days, or
it will deteriorate and die. The outer layers of the zygote (blastocyst) grow into the endometrium by digesting
the endometrial cells, and wound healing of the endometrium closes up the blastocyst into the tissue. Another
layer of the blastocyst, the chorion, begins releasing a hormone called human beta chorionic gonadotropin
(β-HCG) which makes its way to the corpus luteum and keeps that structure active. This ensures adequate
levelsofprogesteronethatwillmaintaintheendometriumoftheuterusforthesupportofthedevelopingembryo.
Pregnancy tests determine the level ofβ-HCG in urine or serum. If the hormone is present, the test is positive.
PAGE: 1365
1354 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Figure43.18Inhumans,fertilizationoccurssoonaftertheoocyteleavestheovary.Implantationoccurseightornine
days later.(credit: Ed Uthman)
The gestation period is divided into three equal periods or trimesters. During the first two to four weeks of
the first trimester, nutrition and waste are handled by the endometrial lining through diffusion. As the trimester
progresses,theouterlayeroftheembryobeginstomergewiththeendometrium,andtheplacentaforms.This
organtakesoverthenutrientandwasterequirementsoftheembryoandfetus,withthemother’sbloodpassing
nutrientstotheplacentaandremovingwastefromit.Chemicalsfromthefetus,suchasbilirubin,areprocessed
by the mother’s liver for elimination. Some of the mother’s immunoglobulins will pass through the placenta,
providing passive immunity against some potential infections.
Internal organs and body structures begin to develop during the first trimester. By five weeks, limb buds, eyes,
the heart, and liver have been basically formed. By eight weeks, the term fetus applies, and the body is
essentially formed, as shown in Figure 43.19. The individual is about five centimeters (two inches) in length
and many of the organs, such as the lungs and liver, are not yet functioning. Exposure to any toxins is
especiallydangerousduringthefirsttrimester,asallofthebody’sorgansandstructuresaregoingthroughinitial
development. Anything that affects that development can have a severe effect on the fetus’ survival.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1366
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1355
Figure 43.19Fetal development is shown at nine weeks gestation. (credit: Ed Uthman)
Duringthesecondtrimester,thefetusgrowstoabout30cm(12inches),asshowninFigure43.20.Itbecomes
active and the mother usually feels the first movements. All organs and structures continue to develop. The
placenta has taken over the functions of nutrition and waste and the production of estrogen and progesterone
fromthecorpusluteum,whichhasdegenerated.Theplacentawillcontinuefunctioningupthroughthedelivery
of the baby.
Figure 43.20 This fetus is just entering the second trimester, when the placenta takes over more of the functions
performed as the baby develops. (credit: National Museum of Health and Medicine)
Duringthethirdtrimester,thefetusgrowsto3to4kg(6½-8½lbs.)andabout50cm(19-20inches)long,as
illustratedinFigure43.21.Thisistheperiodofthemostrapidgrowthduringthepregnancy.Organdevelopment
PAGE: 1367
1356 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
continues to birth (and some systems, such as the nervous system and liver, continue to develop after birth).
Themotherwillbeathermostuncomfortableduringthistrimester.Shemayurinatefrequentlyduetopressure
onthebladderfromthefetus.Theremayalsobeintestinalblockageandcirculatoryproblems,especiallyinher
legs. Clots may form in her legs due to pressure from the fetus on returning veins as they enter the abdominal
cavity.
Figure 43.21There is rapid fetal growth during the third trimester. (credit: modification of work by Gray’s Anatomy)
Visitthis site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/embryo_fetus)to see the stages of human fetal development.
Labor and Birth
Laboristhephysicaleffortsofexpulsionofthefetusandtheplacentafromtheuterusduringbirth(parturition).
Toward the end of the third trimester, estrogen causes receptors on the uterine wall to develop and bind the
hormoneoxytocin.Atthistime,thebabyreorients,facingforwardanddownwiththebackorcrownofthehead
engaging the cervix (uterine opening). This causes the cervix to stretch and nerve impulses are sent to the
hypothalamus, which signals for the release of oxytocin from the posterior pituitary. The oxytocin causes the
smooth muscle in the uterine wall to contract. At the same time, the placenta releases prostaglandins into the
uterus, increasing the contractions. A positive feedback relay occurs between the uterus, hypothalamus, and
theposteriorpituitarytoassureanadequatesupplyofoxytocin.Asmoresmoothmusclecellsarerecruited,the
contractions increase in intensity and force.
There are three stages to labor. During stage one, the cervix thins and dilates. This is necessary for the baby
andplacentatobeexpelledduringbirth.Thecervixwilleventuallydilatetoabout10cm.Duringstagetwo,the
babyisexpelledfromtheuterus.Theuteruscontractsandthemotherpushesasshecompressesherabdominal
muscles to aid the delivery. The last stage is the passage of the placenta after the baby has been born and
the organ has completely disengaged from the uterine wall. If labor should stop before stage two is reached,
synthetic oxytocin, known as Pitocin, can be administered to restart and maintain labor.
An alternative to labor and delivery isthe surgical delivery of the baby through aprocedure called aCaesarian
section.Thisismajorabdominalsurgeryandcanleadtopost-surgicalcomplicationsforthemother,butinsome
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1368
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1357
cases it may be the only way to safely deliver the baby.
The mother’s mammary glands go through changes during the third trimester to prepare for lactation and
breastfeeding. When the baby begins suckling at the breast, signals are sent to the hypothalamus causing the
releaseofprolactinfromtheanteriorpituitary.Prolactincausesthemammaryglandstoproducemilk.Oxytocin
isalsoreleased,promotingthereleaseofthemilk.Themilkcontainsnutrientsforthebaby’sdevelopmentand
growth as well as immunoglobulins to protect the child from bacterial and viral infections.
Contraception and Birth Control
The prevention of a pregnancy comes under the terms contraception or birth control. Strictly speaking,
contraception refers to preventing the sperm and egg from joining. Both terms are, however, frequently used
interchangeably.
Contraceptive Methods
Failure Rate in Typical Use
Method Examples
Over 12 Months
male condom, female condom, sponge, cervical cap,
Barrier 15 to 24%
diaphragm, spermicides
Hormonal oral, patch, vaginal ring 8%
injection 3%
implant less than 1%
Other natural family planning 12 to 25%
withdrawal 27%
sterilization less than 1%
Table 43.3
Table43.3listscommonmethodsofcontraception.Thefailurerateslistedarenottheidealratesthatcouldbe
realized,butthetypicalratesthatoccur.Afailurerateisthenumberofpregnanciesresultingfromthemethod’s
use over a twelve-month period. Barrier methods, such as condoms, cervical caps, and diaphragms, block
spermfromenteringtheuterus,preventingfertilization.Spermicidesarechemicalsthatareplacedinthevagina
thatkillsperm.Sponges,whicharesaturatedwithspermicides,areplacedinthevaginaatthecervicalopening.
Combinations of spermicidal chemicals and barrier methods achieve lower failure rates than do the methods
when used separately.
Nearlyaquarterofthecouplesusingbarriermethods,naturalfamilyplanning,orwithdrawalcanexpectafailure
ofthemethod.Naturalfamilyplanningisbasedonthemonitoringofthemenstrualcycleandhavingintercourse
only during times when the egg is not available. A woman’s body temperature may rise a degree Celsius at
ovulation and the cervical mucus may increase in volume and become more pliable. These changes give a
general indication of when intercourse is more or less likely to result in fertilization. Withdrawal involves the
removalofthepenisfromthevaginaduringintercourse,beforeejaculationoccurs.Thisisariskymethodwitha
high failure rate due to the possible presence of sperm in the bulbourethral gland’s secretion, which may enter
the vagina prior to removing the penis.
Hormonal methods use synthetic progesterone (sometimes in combination with estrogen), to inhibit the
hypothalamus from releasing FSH or LH, and thus prevent an egg from being available for fertilization. The
method of administering the hormone affects failure rate. The most reliable method, with a failure rate of less
than 1 percent, is the implantation of the hormone under the skin. The same rate can be achieved through the
sterilization procedures of vasectomy in the man or of tubal ligation in the woman, or by using an intrauterine
device (IUD). IUDs are inserted into the uterus and establish an inflammatory condition that prevents fertilized
eggs from implanting into the uterine wall.
Compliancewiththecontraceptivemethodisastrongcontributortothesuccessorfailurerateofanyparticular
method. The only method that is completely effective at preventing conception is abstinence. The choice
of contraceptive method depends on the goals of the woman or couple. Tubal ligation and vasectomy are
PAGE: 1369
1358 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
considered permanent prevention, while other methods are reversible and provide short-term contraception.
Termination of an existing pregnancy can be spontaneous or voluntary. Spontaneous termination is a
miscarriageandusuallyoccursveryearlyinthepregnancy,usuallywithinthefirstfewweeks.Thisoccurswhen
thefetuscannotdevelopproperlyandthegestationisnaturallyterminated.Voluntaryterminationofapregnancy
is an abortion. Laws regulating abortion vary between states and tend to view fetal viability as the criteria for
allowing or preventing the procedure.
Infertility
Infertility is the inability to conceive a child or carry a child to birth. About 75 percent of causes of infertility
canbeidentified; theseincludediseases,suchassexuallytransmitted diseasesthatcancausescarringofthe
reproductivetubesineithermenorwomen,ordevelopmentalproblemsfrequentlyrelatedtoabnormalhormone
levels in one of the individuals. Inadequate nutrition, especially starvation, can delay menstruation. Stress can
alsoleadtoinfertility.Short-termstresscanaffecthormonelevels,whilelong-termstresscandelaypubertyand
causelessfrequentmenstrualcycles.Otherfactorsthataffectfertilityincludetoxins(suchascadmium),tobacco
smoking, marijuana use, gonadal injuries, and aging.
If infertility is identified, several assisted reproductive technologies (ART) are available to aid conception. A
common type of ART is in vitro fertilization (IVF) where an egg and sperm are combined outside the body and
thenplacedintheuterus.Eggsareobtainedfromthewomanafterextensivehormonaltreatmentsthatprepare
matureeggsforfertilizationandpreparetheuterusforimplantationofthefertilizedegg.Spermareobtainedfrom
themanandtheyarecombinedwiththeeggsandsupportedthroughseveralcelldivisionstoensureviabilityof
the zygotes. When the embryos have reached the eight-cell stage, one or more is implanted into the woman’s
uterus. If fertilization is not accomplished by simple IVF, a procedure that injects the sperm into an egg can
be used. This is called intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) and is shown in Figure 43.22. IVF procedures
produce asurplus of fertilized eggs and embryos that can be frozen and stored for future use. The procedures
can also result in multiple births.
Figure 43.22 A sperm is inserted into an egg for fertilization during intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI). (credit:
scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
43.6 | Fertilization and Early Embryonic Development
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss how fertilization occurs
• Explain how the embryo forms from the zygote
• Discuss the role of cleavage and gastrulation in animal development
Theprocessinwhichanorganismdevelopsfromasingle-celledzygotetoamulti-cellularorganismiscomplex
and well-regulated. The early stages of embryonic development are also crucial for ensuring the fitness of the
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1370
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1359
organism.
Fertilization
Fertilization, pictured in Figure 43.23a is the process in which gametes (an egg and sperm) fuse to form a
zygote. The egg and sperm each contain one set of chromosomes. To ensure that the offspring has only one
completediploidsetofchromosomes,onlyonespermmustfusewithoneegg.Inmammals,theeggisprotected
by a layer of extracellular matrix consisting mainly of glycoproteins called the zona pellucida. When a sperm
binds to the zona pellucida, a series of biochemical events, called the acrosomal reactions, take place. In
placental mammals, the acrosome contains digestive enzymes that initiate the degradation of the glycoprotein
matrixprotectingtheeggandallowingthespermplasmamembranetofusewiththeeggplasmamembrane,as
illustrated in Figure 43.23b. The fusion of these two membranes creates an opening through which the sperm
nucleus is transferred into the ovum. The nuclear membranes of the egg and sperm break down and the two
haploid genomes condense to form a diploid genome.
Figure 43.23 (a) Fertilization is the process in which sperm and egg fuse to form a zygote. (b) Acrosomal reactions
helpthespermdegradetheglycoproteinmatrixprotectingtheeggandallowthespermtotransferitsnucleus.(credit:
(b) modification of work by Mariana Ruiz Villareal; scale-bar data from Matt Russell)
To ensure that no more than one sperm fertilizes the egg, once the acrosomal reactions take place at one
location of the egg membrane, the egg releases proteins in other locations to prevent other sperm from fusing
with the egg. If this mechanism fails, multiple sperm can fuse with the egg, resulting in polyspermy. The
resulting embryo is not genetically viable and dies within a few days.
Cleavage and Blastula Stage
The development of multi-cellular organisms begins from a single-celled zygote, which undergoes rapid cell
division to form the blastula. The rapid, multiple rounds of cell division are termed cleavage. Cleavage is
illustrated in (Figure 43.24a). After the cleavage has produced over 100 cells, the embryo is called a blastula.
Theblastulaisusuallyasphericallayerofcells(theblastoderm)surroundingafluid-filledoryolk-filledcavity(the
blastocoel). Mammals at this stage form a structure called the blastocyst, characterized by an inner cell mass
thatisdistinctfromthesurroundingblastula,showninFigure43.24b.Duringcleavage,thecellsdividewithout
an increase in mass; that is, one large single-celled zygote divides into multiple smaller cells. Each cell within
the blastula is called a blastomere.
Figure43.24(a)Duringcleavage,thezygoterapidlydividesintomultiplecellswithoutincreasinginsize.(b)Thecells
rearrange themselves to form a hollow ball with a fluid-filled or yolk-filled cavity called the blastula.
Cleavage can take place in two ways: holoblastic (total) cleavage or meroblastic (partial) cleavage. The
type of cleavage depends on the amount of yolk in the eggs. In placental mammals (including humans) where
nourishment is provided by the mother’s body, the eggs have a very small amount of yolk and undergo
PAGE: 1371
1360 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
holoblastic cleavage. Other species, such as birds, with a lot of yolk in the egg to nourish the embryo during
development, undergo meroblastic cleavage.
Inmammals,theblastulaformstheblastocyst inthenextstageofdevelopment.Herethecellsintheblastula
arrange themselves in two layers: the inner cell mass, and an outer layer called the trophoblast. The inner
cell mass is also known as the embryoblast and this mass of cells will go on to form the embryo. At this
stage of development, illustrated in Figure 43.25 the inner cell mass consists of embryonic stem cells that will
differentiateintothedifferentcelltypesneededbytheorganism.Thetrophoblastwillcontributetotheplacenta
and nourish the embryo.
Figure 43.25 The rearrangement of the cells in the mammalian blastula to two layers—the inner cell mass and the
trophoblast—results in the formation of the blastocyst.
VisittheVirtualHumanEmbryoproject(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/human_embryo)attheEndowment
for Human Development site to step through an interactive that shows the stages of embryo development,
including micrographs and rotating 3-D images.
Gastrulation
The typical blastula is a ball of cells. The next stage in embryonic development is the formation of the body
plan.Thecellsintheblastularearrangethemselvesspatiallytoformthreelayersofcells.Thisprocessiscalled
gastrulation. During gastrulation, the blastula folds upon itself to form the three layers of cells. Each of these
layers is called a germ layer and each germ layer differentiates into different organ systems.
The three germ layers, shown in Figure 43.26, are the endoderm, the ectoderm, and the mesoderm. The
ectodermgivesrisetothenervoussystemandtheepidermis.Themesodermgivesrisetothemusclecellsand
connectivetissueinthebody.Theendodermgivesrisetocolumnarcellsfoundinthedigestivesystemandmany
internal organs.
Figure43.26Thethreegermlayersgiverisetodifferentcelltypesintheanimalbody.(credit:modificationofworkby
NIH, NCBI)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1372
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1361
Are Designer Babies in Our Future?
Figure 43.27 This logo from the Second International Eugenics Conference in New York City in September of
1921 shows how eugenics attempted to merge several fields of study with the goal of producing a genetically
superior human race.
Ifyoucouldpreventyourchildfromgettingadevastatinggeneticdisease,wouldyoudoit?Wouldyouselect
the sex of your child or select for their attractiveness, strength, or intelligence? How far would you go to
maximizethepossibilityofresistancetodisease?Thegeneticengineeringofahumanchild,theproduction
of"designerbabies"withdesirablephenotypiccharacteristics,wasonceatopicrestrictedtosciencefiction.
This is the case no longer: science fiction is now overlapping into science fact. Many phenotypic choices
foroffspringarealreadyavailable,withmanymorelikelytobepossibleinthenottoodistantfuture.Which
traits shouldbeselected andhowtheyshouldbeselected aretopics ofmuchdebate within theworldwide
medical community. The ethical and moral line is not always clear or agreed upon, and some fear that
modern reproductive technologies could lead to a new form of eugenics.
Eugenics is the use of information and technology from a variety of sources to improve the genetic
makeupofthehumanrace.Thegoalofcreatinggeneticallysuperiorhumanswasquiteprevalent(although
th
controversial)inseveralcountriesduringtheearly20 century,butfellintodisreputewhenNaziGermany
developed an extensive eugenics program in the 1930s and 40s. As part of their program, the Nazis
forciblysterilizedhundredsofthousandsoftheso-called"unfit"andkilledtensofthousandsofinstitutionally
disabledpeopleaspartofasystematicprogramtodevelopageneticallysuperiorraceofGermansknown
as Aryans. Ever since, eugenic ideas have not been as publicly expressed, but there are still those who
promote them.
Effortshavebeenmadeinthepasttocontroltraitsinhumanchildrenusingdonatedspermfrommenwith
desired traits. In fact, eugenicist Robert Klark Graham established a sperm bank in 1980 that included
samples exclusively from donors with high IQs. The "genius" sperm bank failed to capture the public's
imagination and the operation closed in 1999.
Inmorerecenttimes,theprocedureknownasprenatalgeneticdiagnosis(PGD)hasbeendeveloped.PGD
involvesthescreeningofhumanembryosaspartoftheprocessofinvitrofertilization,duringwhichembryos
areconceivedandgrownoutsidethemother'sbodyforsomeperiodoftimebeforetheyareimplanted.The
term PGD usually refers to both the diagnosis, selection, and the implantation of the selected embryos.
In the least controversial use of PGD, embryos are tested for the presence of alleles which cause genetic
diseasessuchassicklecelldisease,musculardystrophy,andhemophilia,inwhichasingledisease-causing
alleleorpairofalleleshasbeenidentified.Byexcludingembryoscontainingtheseallelesfromimplantation
into the mother, the disease is prevented, and the unused embryos are either donated to science or
PAGE: 1373
1362 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
discarded.Therearerelativelyfewintheworldwidemedicalcommunitythatquestiontheethicsofthistype
of procedure, which allows individuals scared to have children because of the alleles they carry to do so
successfully.Themajorlimitationtothisprocedureisitsexpense.Notusuallycoveredbymedicalinsurance
and thus out of reach financially for most couples, only a very small percentage of all live births use such
complicated methodologies. Yet, even in cases like these where the ethical issues may seem to be clear-
cut, not everyone agrees with the morality of these types of procedures. For example, to those who take
thepositionthathumanlifebeginsatconception,thediscardingofunusedembryos,anecessaryresultof
PGD, is unacceptable under any circumstances.
A murkier ethical situation is found in the selection of a child's sex, which is easily performed by PGD.
Currently,countriessuchasGreatBritainhavebannedtheselectionofachild'ssexforreasonsotherthan
preventing sex-linked diseases. Other countries allow the procedure for "family balancing", based on the
desireofsomeparentstohaveatleastonechildofeachsex.Stillothers,includingtheUnitedStates,have
takenascattershotapproachtoregulatingthesepractices,essentiallyleavingittotheindividualpracticing
physician to decide which practices are acceptable and which are not.
Evenmurkierarerareinstancesofdisabledparents,suchasthosewithdeafnessordwarfism,whoselect
embryosviaPGDtoensurethattheysharetheirdisability.Theseparentsusuallycitemanypositiveaspects
oftheirdisabilitiesandassociatedcultureasreasonsfortheirchoice,whichtheyseeastheirmoralright.To
others,topurposelycauseadisabilityinachildviolatesthebasicmedicalprincipleofPrimumnonnocere,
"first, do no harm." This procedure, although not illegal in most countries, demonstrates the complexity of
ethical issues associated with choosing genetic traits in offspring.
Where could this process lead? Will this technology become more affordable and how should it be used?
Withtheabilityoftechnologytoprogressrapidlyandunpredictably,alackofdefinitiveguidelinesfortheuse
ofreproductive technologies before they arisemight makeitdifficult forlegislators tokeeppaceoncethey
areinfactrealized,assumingtheprocessneedsanygovernmentregulationatall.Otherbioethicistsargue
thatweshouldonlydealwithtechnologiesthatexistnow,andnotinsomeuncertainfuture.Theyarguethat
these types of procedures will always be expensive and rare, so the fears of eugenics and "master" races
are unfounded and overstated. The debate continues.
43.7 | Organogenesis and Vertebrate Formation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the process of organogenesis
• Identify the anatomical axes formed in vertebrates
Gastrulation leads to the formation of the three germ layers that give rise, during further development, to the
different organs in the animal body. This process is called organogenesis. Organogenesis is characterized by
rapid and precise movements of the cells within the embryo.
Organogenesis
Organs form from the germ layers through the process of differentiation. During differentiation, the embryonic
stemcellsexpressspecificsetsofgeneswhichwilldeterminetheirultimatecelltype.Forexample,somecellsin
theectodermwillexpressthegenesspecifictoskincells.Asaresult,thesecellswilldifferentiateintoepidermal
cells. The process of differentiation is regulated by cellular signaling cascades.
Scientistsstudyorganogenesisextensivelyinthelabinfruitflies(Drosophila)andthenematodeCaenorhabditis
elegans. Drosophila have segments along their bodies, and the patterning associated with the segment
formationhasallowedscientiststostudywhichgenesplayimportantrolesinorganogenesisalongthelengthof
theembryoatdifferenttimepoints.ThenematodeC.eleganshasroughly1000somaticcellsandscientistshave
studiedthefateofeachofthesecellsduringtheirdevelopmentinthenematodelifecycle.Thereislittlevariation
in patterns of cell lineage between individuals, unlike in mammals where cell development from the embryo is
dependent on cellular cues.
In vertebrates, one of the primary steps during organogenesis is the formation of the neural system. The
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1374
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1363
ectoderm forms epithelial cells and tissues, and neuronal tissues. During the formation of the neural system,
special signaling molecules called growth factors signal some cells at the edge of the ectoderm to become
epidermis cells. The remaining cells in the center form the neural plate. If the signaling by growth factors were
disrupted, then the entire ectoderm would differentiate into neural tissue.
Theneuralplateundergoesaseriesofcellmovementswhereitrollsupandformsatubecalledtheneuraltube,
as illustrated in Figure 43.28. In further development, the neural tube will give rise to the brain and the spinal
cord.
Figure 43.28 The central region of the ectoderm forms the neural tube, which gives rise to the brain and the spinal
cord.
The mesoderm that lies on either side of the vertebrate neural tube will develop into the various connective
tissuesoftheanimalbody.Aspatialpatternofgeneexpressionreorganizesthemesodermintogroupsofcells
calledsomiteswithspacesbetweenthem.Thesomites,illustratedinFigure43.29willfurtherdevelopintothe
ribs,lungs,andsegmental(spine)muscle.Themesodermalsoformsastructurecalledthenotochord,whichis
rod-shaped and forms the central axis of the animal body.
PAGE: 1375
1364 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
Figure 43.29 In this five-week old human embryo, somites are segments along the length of the body. (credit:
modification of work by Ed Uthman)
Vertebrate Axis Formation
Even as the germ layers form, the ball of cells still retains its spherical shape. However, animal bodies have
lateral-medial(left-right),dorsal-ventral(back-belly),andanterior-posterior(head-feet)axes,illustratedinFigure
43.30.
Figure 43.30Animal bodies have three axes for symmetry. (credit: modification of work by NOAA)
How are these established? In one of the most seminal experiments ever to be carried out in developmental
biology, Spemann and Mangold took dorsal cells from one embryo and transplanted them into the belly region
of another embryo. They found that the transplanted embryo now had two notochords: one at the dorsal site
fromtheoriginalcellsandanotheratthetransplantedsite.Thissuggestedthatthedorsalcellsweregenetically
programmedtoformthenotochordanddefinetheaxis.Sincethen,researchershaveidentifiedmanygenesthat
areresponsibleforaxisformation.Mutationsinthesegenesleadstothelossofsymmetryrequiredfororganism
development.
Animalbodieshaveexternallyvisiblesymmetry.However,theinternalorgansarenotsymmetric.Forexample,
the heart is on the left side and the liver on the right. The formation of the central left-right axis is an important
processduringdevelopment.Thisinternalasymmetryisestablishedveryearlyduringdevelopmentandinvolves
many genes. Research is still ongoing to fully understand the developmental implications of these genes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1376
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1365
KEY TERMS
acrosomal reaction series of biochemical reactions that the sperm uses to break through the zona pellucida
asexual reproduction form of reproduction that produces offspring that are genetically identical to the parent
blastocyst structure formed when cells in the mammalian blastula separate into an inner and outer layer
budding formofasexualreproductionthatresultsfromtheoutgrowthofapartofacellleadingtoaseparation
from the original animal into two individuals
bulbourethral gland secretion that cleanses the urethra prior to ejaculation
clitoris sensory structure in females; stimulated during sexual arousal
cloaca common body opening for the digestive, excretory, and reproductive systems found in non-mammals,
such as birds
contraception (also, birth control) various means used to prevent pregnancy
estrogen reproductive hormone in females that assists in endometrial regrowth, ovulation, and calcium
absorption
external fertilization fertilization of egg by sperm outside animal body, often during spawning
fission (also,binaryfission)methodbywhichmulticellularorganismsincreaseinsizeorasexualreproductionin
which a unicellular organism splits into two separate organisms by mitosis
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) reproductive hormone that causes sperm production in men and follicle
development in women
fragmentation cuttingorfragmentingoftheoriginalanimalintopartsandthegrowthofaseparateanimalfrom
each part
gastrulation process in which the blastula folds over itself to form the three germ layers
gestation length of time for fetal development to birth
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) hormone from the hypothalamus that causes the release of FSH
and LH from the anterior pituitary
hermaphroditism state of having both male and female reproductive parts within the same individual
holoblastic complete cleavage; takes place in cells with a small amount of yolk
human beta chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG) hormone produced by the chorion of the zygote that helps to
maintain the corpus luteum and elevated levels of progesterone
infertility inability to conceive, carry, and deliver children
inhibin hormone made by Sertoli cells; provides negative feedback to hypothalamus in control of FSH and
GnRH release
inner cell mass inner layer of cells in the blastocyst
internal fertilization fertilization of egg by sperm inside the body of the female
interstitial cell of Leydig cell in seminiferous tubules that makes testosterone
labia majora large folds of tissue covering the inguinal area
labia minora smaller folds of tissue within the labia majora
PAGE: 1377
1366 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
luteinizing hormone (LH) reproductive hormone in both men and women, causes testosterone production in
men and ovulation and lactation in women
menopause loss of reproductive capacity in women due to decreased sensitivity of the ovaries to FSH and LH
menstrual cycle cycle of the degradation and regrowth of the endometrium
meroblastic partial cleavage; takes place in cells with a large amount of yolk
morning sickness condition in the mother during the first trimester; includes feelings of nausea
neural tube tube-like structure that forms from the ectoderm and gives rise to the brain and spinal cord
oogenesis process of producing haploid eggs
organogenesis process of organ formation
ovarian cycle cycle of preparation of egg for ovulation and the conversion of the follicle to the corpus luteum
oviduct (also, fallopian tube) muscular tube connecting the uterus with the ovary area
oviparity process by which fertilized eggs are laid outside the female’s body and develop there, receiving
nourishment from the yolk that is a part of the egg
ovoviparity processbywhichfertilizedeggsareretainedwithinthefemale;theembryoobtainsitsnourishment
from the egg’s yolk and the young are fully developed when they are hatched
ovulation release of the egg by the most mature follicle
parthenogenesis formofasexualreproductionwhereaneggdevelopsintoacompleteindividualwithoutbeing
fertilized
penis male reproductive structure for urine elimination and copulation
placenta organ that supports the diffusion of nutrients and waste between the mother’s and fetus’ blood
polyspermy condition in which one egg is fertilized by multiple sperm
progesterone reproductive hormone in women; assists in endometrial regrowth and inhibition of FSH and LH
release
prostate gland structure that is a mixture of smooth muscle and glandular material and that contributes to
semen
scrotum sac containing testes; exterior to the body
semen fluid mixture of sperm and supporting materials
seminal vesicle secretory accessory gland in males; contributes to semen
seminiferous tubule site of sperm production in testes
Sertoli cell cell in seminiferous tubules that assists developing sperm and makes inhibin
sexual reproduction mixing of genetic material from two individuals to produce genetically unique offspring
somite groupofcellsseparatedbysmallspacesthatformfromthemesodermandgiverisetoconnectivetissue
spermatheca specialized sac that stores sperm for later use
spermatogenesis process of producing haploid sperm
testes pair of reproductive organs in males
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1378
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1367
testosterone reproductive hormone in men that assists in sperm production and promoting secondary sexual
characteristics
trophoblast outer layer of cells in the blastocyst
uterus environment for developing embryo and fetus
vagina muscular tube for the passage of menstrual flow, copulation, and birth of offspring
viviparity processinwhichtheyoungdevelopwithinthefemale,receivingnourishmentfromthemother’sblood
through a placenta
zona pellucida protective layer of glycoproteins on the mammalian egg
CHAPTER SUMMARY
43.1Reproduction Methods
Reproduction may be asexual when one individual produces genetically identical offspring, or sexual when the
genetic material from two individuals is combined to produce genetically diverse offspring. Asexual
reproduction occurs through fission, budding, and fragmentation. Sexual reproduction may mean the joining of
sperm and eggs within animals’ bodies or it may mean the release of sperm and eggs into the environment. An
individual may be one sex, or both; it may start out as one sex and switch during its life, or it may stay male or
female.
43.2Fertilization
Sexual reproduction starts with the combination of a sperm and an egg in a process called fertilization. This can
occur either outside the bodies or inside the female. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages. Once
fertilized, the eggs can develop inside the female or outside. If the egg develops outside the body, it usually has
a protective covering over it. Animal anatomy evolved various ways to fertilize, hold, or expel the egg. The
method of fertilization varies among animals. Some species release the egg and sperm into the environment,
some species retain the egg and receive the sperm into the female body and then expel the developing embryo
covered with shell, while still other species retain the developing offspring through the gestation period.
43.3Human Reproductive Anatomy and Gametogenesis
As animals became more complex, specific organs and organ systems developed to support specific functions
for the organism. The reproductive structures that evolved in land animals allow males and females to mate,
fertilize internally, and support the growth and development of offspring. Processes developed to produce
reproductive cells that had exactly half the number of chromosomes of each parent so that new combinations
would have the appropriate amount of genetic material. Gametogenesis, the production of sperm
(spermatogenesis) and eggs (oogenesis), takes place through the process of meiosis.
43.4Hormonal Control of Human Reproduction
The male and female reproductive cycles are controlled by hormones released from the hypothalamus and
anterior pituitary as well as hormones from reproductive tissues and organs. The hypothalamus monitors the
need for the FSH and LH hormones made and released from the anterior pituitary. FSH and LH affect
reproductive structures to cause the formation of sperm and the preparation of eggs for release and possible
fertilization. In the male, FSH and LH stimulate Sertoli cells and interstitial cells of Leydig in the testes to
facilitate sperm production. The Leydig cells produce testosterone, which also is responsible for the secondary
sexual characteristics of males. In females, FSH and LH cause estrogen and progesterone to be produced.
They regulate the female reproductive system which is divided into the ovarian cycle and the menstrual cycle.
Menopause occurs when the ovaries lose their sensitivity to FSH and LH and the female reproductive cycles
slow to a stop.
43.5Human Pregnancy and Birth
Human pregnancy begins with fertilization of an egg and proceeds through the three trimesters of gestation.
The labor process has three stages (contractions, delivery of the fetus, expulsion of the placenta), each
PAGE: 1379
1368 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
propelled by hormones. The first trimester lays down the basic structures of the body, including the limb buds,
heart, eyes, and the liver. The second trimester continues the development of all of the organs and systems.
The third trimester exhibits the greatest growth of the fetus and culminates in labor and delivery. Prevention of
a pregnancy can be accomplished through a variety of methods including barriers, hormones, or other means.
Assisted reproductive technologies may help individuals who have infertility problems.
43.6Fertilization and Early Embryonic Development
The early stages of embryonic development begin with fertilization. The process of fertilization is tightly
controlled to ensure that only one sperm fuses with one egg. After fertilization, the zygote undergoes cleavage
to form the blastula. The blastula, which in some species is a hollow ball of cells, undergoes a process called
gastrulation, in which the three germ layers form. The ectoderm gives rise to the nervous system and the
epidermal skin cells, the mesoderm gives rise to the muscle cells and connective tissue in the body, and the
endoderm gives rise to columnar cells and internal organs.
43.7Organogenesis and Vertebrate Formation
Organogenesis is the formation of organs from the germ layers. Each germ layer gives rise to specific tissue
types. The first stage is the formation of the neural system in the ectoderm. The mesoderm gives rise to
somites and the notochord. Formation of vertebrate axis is another important developmental stage.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 43.8Which of the following statements a. LH and FSH are produced in the pituitary,
about the male reproductive system is false? and estradiol and progesterone are
produced in the ovaries.
a. The vas deferens carries sperm from the b. Estradiol and progesterone secreted from
testes to the penis. the corpus luteum cause the endometrium
b. Sperm mature in seminiferous tubules in the to thicken.
testes. c. Both progesterone and estradiol are
c. Both the prostate and the bulbourethral produced by the follicles.
glands produce components of the semen. d. Secretion of GnRH by the hypothalamus is
d. The prostate gland is located in the testes. inhibited by low levels of estradiol but
stimulated by high levels of estradiol.
2.Figure 43.15Which of the following statements
about hormone regulation of the female reproductive 3.Figure 43.17Which of the following statements
cycle is false? about the menstrual cycle is false?
a. Progesterone levels rise during the luteal
phase of the ovarian cycle and the secretory
phase of the uterine cycle.
b. Menstruation occurs just after LH and FSH
levels peak.
c. Menstruation occurs after progesterone
levels drop.
d. Estrogen levels rise before ovulation, while
progesterone levels rise after.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which form of reproduction is thought to be best in a. asexual
a stable environment? b. fragmentation
a. asexual c. budding
b. sexual d. parthenogenesis
c. budding
6.Which form of reproduction is useful to an animal
d. parthenogenesis
with little mobility that reproduces sexually?
5.Which form of reproduction can result from a. fission
damage to the original animal? b. budding
c. parthenogenesis
d. hermaphroditism
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1380
Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development 1369
7.Genetically unique individuals are produced 16.How many eggs are produced as a result of one
through ________. meiotic series of cell divisions?
a. sexual reproduction a. one
b. parthenogenesis b. two
c. budding c. three
d. fragmentation d. four
8.External fertilization occurs in which type of 17.Which hormone causes Leydig cells to make
environment? testosterone?
a. aquatic a. FSH
b. forested b. LH
c. savanna c. inhibin
d. steppe d. estrogen
9.Which term applies to egg development within the 18.Which hormone causes FSH and LH to be
female with nourishment derived from a yolk? released?
a. testosterone
a. oviparity b. estrogen
b. viviparity c. GnRH
c. ovoviparity d. progesterone
d. ovovoparity
19.Which hormone signals ovulation?
10.Which term applies to egg development outside a. FSH
the female with nourishment derived from a yolk? b. LH
c. inhibin
a. oviparity d. estrogen
b. viviparity
20.Which hormone causes the regrowth of the
c. ovoviparity
endometrial lining of the uterus?
d. ovovoparity
a. testosterone
11.Sperm are produced in the ________. b. estrogen
a. scrotum c. GnRH
b. seminal vesicles d. progesterone
c. seminiferous tubules
21.Nutrient and waste requirements for the
d. prostate gland
developing fetus are handled during the first few
12.Most of the bulk of semen is made by the weeks by:
________. a. the placenta
a. scrotum b. diffusion through the endometrium
b. seminal vesicles c. the chorion
c. seminiferous tubules d. the blastocyst
d. prostate gland
22.Progesterone is made during the third trimester
13.Which of the following cells in spermatogenesis is by the:
diploid? a. placenta
a. primary spermatocyte b. endometrial lining
b. secondary spermatocyte c. chorion
c. spermatid d. corpus luteum
d. sperm
23.Which contraceptive method is 100 percent
14.Which female organ has the same embryonic effective at preventing pregnancy?
origin as the penis? a. condom
a. clitoris b. oral hormonal methods
b. labia majora c. sterilization
c. greater vestibular glands d. abstinence
d. vagina
24.Which type of short term contraceptive method is
15.Which female organ has an endometrial lining generally more effective than others?
that will support a developing baby? a. barrier
a. labia minora b. hormonal
b. breast c. natural family planning
c. ovaries d. withdrawal
d. uterus
25.Which hormone is primarily responsible for the
PAGE: 1381
1370 Chapter 43 | Animal Reproduction and Development
contractions during labor? 28.During cleavage, the mass of cells:
a. oxytocin a. increases
b. estrogen b. decreases
c. β-HCG c. doubles with every cell division
d. progesterone d. does not change significantly
26.Major organs begin to develop during which part 29.Which of the following gives rise to the skin cells?
of human gestation?
a. fertilization a. ectoderm
b. first trimester b. endoderm
c. second trimester c. mesoderm
d. third trimester d. none of the above
27.Which of the following is false? 30.The ribs form from the ________.
a. The endoderm, mesoderm, ectoderm are a. notochord
germ layers. b. neural plate
b. The trophoblast is a germ layer. c. neural tube
c. The inner cell mass is a source of d. somites
embryonic stem cells.
d. The blastula is often a hollow ball of cells.
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
31.Why is sexual reproduction useful if only half the how are they controlled?
animals can produce offspring and two separate cells
38.Describe the events in the ovarian cycle leading
must be combined to form a third?
up to ovulation.
32.What determines which sex will result in offspring
39.Describe the major developments during each
of birds and mammals?
trimester of human gestation.
33.What are the advantages and disadvantages of
40.Describe the stages of labor.
external and internal forms of fertilization?
41.What do you think would happen if multiple
34.Why would paired external fertilization be
sperm fused with one egg?
preferable to group spawning?
42.Why do mammalian eggs have a small
35.Describe the phases of the human sexual
concentration of yolk, while bird and reptile eggs
response.
have a large concentration of yolk?
36.Compare spermatogenesis and oogenesis as to
43.Explain how the different germ layers give rise to
timing of the processes and the number and type of
different tissue types.
cells finally produced.
44.Explain the role of axis formation in development.
37.If male reproductive pathways are not cyclical,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1382
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1371
44 | ECOLOGY AND THE
BIOSPHERE
Figure 44.1 The (a) deer tick carries the bacterium that produces Lyme disease in humans, often evident in (b) a
symptomatic bull’s eye rash. The (c) white-footed mouse is one well-known host to deer ticks carrying the Lyme
diseasebacterium.(credita:modificationofworkbyScottBauer,USDAARS;creditb:modificationofworkbyJames
Gathany, CDC; credit c: modification of work by Rob Ireton)
Chapter Outline
44.1:The Scope of Ecology
44.2:Biogeography
44.3:Terrestrial Biomes
44.4:Aquatic Biomes
44.5:Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
Introduction
Why study ecology? Perhaps you are interested in learning about the natural world and how living things
have adapted to the physical conditions of their environment. Or, perhaps you’re a future physician seeking to
understand the connection between your patients' health and their environment.
Humans are a part of the ecological landscape, and human health is one important part of human interaction
withourphysicalandlivingenvironment.Lymedisease,forinstance,servesasonemodern-dayexampleofthe
connection between our health and the natural world (Figure 44.1). More formally known as Lyme borreliosis,
Lyme disease is a bacterial infection that can be transmitted to humans when they are bitten by the deer tick
(IxodesscapularisintheeasternU.S.,andIxodespacificusalongthePacificcoast).Deerticksaretheprimary
vectors (a vector is an organism that transmits a pathogen) for this disease. However, not all ticks carry the
pathogen, and not all deer ticks carry the bacteria that will cause Lyme disease in humans. Also, the ticks I.
scapularis and pacificus can have other hosts besides deer. In fact, it turns out that the probability of infection
dependsonthetypeofhostuponwhichthetickdevelops:ahigherproportionofticksthatliveonwhite-footed
mice carry the bacterium than do ticks that live on deer. Knowledge about the environments and population
densities in which the host species is abundant would help a physician or an epidemiologist better understand
how Lyme disease is transmitted and how its incidence could be reduced.
PAGE: 1383
1372 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
44.1 | The Scope of Ecology
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define ecology and the four basic levels of ecological research
• Describeexamplesofthewaysinwhichecologyrequirestheintegrationofdifferentscientificdisciplines
• Distinguish between abiotic and biotic components of the environment
• Recognize the relationship between abiotic and biotic components of the environment
Ecologyisthestudyoftheinteractionsoflivingorganismswiththeirenvironment.Onecoregoalofecologyis
tounderstandthedistributionandabundanceoflivingthingsinthephysicalenvironment.Attainmentofthisgoal
requires the integration of scientific disciplines inside and outside of biology, such as mathematics, statistics,
biochemistry, molecular biology, physiology, evolution, biodiversity, geology, and climatology.
Climate change can alter where organisms live, which can sometimes directly affect human health. Watch
the PBS video “Feeling the Effects of Climate Change” (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/climate_health) in
which researchers discover a pathogenic organism living far outside of its normal range.
Levels of Ecological Study
When a discipline such as biology is studied, it is often helpful to subdivide it into smaller, related areas. For
instance, cell biologists interested in cell signaling need to understand the chemistry of the signal molecules
(which are usually proteins) as well as the result of cell signaling. Ecologists interested in the factors that
influence the survival of an endangered species might use mathematical models to predict how current
conservation efforts affect endangered organisms.
To produce a sound set of management options, a conservation biologist needs to collect accurate data,
including current population size, factors affecting reproduction (like physiology and behavior), habitat
requirements (such as plants and soils), and potential human influences on the endangered population and its
habitat(whichmightbederivedthroughstudiesinsociologyandurbanecology).Withinthedisciplineofecology,
researchers work at four general levels, which sometimes overlap. These levels are organism, population,
community, and ecosystem (Figure 44.2).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1384
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1373
Figure44.2Ecologistsstudywithinseveralbiologicallevelsoforganization.(credit“organisms”:modificationofwork
byyeowatzup”/Flickr;credit“populations”:modificationofworkby"Crystl"/Flickr;credit“communities”:modificationof
workbyUSFishandWildlifeService;credit“ecosystems”:modificationofworkbyTomCarlisle,USFishandWildlife
Service Headquarters; credit “biosphere”: NASA)
Organismal Ecology
Researchers studying ecology at the organismal level are interested in the adaptations that enable individuals
toliveinspecifichabitats.Theseadaptationscanbemorphological,physiological,andbehavioral.Forinstance,
the Karner blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa samuelis) (Figure 44.3) is considered a specialist because the
females only oviposit (that is, lay eggs) on wild lupine (Lupinus perennis). This specific requirement and
adaptation means that the Karner blue butterfly is completely dependent on the presence of wild lupine plants
for its survival.
Figure 44.3 The Karner blue butterfly (Lycaeides melissa samuelis) is a rare butterfly that lives only in open areas
with few trees or shrubs, such as pine barrens and oak savannas. It can only lay its eggs on lupine plants. (credit:
modification of work by J & K Hollingsworth, USFWS)
After hatching, the (first instar) caterpillars emerge and spend four to six weeks feeding solely on wild lupine
(Figure 44.4). The caterpillars pupate as a chrysalis to undergo the final stage of metamorphosis and emerge
asbutterfliesafteraboutfourweeks.Theadultbutterfliesfeedonthenectarofflowersofwildlupineandother
plant species, such as milkweeds. Generally there are two broods of the Karner blue each year.
A researcher interested in studying Karner blue butterflies at the organismal level might, in addition to asking
questions about egg laying requirements, ask questions about the butterflies’ preferred thoracic flight
temperature(aphysiologicalquestion),orthebehaviorofthecaterpillarswhentheyareatdifferentlarvalstages
(a behavioral question).
PAGE: 1385
1374 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.4The wild lupine (Lupinus perennis) is the only known host plant for the Karner blue butterfly.
Population Ecology
A population is a group of interbreeding organisms that are members of the same species living in the same
area at the same time. (Organisms that are all members of the same species are called conspecifics.) A
population is identified, in part, by where it lives, and its area of population may have natural or artificial
boundaries.Naturalboundariesmightberivers,mountains,ordeserts,whileartificialboundariesmaybemowed
grass, manmade structures, or roads. The study of population ecology focuses on the number of individuals in
an area and how and why population size changes over time.
For example, population ecologists are particularly interested in counting the Karner blue butterfly because
it is classified as a federally endangered species. However, the distribution and density of this species is
highly influenced by the distribution and abundance of wild lupine, and the biophysical environment around it.
Researchers might ask questions about the factors leading to the decline of wild lupine and how these affect
Karner blue butterflies. For example, ecologists know that wild lupine thrives in open areas where trees and
shrubsarelargelyabsent.Innaturalsettings,intermittentwildfiresregularlyremovetreesandshrubs,helpingto
maintaintheopenareasthatwildlupinerequires.Mathematicalmodelscanbeusedtounderstandhowwildfire
suppression by humans has led to the decline of this important plant for the Karner blue butterfly.
Community Ecology
A biological community consists of the different species within an area, typically a three-dimensional space,
and the interactions within and among these species. Community ecologists are interested in the processes
driving these interactions and their consequences. Questions about conspecific interactions often focus on
competition among members of the same species for a limited resource. Ecologists also study interactions
betweenvariousspecies;membersofdifferentspeciesarecalledheterospecifics.Examplesofheterospecific
interactions include predation, parasitism, herbivory, competition, and pollination. These interactions can have
regulating effects on population sizes and can impact ecological and evolutionary processes affecting diversity.
For example, Karner blue butterfly larvae form mutualistic relationships with ants (especially Formica spp).
Mutualism is a form of long-term relationship that has coevolved between two species and from which each
speciesbenefits.Formutualismtoexistbetweenindividualorganisms,eachspeciesmustreceivesomebenefit
from the other as a consequence of the relationship. Researchers have shown that there is an increase in
survival when ants protect Karner blue butterfly larvae (caterpillars) from predaceous insects and spiders, an
act known as “tending.” This might be because the larvae spend less time in each life stage when tended by
ants,whichprovidesanadvantageforthelarvae.Meanwhile,toattracttheants,theKarnerbluebutterflylarvae
secreteant-likepheromonesandacarbohydrate-richsubstancethatisanimportantenergysourcefortheants.
Both the Karner blue larvae and the ants benefit from their interaction, although the species of attendant ants
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1386
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1375
may be partially opportunistic and vary over the range of the butterfly.
Ecosystem Ecology
Ecosystem ecology is an extension of organismal, population, and community ecology. The ecosystem is
composed of all the biotic components (living things) in an area along with the abiotic components (nonliving
things) of that area. Some of the abiotic components include air, water, and soil. Ecosystem biologists ask
questions about how nutrients and energy are stored and how they move among organisms and through the
surrounding atmosphere, soil, and water.
TheKarnerbluebutterfliesandthewildlupineliveinanoak-pinebarrenhabitat.Thishabitatischaracterizedby
natural disturbance and nutrient-poor soils that are low in nitrogen. The availability of nutrients is an important
factorinthedistributionoftheplantsthatliveinthishabitat.Researchersinterestedinecosystemecologycould
ask questions about the importance of limited resources and the movement of resources, such as nutrients,
though the biotic and abiotic portions of the ecosystem.
Ecologist
Acareerinecologycontributestomanyfacetsofhumansociety.Understandingecologicalissuescanhelp
societymeetthebasichumanneedsoffood,shelter,andhealthcare.Ecologistscanconducttheirresearch
inthelaboratoryandoutsideinnaturalenvironments(Figure44.5).Thesenaturalenvironmentscanbeas
closetohomeasthestreamrunningthroughyourcampusorasfarawayasthehydrothermalventsatthe
bottom of the Pacific Ocean. Ecologists manage natural resources such as white-tailed deer populations
(Odocoileusvirginianus)forhuntingoraspen(Populusspp.)timberstandsforpaperproduction.Ecologists
also work as educators who teach children and adults at various institutions including universities, high
schools,museums,andnaturecenters.Ecologistsmayalsoworkinadvisorypositionsassistinglocal,state,
and federal policymakers to develop laws that are ecologically sound, or they may develop those policies
andlegislationthemselves.Tobecomeanecologistrequiresatleastanundergraduatedegree,usuallyina
naturalscience.Theundergraduatedegreeisoftenfollowedbyspecializedtrainingoranadvanceddegree,
dependingontheareaofecologyselected.Ecologistsshouldalsohaveabroadbackgroundinthephysical
sciences, as well as a solid foundation in mathematics and statistics.
Figure 44.5 This landscape ecologist is releasing a black-footed ferret into its native habitat as part of a study.
(credit: USFWS Mountain Prairie Region, NPS)
Visit this site (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ecologist_role) to see Stephen Wing, a marine ecologist from
the University of Otago, discuss the role of an ecologist and the types of issues ecologists explore.
PAGE: 1387
1376 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
44.2 | Biogeography
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define biogeography
• List and describe abiotic factors that affect the global distribution of plant and animal species
• Compare the impact of abiotic forces on aquatic and terrestrial environments
• Summarize the effects of abiotic factors on net primary productivity
Manyforcesinfluencethecommunitiesoflivingorganismspresentindifferentpartsofthebiosphere(allofthe
parts of Earth inhabited by life). The biosphere extends into the atmosphere (several kilometers above Earth)
andintothedepthsoftheoceans.Despiteitsapparentvastnesstoanindividualhuman,thebiosphereoccupies
only a minute space when compared to the known universe. Many abiotic forces influence where life can exist
andthetypesoforganismsfoundindifferentpartsofthebiosphere.Theabioticfactorsinfluencethedistribution
ofbiomes: large areas of land with similar climate, flora, and fauna.
Biogeography
Biogeography isthestudyofthegeographicdistributionoflivingthingsandtheabioticfactorsthataffecttheir
distribution. Abiotic factors such as temperature and rainfall vary based mainly on latitude and elevation. As
theseabioticfactorschange,thecompositionofplantandanimalcommunitiesalsochanges.Forexample,ifyou
weretobeginajourneyattheequatorandwalknorth,youwouldnoticegradualchangesinplantcommunities.
Atthebeginningofyourjourney,youwouldseetropicalwetforestswithbroad-leavedevergreentrees,whichare
characteristicofplantcommunitiesfoundneartheequator.Asyoucontinuedtotravelnorth,youwouldseethese
broad-leavedevergreenplantseventuallygiverisetoseasonallydryforestswithscatteredtrees.Youwouldalso
begintonoticechangesintemperatureandmoisture.Atabout30degreesnorth,theseforestswouldgiveway
to deserts, which are characterized by low precipitation and high insolation (sunlight).
Movingfarthernorth,youwouldseethatdesertsarereplacedbygrasslandsorprairies.Eventually,grasslands
arereplacedbydeciduoustemperateforests.Thesedeciduousforestsgivewaytotheborealforestsandtaiga
found in the subarctic, the area south of the Arctic Circle. Finally, you would reach the Arctic tundra, which is
found at the most northern latitudes. This trek north reveals gradual changes in both climate and the types of
organisms that have adapted to environmental factors associated with ecosystems found at different latitudes.
However, different ecosystems exist at the same latitude due in part to abiotic factors such as jet streams, the
GulfStream,andoceancurrents.Ifyouweretohikeupamountain,thechangesyouwouldseeinthevegetation
would parallel in many ways those as you move to higher latitudes.
Ecologistswhostudybiogeographyexaminepatternsofspeciesdistribution.Nospeciesexistseverywhere;for
example, the Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) is endemic to a small area in North and South Carolina. An
endemic species is one which is naturally found only in a specific geographic area that is usually restricted
in size. Other species are generalists: species which live in a wide variety of geographic areas; the raccoon
(Procyonspp) for example, is native to most of North and Central America.
Species distribution patterns are based on biotic and abiotic factors and their influences during the very long
periods of time required for species evolution; therefore, early studies of biogeography were closely linked to
the emergence of evolutionary thinking in the eighteenth century. Some of the most distinctive assemblages of
plants and animals occur in regions that have been physically separated for millions of years by geographic
barriers.BiologistsestimatethatAustralia,forexample,hasbetween600,000and700,000speciesofplantsand
animals. Approximately 3/4 of living plant and mammal species are endemic species found solely in Australia
(Figure 44.6ab).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1388
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1377
Figure44.6Australiaishometomanyendemicspecies.The(a)wallaby(Wallabiabicolor),amedium-sizedmember
ofthekangaroofamily,isapouchedmammal,ormarsupial.The(b)echidna(Tachyglossusaculeatus)isanegg-laying
mammal. (credit a: modification of work by Derrick Coetzee; credit b: modification of work by Allan Whittome)
Sometimes ecologists discover unique patterns of species distribution by determining where species are not
found.Despitebeingtropical,Hawaii,forexample,hasnonativelandspeciesofreptilesoramphibians,onlya
fewnativespeciesofbutterflies,andonlyonenativeterrestrialmammal,thehoarybat.MostofNewGuinea,as
another example, lacks placental mammals.
Check out this video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/platypus) to observe a platypus swimming in its natural
habitat in New South Wales, Australia.
Like animals, plants can be endemic or generalists: endemic plants are found only on specific regions of the
Earth, while generalists are found on many regions. Isolated land masses—such as Australia, Hawaii, and
Madagascar—oftenhavelargenumbersofendemicplantspecies.Someoftheseplantsareendangereddueto
humanactivity.Theforestgardenia(Gardeniabrighamii),forinstance,isendemictoHawaii;onlyanestimated
15–20 trees are thought to exist (Figure 44.7).
PAGE: 1389
1378 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure44.7Listedasfederallyendangered,theforestgardeniaisasmalltreewithdistinctiveflowers.Itisfoundonly
in five of the Hawaiian Islands in small populations consisting of a few individual specimens. (credit: Forest & Kim
Starr)
Energy Sources
Energy from the sun is captured by green plants, algae, cyanobacteria, and photosynthetic protists. These
organismsconvertsolarenergyintothechemicalenergyneededbyalllivingthings.Lightavailabilitycanbean
important force directly affecting the evolution of adaptations in photosynthesizers. For instance, plants in the
understory of a temperate forest are shaded when the trees above them in the canopy completely leaf out in
the late spring. Not surprisingly, understory plants have adaptations to successfully capture available light that
passes through the canopy. One such adaptation is the rapid growth of spring ephemeral plants such as the
spring beauty (Claytonia virginica) (Figure 44.8). These spring flowers achieve much of their growth and finish
their life cycle (reproduce) early in the season before the trees in the canopy develop leaves.
Figure 44.8 The spring beauty is an ephemeral spring plant that flowers early in the spring to avoid competing with
larger forest trees for sunlight. (credit: John Beetham)
In aquatic ecosystems, the availability of light may be limited because sunlight is absorbed by water, plants,
suspendedparticles,andresidentmicroorganisms.Towardthebottomofalake,pond,orocean,thereisazone
that light cannot reach (because most wavelengths except for the shortest blues are absorbed by the water
column). Photosynthesis cannot take place there and, as a result, a number of adaptations have evolved that
enable living things to survive without light. For instance, aquatic plants have photosynthetic tissue near the
surfaceofthewater.Youcanthinkofthebroad,floatingleavesofawaterlily—waterliliescannotsurvivewithout
light. In environments such as hydrothermal vents, some bacteria extract energy from inorganic chemicals
because there is no light for photosynthesis.
The availability of nutrients in aquatic systems such as oceans is also an important aspect of energy or
photosynthesis. Many organisms sink to the bottom of the ocean when they die in the open water; when this
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1390
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1379
occurs, the energy found in that living organism is sequestered for some time unless ocean upwelling occurs.
Ocean upwelling is the rising of deep ocean waters that occurs when prevailing winds blow along surface
waters near a coastline (Figure 44.9). As the wind pushes ocean waters offshore, water from the bottom of
theoceanmovesuptoreplacethiswater.Asaresult,thenutrientsoncecontainedindeadorganismsbecome
available for reuse by other living organisms.
Figure44.9Oceanupwellingisanimportantprocessthatrecyclesnutrientsandenergyintheocean.Aswind(green
arrows) pushes offshore, it causes water from the ocean bottom (red arrows) to move to the surface, bringing up
nutrients from the ocean depths.
Infreshwatersystems,suchaslakes,therecyclingofnutrientsoccursinresponsetoairtemperatureandwind
changes. The nutrients at the bottom of lakes are recycled twice each year: in the spring and fall turnover.
The spring-and-fall turnover are seasonal processes that recycle nutrients and oxygen from the bottom of
a freshwater lake to the top of the lake (Figure 44.10). These turnovers are caused by the formation of a
thermocline: layers of water with temperatures that are significantly different from those above and below it.
Inwintertime,thesurfaceoflakesfoundinmanynorthernregionsisfrozen.However,thewaterundertheiceis
slightly warmer, and the water at the bottom of the lake is warmer yet at 4 °C to 5 °C (39.2 °F to 41 °F). Water
is densest at about 4 °C; therefore, the deepest water is also the densest. The deepest water is oxygen-poor
because the decomposition of organic material at the bottom of the lake uses up available oxygen that cannot
be replaced by means of oxygen diffusion into the surface of the water, due to the surface ice layer.
PAGE: 1391
1380 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.10 The spring and fall turnovers are important processes in freshwater lakes that act to move the
nutrients and oxygen at the bottom of deep lakes to the top. Turnover occurs because water has a maximum
density at 4 °C. Surface water temperature changes as the seasons progress, and denser water sinks.
How might turnover in tropical lakes differ from turnover in lakes that exist in temperate regions? Think of
the variation, or lack of variation, in seasonal temperature change.
In springtime, air temperatures increase and surface ice melts. When the temperature of the surface water
begins to approach 4 °C, the water becomes heavier and sinks to the bottom. The water at the bottom of the
lake is then displaced by the heavier and denser surface water and, thus, rises to the top. As that water rises
to the top, the sediments and nutrients from the lake bottom are brought along with it. This is called the spring
turnover. During the summer months, the lake water stratifies, or forms layers, with the warmest water at the
lake surface.
As air temperatures drop in the fall, the temperature of the lake water cools to 4 °C; therefore, this causes fall
turnover as the heavy cold water sinks and displaces the water at the bottom. The oxygen-rich water at the
surface of the lake then moves to the bottom of the lake, while the nutrients at the bottom of the lake rise to
thesurface(Figure44.10).Duringthewinter,theoxygenatthebottomofthelakeisusedbydecomposersand
other organisms requiring oxygen, such as fish. It is important to note, however, that the relative transparency
oficealsoallowsthepenetrationoftheshorterwavelengthsofvisiblelightsothatphotosynthesis,especiallyby
algae can continue.
Temperature
Temperature affects the physiology of organisms as well as the density and state of water. Temperature exerts
an important influence on living things because few living things can survive at temperatures below 0 °C
(32 °F) due to metabolic constraints. It is also rare for living things to survive at temperatures exceeding 45
°C (113 °F); this is a reflection of evolutionary response to typical temperatures near the Earth’s surface.
Enzymesaremostefficientwithinanarrowandspecificrangeoftemperatures;enzymedegradationcanoccur
athighertemperatures.Therefore,organismseithermustmaintainaninternaltemperatureortheymustinhabit
an environment that will keep the body within a temperature range that supports metabolism. Some animals
haveadaptedtoenabletheirbodiestosurvivesignificanttemperaturefluctuations,suchasseeninhibernation
or reptilian torpor. Similarly, some Archaea bacteria have evolved to tolerate extremely hot temperatures such
as those found in the geysers within Yellowstone National Park. Such bacteria are examples of extremophiles:
organisms that thrive in extreme environments.
Thetemperature(ofbothwaterandair)canlimitthedistributionoflivingthings.Animalsfacedwithtemperature
fluctuations may respond with adaptations, such as migration, in order to survive. Migration, the regular
movement from one place to another, is an adaptation found in many animals, including many that inhabit
seasonally cold climates. Migration solves problems related to temperature, locating food, and finding a mate.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1392
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1381
For example, the Arctic Tern (Sterna paradisaea) makes a 40,000 km (24,000 mi) round-trip flight each year
betweenitsfeedinggroundsinthesouthernhemisphereanditsbreedinggroundsintheArcticOcean.Monarch
butterflies (Danausplexippus)liveintheeasternandwesternUnitedStates inthewarmermonths,wherethey
build up enormous populations, and migrate to areas around Michoacan, Mexico as well as areas along the
PacificCoast,andthesouthernUnitedStatesinthewintertime.Somespeciesofmammalsalsomakemigratory
forays. Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) travel about 5,000 km (3,100 mi) each year to find food. Amphibians and
reptiles are more limited in their distribution because they generally lack migratory ability. Not all animals that
could migrate do so: migration carries risk and comes at a high-energy cost.
Some animals hibernate or estivate to survive hostile temperatures. Hibernation enables animals to survive
cold conditions, and estivation allows animals to survive the hostile conditions of a hot, dry climate. Animals
thathibernateorestivateenterastateknownastorpor:aconditioninwhichtheirmetabolicrateissignificantly
lowered. This enables the animal to wait until its environment better supports its survival. Some amphibians,
such as the wood frog (Rana sylvatica), have an antifreeze-like chemical in their cells, which retains the cells’
integrity and prevents them from freezing and bursting.
Water
Waterisrequiredbyalllivingthingsbecauseitiscriticalforcellularprocesses.Sinceterrestrialorganismslose
water to the environment, they have evolved many adaptations to retain water.
• Plants have a number of interesting features on their leaves, such as leaf hairs and a waxy cuticle, that
serve to decrease the rate of water loss via transpiration and convection.
• Freshwaterorganismsaresurroundedbywaterandareconstantlyindangerofhavingwaterrushintotheir
cells because of osmosis. Many adaptations of organisms living in freshwater environments have evolved
to ensure that solute concentrations in their bodies remain within appropriate levels. One such adaptation
is the excretion of dilute urine.
• Marineorganismsaresurroundedbywaterwithahighersoluteconcentrationthantheorganismand,thus,
areindangeroflosingwatertotheenvironmentbecauseofosmosis.Theseorganismshavemorphological
andphysiologicaladaptationstoretainwaterandreleasesolutesintotheenvironment.Forexample,Marine
iguanas (Amblyrhynchus cristatus), sneeze out water vapor that is high in salt in order to maintain solute
concentrations within an acceptable range while swimming in the ocean and eating marine plants.
Inorganic Nutrients and Soil
Inorganic nutrients, such as nitrogen and phosphorus, are important in determining the distribution and the
abundanceoflivingthings.Plantsobtaintheseinorganicnutrientsfromthesoilwhenwatermovesintotheplant
through the roots. Therefore, soil structure (particle size of soil components), soil pH, and soil nutrient content
together all play an important role in the distribution of plants. Animals obtain inorganic nutrients from the food
they consume. Therefore, animal distributions are related to the distribution of what they eat. In some cases,
animals will follow their food resource as it moves through the environment.
Other Aquatic Factors
Someabioticfactors,suchasoxygen,areimportantinaquaticecosystemsaswellasterrestrialenvironments.
Terrestrial animals obtain oxygen from the air they breathe. Oxygen availability can be an issue for organisms
livingatveryhighelevations,however,wheretherearefewermoleculesofoxygenintheair.Inaquaticsystems,
theconcentrationofdissolvedoxygenisrelatedtowatertemperatureandthespeedatwhichthewatermoves.
Coldwaterhasmoredissolvedoxygenthanwarmerwater.Inaddition,salinity,currents,andtidalchangescan
be important abiotic factors in aquatic ecosystems.
Other Terrestrial Factors
Wind can be an important abiotic factor because it influences the rate of evaporation, transpiration, and
convective heat loss from the surface of all organisms. The physical force of wind is also important because it
can move soil, water, or other abiotic factors, as well as an ecosystem’s organisms.
Fire is another terrestrial factor that can be an important agent of disturbance in terrestrial ecosystems. Some
organismsareadaptedtofireand,thus,requirethehighheatassociatedwithfiretocompleteapartoftheirlife
cycle. For example, the jack pine (Pinus banksiana) requires heat from fire for its seed cones to open (Figure
44.11). Through the burning of pine needles, fire adds nitrogen to the soil and limits competition by destroying
undergrowth.
PAGE: 1393
1382 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.11 The mature cones of the jack pine (Pinus banksiana) open only when exposed to high temperatures,
suchasduringaforestfire.Afireislikelytokillmostvegetation,soaseedlingthatgerminatesafterafireismorelikely
to receive ample sunlight than one that germinates under normal conditions. (credit: USDA)
Abiotic Factors Influencing Plant Growth
Temperature and moisture are important influences on plant production (primary productivity) and the amount
of organic matter available as food (net primary productivity). Net primary productivity is an estimation of
all of the organic matter available as food; it is calculated as the total amount of carbon fixed per year minus
the amount that is oxidized during cellular respiration. In terrestrial environments, net primary productivity is
estimated by measuring the above-ground biomass per unit area, which is the total mass of living plants,
excludingroots(whosemassisverydifficulttomeasure).Thismeansthatalargepercentageofplantbiomass
whichexistsundergroundisnotincludedinthismeasurement.Netprimaryproductivityisanimportantvariable
when considering differences in biomes. Very productive biomes have a high level of aboveground biomass.
Annualbiomassproductionisdirectlyrelatedtotheabioticcomponentsoftheenvironment.Environmentswith
thegreatestamountofbiomassproduceconditionsinwhichphotosynthesis,plantgrowth,andtheresultingnet
primary productivity are optimized. The climate of these areas is warm and wet. Photosynthesis can proceed
at a high rate, enzymes can work most efficiently, and stomata can remain open without the risk of excessive
transpiration;together,thesefactorsleadtothemaximalamountofcarbondioxide(CO2)movingintotheplant,
resulting in high biomass production. The above-ground biomass produces several important resources for
otherlivingthings,includinghabitatandfood.Conversely,dryandcoldenvironmentshavelowerphotosynthetic
rates and therefore less biomass. The animal communities living there will also be affected by the decrease in
available food.
44.3 | Terrestrial Biomes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify the two major abiotic factors that determine terrestrial biomes
• Recognize distinguishing characteristics of each of the eight major terrestrial biomes
TheEarth’sbiomesarecategorizedintotwomajorgroups:terrestrialandaquatic.Terrestrialbiomesarebased
on land, while aquatic biomes include both ocean and freshwater biomes. The eight major terrestrial biomes
on Earth are each distinguished by characteristic temperatures and amount of precipitation. Comparing the
annualtotalsofprecipitationandfluctuationsinprecipitationfromonebiometoanotherprovidescluesastothe
importanceofabioticfactorsinthedistributionofbiomes.Temperaturevariationonadailyandseasonalbasisis
alsoimportantforpredictingthegeographicdistributionofthebiomeandthevegetationtypeinthebiome.The
distribution of these biomes shows that the same biome can occur in geographically distinct areas with similar
climates (Figure 44.12).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1394
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1383
Figure 44.12 Each of the world’s major biomes is distinguished by characteristic temperatures and amounts of
precipitation. Polar ice and mountains are also shown.
Which of the following statements about biomes is false?
a. Chaparral is dominated by shrubs.
b. Savannas and temperate grasslands are dominated by grasses.
c. Boreal forests are dominated by deciduous trees.
d. Lichens are common in the arctic tundra.
Tropical Wet Forest
Tropical wet forests are also referred to as tropical rainforests. This biome is found in equatorial regions
(Figure44.12).Thevegetationischaracterizedbyplantswithbroadleavesthatfallandarereplacedthroughout
the year. Unlike the trees of deciduous forests, the trees in this biome do not have a seasonal loss of leaves
associated with variations in temperature and sunlight; these forests are “evergreen” year-round.
The temperature and sunlight profiles of tropical wet forests are very stable in comparison to that of other
terrestrial biomes, with the temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 34 °C (68 °F to 93 °F). When one compares
the annual temperature variation of tropical wet forests with that of other forest biomes, the lack of seasonal
temperature variation in the tropical wet forest becomes apparent. This lack of seasonality leads to year-round
plantgrowth,ratherthantheseasonal(spring,summer,andfall)growthseeninothermoretemperatebiomes.
In contrast to other ecosystems, tropical ecosystems do not have long days and short days during the yearly
cycle.Instead,aconstantdailyamountofsunlight(11–12hrsperday)providesmoresolarradiation,thereby,a
longer period of time for plant growth.
Theannualrainfallintropicalwetforestsrangesfrom125cmto660cm(50–200in)withsomemonthlyvariation.
While sunlight and temperature remain fairly consistent, annual rainfall is highly variable. Tropical wet forests
typically have wet months in which there can be more than 30 cm (11–12 in) of precipitation, as well as dry
monthsinwhichtherearefewerthan10cm(3.5in)ofrainfall.However,thedriestmonthofatropicalwetforest
still exceeds theannualrainfall of some other biomes, such as deserts.
Tropicalwetforestshavehighnetprimaryproductivitybecausetheannualtemperaturesandprecipitationvalues
in these areas are ideal for plant growth. Therefore, the extensive biomass present in the tropical wet forest
leads to plant communities with very high species diversities (Figure 44.13). Tropical wet forests have more
species of trees than any other biome; on average between 100 and 300 species of trees are present in a
singlehectare(2.5acres)ofSouthAmericanAmazonianrainforest.Onewaytovisualizethisistocomparethe
distinctive horizontal layers within the tropical wet forest biome. On the forest floor is a sparse layer of plants
anddecayingplantmatter.Abovethatisanunderstoryofshortshrubbyfoliage.Alayeroftreesrisesabovethis
understory and is topped by a closed upper canopy—the uppermost overhead layer of branches and leaves.
PAGE: 1395
1384 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Some additional trees emerge through this closed upper canopy. These layers provide diverse and complex
habitats for the variety of plants, fungi, animals, and other organisms within the tropical wet forests.
For example, epiphytes are plants that grow on other plants, which typically are not harmed. Epiphytes are
foundthroughouttropicalwetforestbiomes.Manyspeciesofanimalsusethevarietyofplantsandthecomplex
structureofthetropicalwetforestsforfoodandshelter.Someorganismsliveseveralmetersabovegroundand
have adapted to this arboreal lifestyle.
Figure44.13Tropicalwetforests,suchastheseforestsalongtheMadredeDiosriver,Peru,neartheAmazonRiver,
have high species diversity. (credit: Roosevelt Garcia)
Savannas
Savannas are grasslands with scattered trees, and they are located in Africa, South America, and northern
Australia(Figure44.12).Savannasareusuallyhot,tropicalareaswithtemperaturesaveragingfrom24°Cto29
°C(75°Fto84°F)andanannualrainfallof10–40cm(3.9–15.7in).Savannashaveanextensivedryseason;
for this reason, forest trees do not grow as well as they do in the tropical wet forest (or other forest biomes).
As a result, within the grasses and forbs (herbaceous flowering plants) that dominate the savanna, there are
relatively few trees (Figure 44.14). Since fire is an important source of disturbance in this biome, plants have
evolved well-developed root systems that allow them to quickly resprout after a fire.
Figure 44.14 Savannas, like this one in Taita Hills Wildlife Sanctuary in Kenya, are dominated by grasses. (credit:
Christopher T. Cooper)
Subtropical Deserts
Subtropical deserts exist between 15° and 30° north and south latitude and are centered on the Tropics of
CancerandCapricorn(Figure44.12).Thisbiomeisverydry;insomeyears,evaporationexceedsprecipitation.
Subtropical hot deserts can have daytime soil surface temperatures above 60 °C (140 °F) and nighttime
temperatures approaching 0 °C (32 °F). This is largely due to the lack of atmospheric water. In cold deserts,
temperaturescanbeashighas25°Candcandropbelow-30°C(-22°F).Subtropicaldesertsarecharacterized
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1396
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1385
by low annual precipitation of fewer than 30 cm (12 in) with little monthly variation and lack of predictability in
rainfall.Insomecases,theannualrainfallcanbeaslowas2cm(0.8in)insubtropicaldesertslocatedincentral
Australia (“the Outback”) and northern Africa.
The vegetation and low animal diversity of this biome is closely related to low and unpredictable precipitation.
Verydrydesertslackperennialvegetationthatlivesfromoneyeartothenext;instead,manyplantsareannuals
that grow quickly and reproduce when rainfall does occur, and then die. Many other plants in these areas are
characterized by having a number of adaptations that conserve water, such as deep roots, reduced foliage,
and water-storing stems (Figure 44.15). Seed plants in the desert produce seeds that can be in dormancy for
extended periods between rains. Adaptations in desert animals include nocturnal behavior and burrowing.
Figure 44.15 To reduce water loss, many desert plants have tiny leaves or no leaves at all. The leaves of ocotillo
(Fouquieriasplendens),shownhereintheSonoraDesertnearGilaBend,Arizona,appearonlyafterrainfall,andthen
are shed.
Chaparral
ThechaparralisalsocalledthescrubforestandisfoundinCalifornia,alongtheMediterraneanSea,andalong
the southern coast of Australia (Figure 44.12). The annual rainfall in this biome ranges from 65 cm to 75 cm
(25.6–29.5in),andthemajorityoftherainfallsinthewinter.Summersareverydryandmanychaparralplants
aredormantduringthesummertime.Thechaparralvegetation,showninFigure44.16,isdominatedbyshrubs
adapted to periodic fires, with some plants producing seeds that only germinate after a hot fire. The ashes left
behind after a fire are rich in nutrients like nitrogen that fertilize the soil and promote plant regrowth.
PAGE: 1397
1386 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.16The chaparral is dominated by shrubs. (credit: Miguel Vieira)
Temperate Grasslands
Temperate grasslands are found throughout central North America, where they are also known as prairies;
they are also in Eurasia, where they are known as steppes (Figure 44.12). Temperate grasslands have
pronounced annual fluctuations in temperature with hot summers and cold winters. The annual temperature
variation produces specific growing seasons for plants. Plant growth is possible when temperatures are warm
enoughtosustainplantgrowthandwhenamplewaterisavailable,whichoccursinthespring,summer,andfall.
Duringmuchofthewinter,temperaturesarelow,andwater,whichisstoredintheformofice,isnotavailablefor
plant growth.
Annualprecipitationrangesfrom25cmto75cm(9.8–29.5in).Becauseofrelativelylowerannualprecipitationin
temperategrasslands,therearefewtreesexceptforthosefoundgrowingalongriversorstreams.Thedominant
vegetation tends to consist of grasses dense enough to sustain populations of grazing animals Figure 44.17.
The vegetation is very dense and the soils are fertile because the subsurface of the soil is packed with the
rootsandrhizomes(undergroundstems)ofthesegrasses.Therootsandrhizomesacttoanchorplantsintothe
ground and replenish the organic material (humus) in the soil when they die and decay.
Figure 44.17 The American bison (Bison bison), more commonly called the buffalo, is a grazing mammal that once
populated American prairies in huge numbers. (credit: Jack Dykinga, USDA Agricultural Research Service)
Fires,mainlycausedbylightning,areanaturaldisturbanceintemperategrasslands.Whenfireissuppressedin
temperate grasslands, the vegetation eventually converts to scrub and sometimes dense forests with drought-
tolerant tree species. Often, the restoration or management of temperate grasslands requires the use of
controlled burns to suppress the growth of trees and maintain the grasses.
Temperate Forests
Temperate forests are the most common biome in eastern North America, Western Europe, Eastern Asia,
Chile, and New Zealand (Figure 44.12). This biome is found throughout mid-latitude regions. Temperatures
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1398
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1387
range between -30 °C and 30 °C (-22 °F to 86 °F) and drop to below freezing periodically during cold winters.
These temperatures mean that temperate forests have defined growing seasons during the spring, summer,
and early fall. Precipitation is relatively constant throughout the year and ranges between 75 cm and 150 cm
(29.5–59 in).
Because of the moderate annual rainfall and temperatures, deciduous trees are the dominant plant in this
biome (Figure 44.18). Deciduous trees lose their leaves each fall and remain leafless in the winter. Thus, no
photosynthesisoccursinthedeciduoustreesduringthedormantwinterperiod.Eachspring,newleavesappear
asthetemperatureincreases.Becauseofthedormantperiod,thenetprimaryproductivityoftemperateforests
is less than that of tropical wet forests. In addition, temperate forests show less diversity of tree species than
tropical wet forest biomes.
Figure 44.18Deciduous trees are the dominant plant in the temperate forest. (credit: Oliver Herold)
The trees of the temperate forests leaf out and shade much of the ground; however, this biome is more open
thantropicalwetforestsbecausemosttreesinthetemperateforestsdonotgrowastallasthetreesintropical
wet forests. The soils of the temperate forests are rich in inorganic and organic nutrients. This is due to the
thick layer of leaf litter on forest floors, which does not develop in tropical rainforests. As this leaf litter decays,
nutrientsarereturnedtothesoil.Theleaflitteralsoprotectssoilfromerosion,insulatestheground,andprovides
habitats for invertebrates (such as the pill bug or roly-poly, Armadillidium vulgare) and their predators, such as
the red-backed salamander (Plethodon cinereus).
Boreal Forests
Theborealforest,alsoknownastaigaorconiferousforest,isfoundsouthoftheArcticCircleandacrossmost
of Canada, Alaska, Russia, and northern Europe (Figure 44.12). This biome has cold, dry winters and short,
cool,wetsummers.Theannualprecipitationisfrom40cmto100cm(15.7–39in)andusuallytakestheformof
snow. Little evaporation occurs because of the cold temperatures.
The long and cold winters in the boreal forest have led to the predominance of cold-tolerant cone-bearing
(coniferous) plants. These are evergreen coniferous trees like pines, spruce, and fir, which retain their needle-
shaped leaves year-round. Evergreen trees can photosynthesize earlier in the spring than deciduous trees
because less energy from the sun is required to warm a needle-like leaf than a broad leaf. This benefits
evergreen trees, which grow faster than deciduous trees in the boreal forest. In addition, soils in boreal forest
regionstendtobeacidicwithlittleavailablenitrogen. Leavesareanitrogen-richstructureanddeciduoustrees
must produce a new set of these nitrogen-rich structures each year. Therefore, coniferous trees that retain
nitrogen-rich needles may have a competitive advantage over the broad-leafed deciduous trees.
The net primary productivity of boreal forests is lower than that of temperate forests and tropical wet forests.
The above-ground biomass of boreal forests is high because these slow-growing tree species are long-lived
andaccumulatealargestandingbiomassovertime.Plantspeciesdiversityislessthanthatseenintemperate
forestsandtropicalwetforests.Borealforestslackthepronouncedelementsofthelayeredforeststructureseen
in tropical wet forests. The structure of a boreal forest is often only a tree layer and a ground layer (Figure
44.19). When conifer needles are dropped, they decompose more slowly than broad leaves; therefore, fewer
nutrients are returned to the soil to fuel plant growth.
PAGE: 1399
1388 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.19The boreal forest (taiga) has low lying plants and conifer trees. (credit: L.B. Brubaker)
Arctic Tundra
The Arctic tundra lies north of the subarctic boreal forest and is located throughout the Arctic regions of the
northern hemisphere (Figure 44.12). The average winter temperature is -34 °C (29.2 °F) and the average
summertemperatureisfrom3°Cto12°C(37°F–52°F).Plantsinthearctictundrahaveaveryshortgrowing
season of approximately 10–12 weeks.
However, during this time, there are almost 24 hours of daylight and plant growth is rapid. The annual
precipitation of the Arctic tundra is very low with little annual variation in precipitation. And, as in the boreal
forests, there is little evaporation due to the cold temperatures.
PlantsintheArctictundraaregenerallylowtotheground(Figure44.20).Thereislittlespeciesdiversity,lownet
primaryproductivity,andlowabove-groundbiomass.ThesoilsoftheArctictundramayremaininaperennially
frozenstatereferredtoaspermafrost.Thepermafrostmakesitimpossibleforrootstopenetratedeepintothe
soilandslowsthedecayoforganicmatter,whichinhibitsthereleaseofnutrientsfromorganicmatter.Duringthe
growing season, the ground of the Arctic tundra can be completely covered with plants or lichens.
Figure 44.20 Low-growing plants such as shrub willow dominate the tundra landscape, shown here in the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge. (credit: USFWS Arctic National Wildlife Refuge)
Watch this Assignment Discovery: Biomes video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/biomes) for an overview
of biomes. To explore further, select one of the biomes on the extended playlist: desert, savanna, temperate
forest, temperate grassland, tropic, tundra.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1400
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1389
44.4 | Aquatic Biomes
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the effects of abiotic factors on the composition of plant and animal communities in aquatic
biomes
• Compare and contrast the characteristics of the ocean zones
• Summarize the characteristics of standing water and flowing water freshwater biomes
Abiotic Factors Influencing Aquatic Biomes
Like terrestrial biomes, aquatic biomes are influenced by a series of abiotic factors. The aquatic
medium—water—hasdifferentphysicalandchemicalpropertiesthanair,however.Evenifthewaterinapond
or other body of water is perfectly clear (there are no suspended particles), water, on its own, absorbs light.
As one descends into a deep body of water, there will eventually be a depth which the sunlight cannot reach.
Whiletherearesomeabioticandbioticfactorsinaterrestrialecosystemthatmightobscurelight(likefog,dust,
or insect swarms), usually these are not permanent features of the environment. The importance of light in
aquatic biomes is central to the communities of organisms found in both freshwater and marine ecosystems.
In freshwater systems, stratification due to differences in density is perhaps the most critical abiotic factor and
is related to the energy aspects of light. The thermal properties of water (rates of heating and cooling and the
abilitytostoremuchlargeramountsofenergythantheair)aresignificanttothefunctionofmarinesystemsand
havemajorimpactsonglobalclimateandweatherpatterns.Marinesystemsarealsoinfluencedbylarge-scale
physical water movements, such as currents; these are less important in most freshwater lakes.
Theoceaniscategorizedbyseveralareasorzones(Figure44.21).Alloftheocean’sopenwaterisreferredto
asthepelagicrealm(orzone).Thebenthicrealm(orzone)extendsalongtheoceanbottomfromtheshoreline
to the deepest parts of the ocean floor. Within the pelagic realm is the photic zone, which is the portion of
the ocean that light can penetrate (approximately 200 m or 650 ft). At depths greater than 200 m, light cannot
penetrate;thus,thisisreferredtoastheaphoticzone.Themajorityoftheoceanisaphoticandlackssufficient
light for photosynthesis. The deepest part of the ocean, the Challenger Deep (in the Mariana Trench, located
in the western Pacific Ocean), is about 11,000 m (about 6.8 mi) deep. To give some perspective on the depth
of this trench, the ocean is, on average, 4267 m or 14,000 ft deep. These realms and zones are relevant to
freshwater lakes as well.
PAGE: 1401
1390 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure 44.21The ocean is divided into different zones based on water depth and distance from the shoreline.
In which of the following regions would you expect to find photosynthetic organisms?
a. the aphotic zone, the neritic zone, the oceanic zone, and the benthic realm
b. the photic zone, the intertidal zone, the neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
c. the photic zone, the abyssal zone, the neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
d. the pelagic realm, the aphotic zone, the neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
Marine Biomes
Theoceanisthelargestmarinebiome.Itisacontinuousbodyofsaltwaterthatisrelativelyuniforminchemical
composition;infact,itisaweaksolutionofmineralsaltsanddecayedbiologicalmatter.Withintheocean,coral
reefsareasecondkindofmarinebiome.Estuaries,coastalareaswheresaltwaterandfreshwatermix,forma
third unique marine biome.
Ocean
Thephysicaldiversityoftheoceanisasignificantinfluenceonplants,animals,andotherorganisms.Theocean
iscategorizedintodifferentzonesbasedonhowfarlightreachesintothewater.Eachzonehasadistinctgroup
of species adapted to the biotic and abiotic conditions particular to that zone.
The intertidal zone, which is the zone between high and low tide, is the oceanic region that is closest to land
(Figure44.21).Generally,mostpeoplethinkofthisportionoftheoceanasasandybeach.Insomecases,the
intertidal zone is indeed a sandy beach, but it can also be rocky or muddy. The intertidal zone is an extremely
variable environment because of action of tidal ebb and flow. Organisms are exposed to air and sunlight at
low tide and are underwater most of the time, especially during high tide. Therefore, living things that thrive in
the intertidal zone are adapted to being dry for long periods of time. The shore of the intertidal zone may also
be repeatedly struck by waves, and the organisms found there are adapted to withstand damage from their
pounding action (Figure 44.22). The exoskeletons of shoreline crustaceans (such as the shore crab, Carcinus
maenas)aretoughandprotectthemfromdesiccation(dryingout)andwavedamage.Anotherconsequenceof
thepoundingwavesisthatfewalgaeandplantsestablishthemselvesintheconstantlymovingrocks,sand,or
mud.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1402
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1391
Figure44.22Seaurchins,musselshells,andstarfishareoftenfoundintheintertidalzone,shownhereinKachemak
Bay, Alaska. (credit: NOAA)
Theneriticzone(Figure44.21)extendsfromtheintertidalzonetodepthsofabout200m(or650ft)attheedge
ofthecontinentalshelf(theunderwaterlandmassthatextendsfromacontinent).Sincelightcanpenetratethis
depth,photosynthesiscanstilloccurintheneriticzone.Thewaterherecontainssiltandiswell-oxygenated,low
in pressure, and stable in temperature. Phytoplankton and floating Sargassum (a type of free-floating marine
seaweed) provide a habitat for some sea life found in the neritic zone. Zooplankton, protists, small fishes, and
shrimp are found in the neritic zone and are the base of the food chain for most of the world’s fisheries.
Beyond the neritic zone is the open ocean area known as the pelagic or open oceanic zone (Figure 44.21).
Within the oceanic zone there is thermal stratification where warm and cold waters mix because of ocean
currents.Abundantplanktonserveasthebaseofthefoodchainforlargeranimalssuchaswhalesanddolphins.
Nutrients are scarce and this is a relatively less productive part of the marine biome. When photosynthetic
organismsandtheprotistsandanimalsthatfeedonthemdie,theirbodiesfalltothebottomoftheocean,where
theyremain.Unlikefreshwaterlakes,mostoftheopenoceanlacksaprocessforbringingtheorganicnutrients
back up to the surface. (Exceptions include major oceanic upwellings within the Humboldt Current along the
westerncoastofSouthAmerica.)Themajorityoforganismsintheaphoticzoneincludeseacucumbers(phylum
Echinodermata)andotherorganismsthatsurviveonthenutrientscontainedinthedeadbodiesoforganismsin
the photic zone.
Beneath the pelagic zone is the benthic realm, the deep-water region beyond the continental shelf (Figure
44.21).Thebottomofthebenthicrealmiscomposedofsand,silt,anddeadorganisms.Temperaturedecreases,
remainingabovefreezing,aswaterdepthincreases.Thisisanutrient-richportionoftheoceanbecauseofthe
deadorganismsthatfallfromtheupperlayersoftheocean.Becauseofthishighlevelofnutrients,adiversityof
fungi, sponges, sea anemones, marine worms, sea stars, fishes, and bacteria exist.
Thedeepestpartoftheoceanistheabyssalzone,whichisatdepthsof4000morgreater.Theabyssalzone
(Figure44.21)isverycoldandhasveryhighpressure,highoxygencontent,andlownutrientcontent.Thereare
a variety of invertebrates and fishes found in this zone, but the abyssal zone does not have plants because of
thelackoflight.Hydrothermalventsarefoundprimarilyintheabyssalzone;chemosyntheticbacteriautilizethe
hydrogen sulfide and other minerals emitted from the vents. These chemosynthetic bacteria use the hydrogen
sulfide as an energy source and serve as the base of the food chain found in the abyssal zone.
Coral Reefs
Coralreefsareoceanridgesformedbymarineinvertebrates,comprisingmostlycnidariansandmolluscs,living
in warm shallow waters within the photic zone of the ocean. They are found within 30˚ north and south of the
equator. The Great Barrier Reef is perhaps the best-known and largest reef system in the world—visible from
theInternationalSpaceStation!Thismassiveandancientreefislocatedseveralmilesoffthenortheasterncoast
ofAustralia.Othercoralreefsystemsarefringingislands,whicharedirectlyadjacenttoland,oratolls,whichare
circularreefsystemssurroundingaformerlandmassthatisnowunderwater.Thecoralorganisms(membersof
phylumCnidaria)arecoloniesofsaltwaterpolypsthatsecreteacalciumcarbonateskeleton.Thesecalcium-rich
skeletons slowly accumulate, forming the underwater reef (Figure 44.23). Corals found in shallower waters (at
a depth of approximately 60 m or about 200 ft) have a mutualistic relationship with photosynthetic unicellular
algae.Therelationshipprovidescoralswiththemajorityofthenutritionandtheenergytheyrequire.Thewaters
in which these corals live are nutritionally poor and, without this mutualism, it would not be possible for large
coralstogrow.Somecoralslivingindeeperandcolderwaterdonothaveamutualisticrelationshipwithalgae;
PAGE: 1403
1392 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
these corals attain energy and nutrients using stinging cells called cnidocytes on their tentacles to capture prey.
Watch this National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) video
(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/marine_biology) to see marine ecologist Dr. Peter Etnoyer discuss his
research on coral organisms.
It is estimated that more than 4,000 fish species inhabit coral reefs. These fishes can feed on coral, the
cryptofauna(invertebratesfoundwithinthecalciumcarbonatesubstrateofthecoralreefs),ortheseaweedand
algae that are associated with the coral. In addition, some fish species inhabit the boundaries of a coral reef;
these species include predators, herbivores, and planktivores, which consume planktonic organisms such as
bacteria, archaea, algae, and protists floating in the pelagic zone.
Figure 44.23 Coral reefs are formed by the calcium carbonate skeletons of coral organisms, which are marine
invertebrates in the phylum Cnidaria. (credit: Terry Hughes)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1404
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1393
Global Decline of Coral Reefs
It takes many thousands of years to build a coral reef. The animals that create coral reefs have evolved
over millions of years, continuing to slowly deposit the calcium carbonate that forms their characteristic
oceanhomes.Bathedinwarmtropicalwaters,thecoralanimalsandtheirsymbioticalgalpartnersevolved
to survive at the upper limit of ocean water temperature.
Together, climate change and human activity pose dual threats to the long-term survival of the world’s
coral reefs. As global warming due to fossil fuel emissions raises ocean temperatures, coral reefs are
suffering. The excessive warmth causes the reefs to lose their symbiotic, food-producing algae, resulting
inaphenomenonknownasbleaching.Whenbleachingoccurs,thereefslosemuchoftheircharacteristic
color as the algae and the coral animals die if loss of the symbiotic zooxanthellae is prolonged.
Rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide further threaten the corals in other ways; as CO2 dissolves
in ocean waters, it lowers the pH and increases ocean acidity. As acidity increases, it interferes with the
calcification that normally occurs when coral animals build their calcium carbonate shelters.
When a coral reef begins to die, species diversity plummets as animals lose food and shelter. Coral reefs
arealsoeconomicallyimportant touristdestinations, sothedeclineofcoralreefsposesaseriousthreatto
coastal economies.
Humanpopulationgrowthhasdamagedcoralsinotherways,too.Ashumancoastalpopulationsincrease,
the runoff of sediment and agricultural chemicals has increased, as well, causing some of the once-clear
tropical waters to become cloudy. At the same time, overfishing of popular fish species has allowed the
predator species that eat corals to go unchecked.
Althoughariseinglobaltemperaturesof1–2˚C(aconservativescientificprojection)inthecomingdecades
may not seem large, it is very significant to this biome. When change occurs rapidly, species can become
extinctbeforeevolutioncanoffernewadaptations.Manyscientistsbelievethatglobalwarming,withitsrapid
(in terms of evolutionary time) and inexorable increases in temperature, is tipping the balance beyond the
point at which many of the world’s coral reefs can recover.
Estuaries: Where the Ocean Meets Fresh Water
Estuaries are biomes that occur where a source of fresh water, such as a river, meets the ocean. Therefore,
both fresh water and salt water are found in the same vicinity; mixing results in a diluted (brackish) saltwater.
Estuariesformprotectedareaswheremanyoftheyoungoffspringofcrustaceans,molluscs,andfishbegintheir
lives, which also creates important breeding grounds for other animals. Salinity is a very important factor that
influencestheorganismsandtheadaptationsoftheorganismsfoundinestuaries.Thesalinityofestuariesvaries
considerably and is based on the rate of flow of its freshwater sources, which may depend on the seasonal
rainfall. Once or twice a day, high tides bring salt water into the estuary. Low tides occurring at the same
frequency reverse the current of salt water.
The short-term and rapid variation in salinity due to the mixing of fresh water and salt water is a difficult
physiological challenge for the plants and animals that inhabit estuaries. Many estuarine plant species are
halophytes: plants that can tolerate salty conditions. Halophytic plants are adapted to deal with the salinity
resultingfromsaltwaterontheirrootsorfromseaspray.Insomehalophytes,filtersintherootsremovethesalt
from the water that the plant absorbs. Other plants are able to pump oxygen into their roots. Animals, such as
mussels and clams (phylum Mollusca), have developed behavioral adaptations that expend a lot of energy to
functioninthisrapidlychangingenvironment.Whentheseanimalsareexposedtolowsalinity,theystopfeeding,
closetheirshells,andswitchfromaerobicrespiration(inwhichtheyusegillstoremoveoxygenfromthewater)
toanaerobicrespiration(aprocessthatdoesnotrequireoxygenandtakesplaceinthecytoplasmoftheanimal’s
cells). When high tide returns to the estuary, the salinity and oxygen content of the water increases, and these
animals open their shells, begin feeding, and return to aerobic respiration.
Freshwater Biomes
Freshwaterbiomesincludelakesandponds(standingwater)aswellasriversandstreams(flowingwater).They
PAGE: 1405
1394 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
also include wetlands, which will be discussed later. Humans rely on freshwater biomes to provide ecosystem
benefits,whichareaquaticresourcesfordrinkingwater,cropirrigation,sanitation,andindustry.Lakesandponds
are connected with abiotic and biotic factors influencing their terrestrial biomes.
Lakes and Ponds
Lakesandpondscanrangeinareafromafewsquaremeterstothousandsofsquarekilometers.Temperature
is an important abiotic factor affecting living things found in lakes and ponds. In the summer, as we have
seen, thermal stratification of lakes and ponds occurs when the upper layer of water is warmed by the sun
and does not mix with deeper, cooler water. Light can penetrate within the photic zone of the lake or pond.
Phytoplankton (algae and cyanobacteria) are found here and carry out photosynthesis, providing the base of
the food web of lakes and ponds. Zooplankton, such as rotifers and larvae and adult crustaceans, consume
thesephytoplankton.Atthebottomoflakesandponds,bacteriaintheaphoticzonebreakdowndeadorganisms
that sink to the bottom.
Nitrogen and phosphorus are important limiting nutrients in lakes and ponds. Because of this, they are the
determiningfactorsintheamountofphytoplanktongrowththattakesplaceinlakesandponds.Whenthereisa
large input of nitrogen and phosphorus (from sewage and runoff from fertilized lawns and farms, for example),
the growth ofalgaeskyrockets, resulting inalargeaccumulation ofalgaecalledanalgal bloom.Algal blooms
(Figure 44.24) can become so extensive that they reduce light penetration in water. They may also release
toxicbyproductsintothewater,contaminatinganydrinkingwatertakenfromthatsource.Inaddition,thelakeor
pondbecomesaphotic,andphotosyntheticplantscannotsurvive.Whenthealgaedieanddecompose,severe
oxygen depletion of the water occurs. Fishes and other organisms that require oxygen are then more likely to
die,resultinginadeadzone.LakeErieandtheGulfofMexicorepresentfreshwaterandmarinehabitatswhere
phosphorus control and storm water runoff pose significant environmental challenges.
Figure 44.24The uncontrolled growth of algae in this lake has resulted in an algal bloom. (credit: Jeremy Nettleton)
Rivers and Streams
Riversandstreamsarecontinuouslymovingbodiesofwaterthatcarrylargeamountsofwaterfromthesource,
orheadwater,toalakeorocean.ThelargestriversincludetheNileRiverinAfrica,theAmazonRiverinSouth
America, and the Mississippi River in North America.
Abiotic features of rivers and streams vary along the length of the river or stream. Streams begin at a point of
origin referred to as source water. The source water is usually cold, low in nutrients, and clear. The channel
(the width of the river or stream) is narrower than at any other place along the length of the river or stream.
Because of this, the current is often faster here than at any other point of the river or stream.
The fast-moving water results in minimal silt accumulation at the bottom of the river or stream; therefore, the
water is usually clear and free of debris. Photosynthesis here is mostly attributed to algae that are growing on
rocks;theswiftcurrentinhibitsthegrowthofphytoplankton.Anadditionalinputofenergycancomefromleaves
and other organic material that fall downstream into the river or stream, as well as from trees and other plants
thatborderthewater.Whentheleavesdecompose,theorganicmaterialandnutrientsintheleavesarereturned
tothewater.Plantsandanimalshaveadaptedtothisfast-movingwater.Forinstance,leeches(phylumAnnelida)
have elongated bodies and suckers on the anterior and ventral areas of the body. These suckers attach to
the substrate, keeping the leech anchored in place, and are also used to attach to their prey. Freshwater trout
species (phylum Chordata) are an important predator in these fast-moving rivers and streams.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1406
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1395
As the river or stream flows away from the source, the width of the channel gradually widens and the current
slows. This slow-moving water, caused by the gradient decrease and the volume increase as tributaries unite,
hasmoresedimentation.Phytoplanktoncanalsobesuspendedinslow-movingwater.Therefore,thewaterwill
notbeasclearasitisnearthesource.Thewaterisalsowarmer.Worms(phylumAnnelida)andinsects(phylum
Arthropoda) can be found burrowing into the mud. The higher order predator vertebrates (phylum Chordata)
include waterfowl, frogs, and fishes. These predators must find food in these slow moving, sometimes murky,
watersand,unlikethetroutinthewatersatthesource,thesevertebratesmaynotbeabletousevisionastheir
primary sense to find food. Instead, they are more likely to use taste or chemical cues to find prey.
Wetlands
Wetlandsareenvironmentsinwhichthesoiliseitherpermanentlyorperiodicallysaturatedwithwater.Wetlands
aredifferentfromlakesbecausewetlandsareshallowbodiesofwaterwhereaslakesvaryindepth.Emergent
vegetationconsistsofwetlandplantsthatarerootedinthesoilbuthaveportionsofleaves,stems,andflowers
extending above the water’s surface. There are several types of wetlands including marshes, swamps, bogs,
mudflats, and salt marshes (Figure 44.25). The three shared characteristics among these types—what makes
them wetlands—are their hydrology, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydric soils.
Figure44.25LocatedinsouthernFlorida,EvergladesNationalParkisvastarrayofwetlandenvironments,including
sawgrassmarshes,cypressswamps,andestuarinemangroveforests.Here,agreategretwalksamongcypresstrees.
(credit: NPS)
Freshwatermarshesandswampsarecharacterizedbyslowandsteadywaterflow.Bogs,however,developin
depressions where water flow is low or nonexistent. Bogs usually occur in areas where there is a clay bottom
withpoorpercolationofwater.(Percolationisthemovementofwaterthroughtheporesinthesoilorrocks.)The
water found in a bog is stagnant and oxygen-depleted because the oxygen used during the decomposition of
organicmatterisnotreadilyreplaced.Astheoxygeninthewaterisdepleted,decompositionslows.Thisleads
to a buildup of acids and a lower water pH. The lower pH creates challenges for plants because it limits the
available nitrogen. As a result, some bog plants (such as sundews, pitcher plants, and Venus flytraps) capture
insects in order to extract the nitrogen from their bodies. Bogs have low net primary productivity because the
water found in bogs has low levels of nitrogen and oxygen.
44.5 | Climate and the Effects of Global Climate
Change
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define global climate change
• Summarize the effects of the Industrial Revolution on global atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration
• Describe three natural factors affecting long-term global climate
• List two or more greenhouse gases and describe their role in the greenhouse effect
All biomes are universally affected by global conditions, such as climate, that ultimately shape each biome’s
PAGE: 1407
1396 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
environment.Scientistswhostudyclimatehavenotedaseriesofmarkedchangesthathavegraduallybecome
increasingly evident during the last sixty years. Global climate change is the term used to describe altered
global weather patterns, especially a worldwide increase in temperature and resulting changes in the climate,
due largely to rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Climate and Weather
Acommonmisconceptionaboutglobalclimatechangeisthataspecificweathereventoccurringinaparticular
region (for example, a very cool week in June in central Indiana) provides evidence of global climate change.
However,acoldweekinJuneisaweather-relatedeventandnotaclimate-relatedone.Thesemisconceptions
often arise because of confusion over the termsclimateandweather.
Climate refers to the long-term, predictable atmospheric conditions of a specific area. The climate of a biome
is characterized by having consistent seasonal temperature and rainfall ranges. Climate does not address the
amountofrainthatfellononeparticulardayinabiomeorthecolder-than-averagetemperaturesthatoccurred
on one day. In contrast, weather refers to the conditions of the atmosphere during a short period of time.
Weatherforecastsareusuallymadefor48-hourcycles.Long-rangeweatherforecastsareavailablebutcanbe
unreliable.
To better understand the difference between climate and weather, imagine that you are planning an outdoor
eventinnorthernWisconsin.Youwouldbethinkingaboutclimatewhenyouplantheeventinthesummerrather
thanthewinterbecauseyouhavelong-termknowledgethatanygivenSaturdayinthemonthsofMaytoAugust
would be a better choice for an outdoor event in Wisconsin than any given Saturday in January. However, you
cannotdeterminethespecificdaythattheeventshouldbeheldonbecauseitisdifficulttoaccuratelypredictthe
weather on a specific day. Climate can be considered “average” weather that takes place over many years.
Global Climate Change
Climate change can be understood by approaching three areas of study:
• evidence of current and past global climate change
• drivers of global climate change
• documented results of climate change
It is helpful to keep these three different aspects of climate change clearly separated when consuming media
reportsaboutglobalclimatechange.Weshouldnotethatitiscommonforreportsanddiscussionsaboutglobal
climate change to confuse the data showing that Earth’s climate is changing with the factors that drive this
climate change.
Evidence for Global Climate Change
Sincescientistscannotgobackintimetodirectlymeasureclimaticvariables,suchasaveragetemperatureand
precipitation,theymustinsteadindirectlymeasuretemperature.Todothis,scientistsrelyonhistoricalevidence
of Earth’s past climate.
Antarcticicecoresareakeyexampleofsuchevidenceforclimatechange.Theseicecoresaresamplesofpolar
iceobtainedbymeansofdrillsthatreachthousandsofmetersintoicesheetsorhighmountainglaciers.Viewing
theicecoresisliketravelingbackwardsthroughtime;thedeeperthesample,theearlierthetimeperiod.Trapped
withintheiceareairbubblesandotherbiologicalevidencethatcanrevealtemperatureandcarbondioxidedata.
AntarcticicecoreshavebeencollectedandanalyzedtoindirectlyestimatethetemperatureoftheEarthoverthe
past400,000years(Figure44.26a).The0°Conthisgraphreferstothelong-termaverage.Temperaturesthat
are greater than 0 °C exceed Earth’s long-term average temperature. Conversely, temperatures that are less
than0°CarelessthanEarth’saveragetemperature.Thisfigureshowsthattherehavebeenperiodiccyclesof
increasing and decreasing temperature.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1408
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1397
Figure44.26Scientistsdrillforicecoresinpolarregions.Theicecontainsairbubblesandbiologicalsubstancesthat
provide important information for researchers. (credit: a: Helle Astrid Kjær; b: National Ice Core Laboratory, USGS)
Beforethelate1800s,theEarthhasbeenasmuchas9°Ccoolerandabout3°Cwarmer.Notethatthegraphin
Figure44.27bshowsthattheatmosphericconcentrationofcarbondioxidehasalsorisenandfalleninperiodic
cycles.Alsonotetherelationshipbetweencarbondioxideconcentrationandtemperature.Figure44.27bshows
that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere have historically cycled between 180 and 300 parts per million
(ppm) by volume.
PAGE: 1409
1398 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
Figure44.27IceattheRussianVostokstationinEastAntarcticawaslaiddownoverthecourseof420,000yearsand
reachedadepthofover3,000m.BymeasuringtheamountofCO2trappedintheice,scientistshavedeterminedpast
atmosphericCO2concentrations.Temperaturesrelativetomoderndayweredeterminedfromtheamountofdeuterium
(a nonradioactive isotope of hydrogen) present.
Figure 44.27a does not show the last 2,000 years with enough detail to compare the changes of Earth’s
temperature during the last 400,000 years with the temperature change that has occurred in the more recent
past. Two significant temperature anomalies, or irregularities, have occurred in the last 2,000 years. These
are the Medieval Climate Anomaly (or the Medieval Warm Period) and the Little Ice Age. A third temperature
anomaly aligns with the Industrial Era. The Medieval Climate Anomaly occurred between 900 and 1300 AD.
Duringthistimeperiod,manyclimatescientiststhinkthatslightlywarmerweatherconditionsprevailedinmany
partsoftheworld;thehigher-than-averagetemperaturechangesvariedbetween0.10°Cand0.20°Cabovethe
norm.Although0.10°Cdoesnotseemlargeenoughtoproduceanynoticeablechange,itdidfreeseasofice.
Because of this warming, the Vikings were able to colonize Greenland.
The Little Ice Age was a cold period that occurred between 1550 AD and 1850 AD. During this time, a slight
coolingofalittlelessthan1°CwasobservedinNorthAmerica,Europe,andpossiblyotherareasoftheEarth.
This1°Cchangeinglobaltemperatureisaseeminglysmalldeviationintemperature(aswasobservedduring
the Medieval Climate Anomaly); however, it also resulted in noticeable climatic changes. Historical accounts
reveal a time of exceptionally harsh winters with much snow and frost.
TheIndustrialRevolution,whichbeganaround1750,wascharacterizedbychangesinmuchofhumansociety.
Advances in agriculture increased the food supply, which improved the standard of living for people in Europe
and the United States. New technologies were invented that provided jobs and cheaper goods. These new
technologies were powered using fossil fuels, especially coal. The Industrial Revolution starting in the early
nineteenthcenturyusheredinthebeginningoftheIndustrialEra.Whenafossilfuelisburned,carbondioxideis
released. With the beginning of the Industrial Era, atmospheric carbon dioxide began to rise (Figure 44.28).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1410
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1399
Figure 44.28The atmospheric concentration of CO2has risen steadily since the beginning of industrialization.
Current and Past Drivers of Global Climate Change
Becauseitisnotpossibletogobackintimetodirectlyobserveandmeasureclimate,scientistsmustuseindirect
evidencetodeterminethedrivers,orfactors,thatmayberesponsibleforclimatechange.Theindirectevidence
includes data collected using ice cores, boreholes (a narrow shaft bored into the ground), tree rings, glacier
lengths,pollenremains,andoceansediments.Thedatashowsacorrelationbetweenthetimingoftemperature
changesanddriversofclimatechange.BeforetheIndustrialEra(pre-1780),therewerethreedriversofclimate
changethatwerenotrelatedtohumanactivityoratmosphericgases.ThefirstoftheseistheMilankovitchcycles.
TheMilankovitchcyclesdescribetheeffectsofslightchangesintheEarth’sorbitonEarth’sclimate.Thelength
oftheMilankovitch cyclesrangesbetween 19,000 and100,000 years.Inotherwords,onecouldexpecttosee
some predictable changes in the Earth’s climate associated with changes in the Earth’s orbit at a minimum of
every 19,000 years.
The variation in the sun’s intensity is the second natural factor responsible for climate change. Solar intensity
is the amount of solar power or energy the sun emits in a given amount of time. There is a direct relationship
between solar intensity and temperature. As solar intensity increases (or decreases), the Earth’s temperature
correspondingly increases (or decreases). Changes in solar intensity have been proposed as one of several
possible explanations for the Little Ice Age.
Finally,volcaniceruptionsareathirdnaturaldriverofclimatechange.Volcaniceruptionscanlastafewdays,but
thesolidsandgasesreleasedduringaneruptioncaninfluencetheclimateoveraperiodofafewyears,causing
short-term climate changes. The gases and solids released by volcanic eruptions can include carbon dioxide,
watervapor,sulfurdioxide,hydrogensulfide,hydrogen,andcarbonmonoxide.Generally,volcaniceruptionscool
the climate. This occurred in 1783 when volcanos in Iceland erupted and caused the release of large volumes
of sulfuric oxide. This led to haze-effect cooling, a global phenomenon that occurs when dust, ash, or other
suspended particles block out sunlight and trigger lower global temperatures as a result; haze-effect cooling
usuallyextendsforoneormoreyearsbeforedissipatinginintensity.InEuropeandNorthAmerica,haze-effect
cooling produced some of the lowest average winter temperatures on record in 1783 and 1784.
Greenhouse gases are probably the most significant drivers of the climate. When heat energy from the sun
strikes the Earth, gases known as greenhouse gases trap the heat in the atmosphere, in a similar manner
as do the glass panes of a greenhouse keep heat from escaping. The greenhouse gases that affect Earth
includecarbondioxide,methane,watervapor,nitrousoxide,andozone.Approximatelyhalfoftheradiationfrom
the sun passes through these gases in the atmosphere and strikes the Earth. This radiation is converted into
thermal(infrared)radiationontheEarth’ssurface,andthenaportionofthatenergyisre-radiatedbackintothe
atmosphere. Greenhouse gases, however, reflect much of the thermal energy back to the Earth’s surface. The
more greenhouse gases there are in the atmosphere, the more thermal energy is reflected back to the Earth’s
surface, heating it up and the atmosphere immediately above it. Greenhouse gases absorb and emit radiation
and are an important factor in the greenhouse effect: the warming of Earth due to carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
Direct evidence supports the relationship between atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and
temperature: as carbon dioxide rises, global temperature rises. Since 1950, the concentration of atmospheric
PAGE: 1411
1400 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
carbondioxidehasincreasedfromabout280ppmto382ppmin2006.In2011,theatmosphericcarbondioxide
concentrationwas392ppm.However,theplanetwouldnotbeinhabitablebycurrentlifeformsifwatervapordid
not produce its drastic greenhouse warming effect.
Scientists look at patterns in data and try to explain differences or deviations from these patterns. The
atmosphericcarbondioxidedatarevealahistoricalpatternofcarbondioxideincreasinganddecreasing,cycling
between a low of 180 ppm and a high of 300 ppm. Scientists have concluded that it took around 50,000 years
fortheatmosphericcarbondioxideleveltoincreasefromitslowminimumconcentrationtoitshighermaximum
concentration. However, beginning only a few centuries ago, atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations have
increasedbeyondthehistoricalmaximumof300ppm.Thecurrentincreasesinatmosphericcarbondioxidehave
happenedveryquickly—inamatterofhundredsofyearsratherthanthousandsofyears.Whatisthereasonfor
this difference in the rate of change and the amount of increase in carbon dioxide? A key factor that must be
recognized when comparing the historical data and the current data is the presence and industrial activities of
modern human society; no other driver of climate change has yielded changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide
levelsat this rate or to this magnitude.
Human activity releases carbon dioxide and methane, two of the most important greenhouse gases, into the
atmosphere in several ways. The primary mechanism that releases carbon dioxide is the burning of fossil
fuels, such as gasoline, coal, and natural gas (Figure 44.29). Deforestation, cement manufacture, animal
agriculture,theclearingofland,andtheburningofforestsareotherhumanactivitiesthatreleasecarbondioxide.
Methane (CH4) is produced when bacteria break down organic matter under anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic
conditionscanhappenwhenorganicmatteristrappedunderwater(suchasinricepaddies)orintheintestines
ofherbivores.Methanecanalsobereleasedfromnaturalgasfieldsandthedecompositionofanimalandplant
material that occurs in landfills. Another source of methane is the melting of clathrates. Clathrates are frozen
chunks of ice and methane found at the bottom of the ocean. When water warms, these chunks of ice melt
and methane is released. As the ocean’s water temperature increases, the rate at which clathrates melt is
increasing, releasing even more methane. This leads to increased levels of methane in the atmosphere, which
furtheracceleratestherateofglobalwarming.Thisisanexampleofthepositivefeedbackloopthatisleadingto
the rapid rate of increase of global temperatures.
Figure 44.29 The burning of fossil fuels in industry and by vehicles releases carbon dioxide and other greenhouse
gases into the atmosphere. (credit: “Pöllö”/Wikimedia Commons)
Documented Results of Climate Change: Past and Present
Scientistshavegeologicalevidenceoftheconsequencesoflong-agoclimatechange.Modern-dayphenomena
such as retreating glaciers and melting polar ice cause a continual rise in sea level. Meanwhile, changes in
climate can negatively affect organisms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1412
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1401
Geological Climate Change
Global warming has been associated with at least one planet-wide extinction event during the geological past.
The Permian extinction event occurred about 251 million years ago toward the end of the roughly 50-million-
year-long geological time span known as the Permian period. This geologic time period was one of the three
warmest periods in Earth’s geologic history. Scientists estimate that approximately 70 percent of the terrestrial
plant and animal species and 84 percent of marine species became extinct, vanishing forever near the end of
the Permian period.
Organisms that had adapted to wet and warm climatic conditions, such as annual rainfall of 300–400 cm
(118–157 in) and 20 °C–30 °C (68 °F–86 °F) in the tropical wet forest, may not have been able to survive the
Permian climate change.
WatchthisNASAvideo(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/climate_plants)todiscoverthemixedeffectsofglobal
warmingonplantgrowth.Whilescientistsfoundthatwarmertemperaturesinthe1980sand1990scausedan
increase in plant productivity, this advantage has since been counteracted by more frequent droughts.
Present Climate Change
Anumberofglobaleventshaveoccurredthatmaybeattributedtoclimatechangeduringourlifetimes.Glacier
National Park in Montana is undergoing the retreat of many of its glaciers, a phenomenon known as glacier
recession. In 1850, the area contained approximately 150 glaciers. By 2010, however, the park contained only
about 24 glaciers greater than 25 acres in size. One of these glaciers is the Grinnell Glacier (Figure 44.30) at
Mount Gould. Between 1966 and 2005, the size of Grinnell Glacier shrank by 40 percent. Similarly, the mass
3
of the ice sheets in Greenland and the Antarctic is decreasing: Greenland lost 150–250 km of ice per year
between 2002 and 2006. In addition, the size and thickness of the Arctic sea ice is decreasing.
Figure44.30TheeffectofglobalwarmingcanbeseeninthecontinuingretreatofGrinnelGlacier.Themeanannual
temperature in the park has increased 1.33 °C since 1900. The loss of a glacier results in the loss of summer
meltwaters,sharplyreducingseasonalwatersuppliesandseverelyaffectinglocalecosystems.(credit:modificationof
work by USGS)
Thislossoficeisleadingtoincreasesintheglobalsealevel.Onaverage,theseaisrisingatarateof1.8mm
peryear.However,between1993and2010therateofsealevelincreaserangedbetween2.9and3.4mmper
year. A variety of factors affect the volume of water in the ocean, especially the temperature of the water (the
densityofwaterisrelatedtoitstemperature:watervolumeexpandsasitwarms,thusraisingsealevels),aswell
astheamountofwaterfoundinrivers,lakes,glaciers,polaricecaps,andseaice.Asglaciersandpolaricecaps
melt, there is a significant contribution of liquid water that was previously frozen.
In addition to some abiotic conditions changing in response to climate change, many organisms are also
being affected by the changes in temperature. Temperature and precipitation play key roles in determining
PAGE: 1413
1402 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
the geographic distribution and phenology of plants and animals. ( Phenology is the study of the effects of
climatic conditions on the timing of periodic life cycle events, such as flowering in plants or migration in birds.)
Researchers have shown that 385 plant species in Great Britain are flowering 4.5 days sooner than was
recorded earlier during the previous 40 years. In addition, insect-pollinated species were more likely to flower
earlier than wind-pollinated species. The impact of changes in flowering date would be mitigated if the insect
pollinatorsemergedearlier.Thismismatchedtimingofplantsandpollinatorscouldresultininjuriousecosystem
effects because, for continued survival, insect-pollinated plants must flower when their pollinators are present.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1414
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1403
KEY TERMS
abiotic nonliving components of the environment
above-ground biomass total mass of aboveground living plants per area
abyssal zone deepest part of the ocean at depths of 4000 m or greater
algal bloom rapid increase of algae in an aquatic system
aphotic zone part of the ocean where no light penetrates
benthic realm (also,benthiczone)partoftheoceanthatextendsalongtheoceanbottomfromtheshorelineto
the deepest parts of the ocean floor
biogeography study of the geographic distribution of living things and the abiotic factors that affect their
distribution
biome ecological community of plants, animals, and other organisms that is adapted to a characteristic set of
environmental conditions
biotic living components of the environment
canopy branches and foliage of trees that form a layer of overhead coverage in a forest
channel width of a river or stream from one bank to the other bank
clathrates frozen chunks of ice and methane found at the bottom of the ocean
climate long-term, predictable atmospheric conditions present in a specific area
conspecifics individuals that are members of the same species
coral reef ocean ridges formed by marine invertebrates living in warm, shallow waters within the photic zone
cryptofauna invertebrates found within the calcium carbonate substrate of coral reefs
ecology study of interaction between living things and their environment
ecosystem services human benefits and services provided by natural ecosystems
emergent vegetation wetlandplantsthatarerootedinthesoilbuthaveportionsofleaves,stems,andflowers
extending above the water’s surface
endemic species found only in a specific geographic area that is usually restricted in size
estuary biomes where a source of fresh water, such as a river, meets the ocean
fall and spring turnover seasonalprocessthatrecyclesnutrientsandoxygenfromthebottomofafreshwater
ecosystem to the top
global climate change altered global weather patterns, including a worldwide increase in temperature, due
largely to rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide
greenhouse effect warming of Earth due to carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere
greenhouse gases atmospheric gases such as carbon dioxide and methane that absorb and emit radiation,
thus trapping heat in Earth’s atmosphere
haze-effect cooling effect of the gases and solids from a volcanic eruption on global climate
heterospecifics individuals that are members of different species
PAGE: 1415
1404 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
intertidal zone part of the ocean that is closest to land; parts extend above the water at low tide
Milankovitch cycles cyclic changes in the Earth's orbit that may affect climate
neritic zone part of the ocean that extends from low tide to the edge of the continental shelf
net primary productivity measurement of the energy accumulation within an ecosystem, calculated as the
total amount of carbon fixed per year minus the amount that is oxidized during cellular respiration
ocean upwelling risingofdeepoceanwatersthatoccurswhenprevailingwindsblowalongsurfacewatersnear
a coastline
oceanic zone part of the ocean that begins offshore where the water measures 200 m deep or deeper
pelagic realm (also, pelagic zone) open ocean waters that are not close to the bottom or near the shore
permafrost perennially frozen portion of the Arctic tundra soil
photic zone portion of the ocean that light can penetrate
planktivore animal species that eats plankton
predator organism that kills and consumes another organism
Sargassum type of free-floating marine seaweed
solar intensity amount of solar power energy the sun emits in a given amount of time
source water point of origin of a river or stream
thermocline layer of water with a temperature that is significantly different from that of the surrounding layers
weather conditions of the atmosphere during a short period of time
CHAPTER SUMMARY
44.1The Scope of Ecology
Ecology is the study of the interactions of living things with their environment. Ecologists ask questions that
comprise four levels of general biological organization—organismal, population, community, and ecosystem. At
the organismal level, ecologists study individual organisms and how they interact with their environments. At
the population and community levels, ecologists explore, respectively, how a population of organisms changes
over time and the ways in which that population interacts with other species in the community. Ecologists
studying an ecosystem examine the living species (the biotic components) of the ecosystem as well as the
nonliving portions (the abiotic components), such as air, water, and soil, of the environment.
44.2Biogeography
Biogeography is the study of the geographic distribution of living things as well as the abiotic factors that affect
their distribution. Endemic species are species that are naturally found only in a specific geographic area. The
distribution of living things is influenced by several environmental factors that are, in part, controlled by the
latitude or elevation at which a species is found. Ocean upwellings, and spring and fall turnovers are important
processes regulating the distribution of nutrients and other abiotic factors important in aquatic ecosystems.
Energy sources, temperature, water, inorganic nutrients, and soil are factors limiting the distribution of living
things in terrestrial systems. Net primary productivity is a measure of the amount of biomass produced by a
biome.
44.3Terrestrial Biomes
The Earth has terrestrial biomes and aquatic biomes. Aquatic biomes include both freshwater and marine
environments. There are eight major terrestrial biomes: tropical wet forests, savannas, subtropical deserts,
chaparral, temperate grasslands, temperate forests, boreal forests, and Arctic tundra. The same biome can
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1416
Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere 1405
occur in different geographic locations with similar climates. Temperature and precipitation, and variations in
both, are key abiotic factors that shape the composition of animal and plant communities in terrestrial biomes.
Some biomes, such as temperate grasslands and temperate forests, have distinct seasons, with cold weather
and hot weather alternating throughout the year. In warm, moist biomes, such as the tropical wet forest, net
primary productivity is high, as warm temperatures, abundant water, and a year-round growing season fuel
plant growth and supply energy for high diversity throughout the food web. Other biomes, such as deserts and
tundras, have low primary productivity due to extreme temperatures and a shortage of available water.
44.4Aquatic Biomes
Aquatic ecosystems include both saltwater and freshwater biomes. The abiotic factors important for the
structuring of aquatic ecosystems can be different than those seen in terrestrial systems. Sunlight is a driving
force behind the structure of forests and also is an important factor in bodies of water, especially those that are
very deep, because of the role of photosynthesis in sustaining certain organisms.
Density and temperature shape the structure of aquatic systems. Oceans may be thought of as consisting of
different zones based on water depth and distance from the shoreline and light penetrance. Different kinds of
organisms are adapted to the conditions found in each zone. Coral reefs are unique marine ecosystems that
are home to a wide variety of species. Estuaries are found where rivers meet the ocean; their shallow waters
provide nourishment and shelter for young crustaceans, mollusks, fishes, and many other species. Freshwater
biomes include lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and wetlands. Bogs are an interesting type of wetland
characterized by standing water, lower pH, and a lack of nitrogen.
44.5Climate and the Effects of Global Climate Change
The Earth has gone through periodic cycles of increases and decreases in temperature. During the past 2,000
years, the Medieval Climate Anomaly was a warmer period, while the Little Ice Age was unusually cool. Both of
these irregularities can be explained by natural causes of changes in climate, and, although the temperature
changes were small, they had significant effects. Natural drivers of climate change include Milankovitch cycles,
changes in solar activity, and volcanic eruptions. None of these factors, however, leads to rapid increases in
global temperature or sustained increases in carbon dioxide.
The burning of fossil fuels is an important source of greenhouse gases, which play a major role in the
greenhouse effect. Two hundred and fifty million years ago, global warming resulted in the Permian extinction:
a large-scale extinction event that is documented in the fossil record. Currently, modern-day climate change is
associated with the increased melting of glaciers and polar ice sheets, resulting in a gradual increase in sea
level. Plants and animals can also be affected by global climate change when the timing of seasonal events,
such as flowering or pollination, is affected by global warming.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 44.10How might turnover in tropical lakes 3.Figure 44.21In which of the following regions
differ from turnover in lakes that exist in temperate would you expect to find photosynthetic organisms?
regions?
a. the aphotic zone, the neritic zone, the
2.Figure 44.12Which of the following statements
oceanic zone, and the benthic realm
about biomes is false?
b. the photic zone, the intertidal zone, the
a. Chaparral is dominated by shrubs.
neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
b. Savannas and temperate grasslands are
c. the photic zone, the abyssal zone, the
dominated by grasses.
neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
c. Boreal forests are dominated by deciduous
d. the pelagic realm, the aphotic zone, the
trees.
neritic zone, and the oceanic zone
d. Lichens are common in the arctic tundra.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following is a biotic factor? 5.The study of nutrient cycling though the
a. wind environment is an example of which of the following?
b. disease-causing microbe
c. temperature
d. soil particle size
PAGE: 1417
1406 Chapter 44 | Ecology and the Biosphere
a. organismal ecology 10.Where would you expect to find the most
b. population ecology photosynthesis in an ocean biome?
c. community ecology a. aphotic zone
d. ecosystem ecology b. abyssal zone
c. benthic realm
6.Understory plants in a temperate forest have
d. intertidal zone
adaptations to capture limited ________.
a. water 11.A key feature of estuaries is:
b. nutrients a. low light conditions and high productivity
c. heat b. salt water and fresh water
d. sunlight c. frequent algal blooms
d. little or no vegetation
7.An ecologist hiking up a mountain may notice
different biomes along the way due to changes in all 12.Which of the following is an example of a weather
of the following except: event?
a. elevation a. The hurricane season lasts from June 1
b. rainfall through November 30.
c. latitude b. The amount of atmospheric CO2has
d. temperature steadily increased during the last century.
c. A windstorm blew down trees in the
8.Which of the following biomes is characterized by
Boundary Waters Canoe Area in Minnesota
abundant water resources?
on July 4, 1999.
a. deserts
d. Deserts are generally dry ecosystems
b. boreal forests
having very little rainfall.
c. savannas
d. tropical wet forests 13.Which of the following natural forces is
responsible for the release of carbon dioxide and
9.Which of the following biomes is characterized by
other atmospheric gases?
short growing seasons?
a. the Milankovitch cycles
a. deserts
b. volcanoes
b. tropical wet forests
c. solar intensity
c. Arctic tundras
d. burning of fossil fuels
d. savannas
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
14.Ecologists often collaborate with other major disturbance factor; however, fire is more
researchers interested in ecological questions. common in the temperate grassland biome than in
Describe the levels of ecology that would be easier the subtropical desert biome. Why is this?
for collaboration because of the similarities of
19.In what ways are the subtropical desert and the
questions asked. What levels of ecology might be
arctic tundra similar?
more difficult for collaboration?
20.Scientists have discovered the bodies of humans
15.The population is an important unit in ecology as
and other living things buried in bogs for hundreds of
well as other biological sciences. How is a population
years, but not yet decomposed. Suggest a possible
defined, and what are the strengths and weaknesses
biological explanation for why such bodies are so
of this definition? Are there some species that at
well-preserved.
certain times or places are not in populations?
21.Describe the conditions and challenges facing
16.Compare and contrast ocean upwelling and
organisms living in the intertidal zone.
spring and fall turnovers.
22.Compare and contrast how natural- and human-
17.Many endemic species are found in areas that
induced processes have influenced global climate
are geographically isolated. Suggest a plausible
change.
scientific explanation for why this is so.
23.Predict possible consequences if carbon
18.The extremely low precipitation of subtropical
emissions from fossil fuels continue to rise.
desert biomes might lead one to expect fire to be a
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1418
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1407
45 | POPULATION AND
COMMUNITY ECOLOGY
Figure45.1Asiancarpjumpoutofthewaterinresponsetoelectrofishing.TheAsiancarpintheinsetphotographwere
harvestedfromtheLittleCalumetRiverinIllinoisinMay,2010,usingrotenone,atoxinoftenusedasaninsecticide,in
anefforttolearnmoreaboutthepopulationofthespecies.(creditmainimage:modificationofworkbyUSGS;credit
inset: modification of work by Lt. David French, USCG)
Chapter Outline
45.1:Population Demography
45.2:Life Histories and Natural Selection
45.3:Environmental Limits to Population Growth
45.4:Population Dynamics and Regulation
45.5:Human Population Growth
45.6:Community Ecology
45.7:Behavioral Biology: Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
Introduction
Imagine sailing down a river in a small motorboat on a weekend afternoon; the water is smooth and you are
enjoyingthewarmsunshineandcoolbreezewhensuddenlyyouarehitintheheadbya20-poundsilvercarp.
This is now a risk on many rivers and canal systems in Illinois and Missouri because of the presence of Asian
carp.
This fish—actually a group of species including the silver, black, grass, and big head carp—has been farmed
and eaten in China for over 1000 years. It is one of the most important aquaculture food resources worldwide.
IntheUnitedStates, however,Asiancarpisconsideredadangerousinvasivespeciesthatdisruptscommunity
structure and composition to the point of threatening native species.
PAGE: 1419
1408 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
45.1 | Population Demography
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how ecologists measure population size and density
• Describe three different patterns of population distribution
• Use life tables to calculate mortality rates
• Describe the three types of survivorship curves and relate them to specific populations
Populations are dynamic entities. Populations consist all of the species living within a specific area, and
populations fluctuate based on a number of factors: seasonal and yearly changes in the environment, natural
disasterssuchasforestfiresandvolcaniceruptions,andcompetitionforresourcesbetweenandwithinspecies.
The statistical study of population dynamics, demography, uses a series of mathematical tools to investigate
howpopulationsrespondtochangesintheirbioticandabioticenvironments.Manyofthesetoolswereoriginally
designed to study human populations. For example, life tables, which detail the life expectancy of individuals
withinapopulation,wereinitiallydevelopedbylifeinsurancecompaniestosetinsurancerates.Infact,whilethe
term “demographics” is commonly used when discussing humans, all living populations can be studied using
this approach.
Population Size and Density
The study of any population usually begins by determining how many individuals of a particular species
exist, and how closely associated they are with each other. Within a particular habitat, a population can be
characterizedbyitspopulationsize(N),thetotalnumberofindividuals,anditspopulationdensity,thenumber
ofindividualswithinaspecificareaorvolume.Populationsizeanddensityarethetwomaincharacteristicsused
to describe and understand populations. For example, populations with more individuals may be more stable
thansmallerpopulationsbasedontheirgeneticvariability,andthustheirpotentialtoadapttotheenvironment.
Alternatively,amemberofapopulationwithlowpopulationdensity(morespreadoutinthehabitat),mighthave
more difficulty finding a mate to reproduce compared to a population of higher density. As is shown in Figure
45.2, smaller organisms tend to be more densely distributed than larger organisms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1420
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1409
Figure 45.2Australian mammals show a typical inverse relationship between population density and body size.
As this graph shows, population density typically decreases with increasing body size. Why do you think
this is the case?
Population Research Methods
The most accurate way to determine population size is to simply count all of the individuals within the habitat.
However,this method isoften not logistically oreconomically feasible, especiallywhenstudying largehabitats.
Thus, scientists usually study populations by sampling a representative portion of each habitat and using this
datatomakeinferencesaboutthehabitatasawhole.Avarietyofmethodscanbeusedtosamplepopulations
to determine their size and density. For immobile organisms such as plants, or for very small and slow-moving
organisms, a quadrat may be used (Figure 45.3). A quadrat is a way of marking off square areas within a
habitat, either by staking out an area with sticks and string, or by the use of a wood, plastic, or metal square
placedontheground.Aftersettingthequadrats,researchersthencountthenumberofindividualsthatliewithin
their boundaries. Multiple quadrat samples are performed throughout the habitat at several random locations
to estimate the population size and density within the entire habitat. The number and size of quadrat samples
depends on the type of organisms under study and other factors, including the density of the organism. For
2
example,ifsamplingdaffodils,a1m quadratmightbeused.Withgiantredwoods,ontheotherhand,alarger
2
quadrat of 100 m might be employed. This ensures that enough individuals of the species are counted to get
an accurate sample that correlates with the habitat, including areas not sampled.
PAGE: 1421
1410 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Figure45.3Ascientistusesaquadrattomeasurepopulationsizeanddensity.(credit:NPSSonoranDesertNetwork)
Formobileorganisms,suchasmammals,birds,orfish,scientistsuseatechniquecalledmarkandrecapture.
Thismethodinvolvesmarkingasampleofcapturedanimalsinsomeway(suchastags,bands,paint,orother
body markings), and then releasing them back into the environment to allow them to mix with the rest of the
population. Later, researchers collect a new sample, including some individuals that are marked (recaptures)
and some individuals that are unmarked (Figure 45.4).
Figure45.4Markandrecaptureisusedtomeasurethepopulationsizeofmobileanimalssuchas(a)bighornsheep,
(b)theCaliforniacondor,and(c)salmon.(credita:modificationofworkbyNealHerbert,NPS;creditb:modificationof
work by Pacific Southwest Region USFWS; credit c: modification of work by Ingrid Taylar)
Using the ratio of marked and unmarked individuals, scientists determine how many individuals are in the
sample. From this, calculations are used to estimate the total population size. This method assumes that the
largerthepopulation,thelowerthepercentageoftaggedorganismsthatwillberecapturedsincetheywillhave
mixedwithmoreuntaggedindividuals.Forexample,if80deerarecaptured,tagged,andreleasedintotheforest,
and later 100 deer are captured and 20 of them are already marked, we can estimate the population size (N)
using the following equation:
(number marked fir t catch x total number of second catch)
= N
number marked second catch
Using our example, the population size would be estimated at 400.
(80 x 100)
= 400
20
Therefore, there are an estimated 400 total individuals in the original population.
There are some limitations to the mark and recapture method. Some animals from the first catch may learn to
avoidcaptureinthesecondround,thusinflatingpopulationestimates.Alternatively,someanimalsmaypreferto
beretrapped(especiallyifafoodrewardisoffered),resultinginanunderestimateofpopulationsize.Also,some
species may be harmed by the marking technique, reducing their survival. A variety of other techniques have
beendeveloped,includingtheelectronictrackingofanimalstaggedwithradiotransmitters andtheuseofdata
fromcommercialfishingandtrappingoperationstoestimatethesizeandhealthofpopulationsandcommunities.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1422
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1411
Species Distribution
In addition to measuring simple density, further information about a population can be obtained by looking
at the distribution of the individuals. Species dispersion patterns (or distribution patterns) show the spatial
relationshipbetweenmembersofapopulationwithinahabitatataparticularpointintime.Inotherwords,they
showwhethermembersofthespeciesliveclosetogetherorfarapart,andwhatpatternsareevidentwhenthey
are spaced apart.
Individuals in a population can be equally spaced apart, dispersed randomly with no predictable pattern, or
clustered in groups. These are known as uniform, random, and clumped dispersion patterns, respectively
(Figure 45.5). Uniform dispersion is observed in plants that secrete substances inhibiting the growth of nearby
individuals (such as the release of toxic chemicals by the sage plant Salvia leucophylla, a phenomenon called
allelopathy) and in animals like the penguin that maintain a defined territory. An example of random dispersion
occurs with dandelion and other plants that have wind-dispersed seeds that germinate wherever they happen
to fall in a favorable environment. A clumped dispersion may be seen in plants that drop their seeds straight
to the ground, such as oak trees, or in animals that live in groups (schools of fish or herds of elephants).
Clumped dispersions may also be a function of habitat heterogeneity. Thus, the dispersion of the individuals
withinapopulationprovidesmoreinformationabouthowtheyinteractwitheachotherthandoesasimpledensity
measurement. Just as lower density species might have more difficulty finding a mate, solitary species with a
random distribution might have a similar difficulty when compared to social species clumped together in groups.
Figure 45.5 Species may have uniform, random, or clumped distribution. Territorial birds such as penguins tend
to have uniform distribution. Plants such as dandelions with wind-dispersed seeds tend to be randomly distributed.
Animals such as elephants that travel in groups exhibit clumped distribution. (credit a: modification of work by Ben
Tubby; credit b: modification of work by Rosendahl; credit c: modification of work by Rebecca Wood)
Demography
While population size and density describe a population at one particular point in time, scientists must use
demography to study the dynamics of a population. Demography is the statistical study of population changes
over time: birth rates, death rates, and life expectancies. Each of these measures, especially birth rates, may
beaffectedbythepopulationcharacteristicsdescribedabove.Forexample,alargepopulationsizeresultsina
higher birth rate because more potentially reproductive individuals are present. In contrast, a large population
size can also result in a higher death rate because of competition, disease, and the accumulation of waste.
Similarly, a higher population density or a clumped dispersion pattern results in more potential reproductive
encounters between individuals, which can increase birth rate. Lastly, a female-biased sex ratio (the ratio of
malestofemales)oragestructure(theproportionofpopulationmembersatspecificageranges)composedof
many individuals of reproductive age can increase birth rates.
Inaddition,thedemographiccharacteristicsofapopulationcaninfluencehowthepopulationgrowsordeclines
over time. If birth and death rates are equal, the population remains stable. However, the population size will
increase if birth rates exceed death rates; the population will decrease if birth rates are less than death rates.
Lifeexpectancyisanotherimportantfactor;thelengthoftimeindividualsremaininthepopulationimpactslocal
resources, reproduction, and the overall health of the population. These demographic characteristics are often
displayed in the form of a life table.
Life Tables
Life tables provide important information about the life history of an organism. Life tables divide the population
intoagegroupsandoftensexes,andshowhowlongamemberofthatgroupislikelytolive.Theyaremodeled
PAGE: 1423
1412 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
after actuarial tables used by the insurance industry for estimating human life expectancy. Life tables may
include the probability of individuals dying before their next birthday (i.e., their mortality rate), the percentage
ofsurvivingindividualsdyingataparticularageinterval,andtheirlifeexpectancyateachinterval.Anexample
of a life table is shown in Table 45.1 from a study of Dall mountain sheep, a species native to northwestern
NorthAmerica.Noticethatthepopulationisdividedintoageintervals(columnA).Themortalityrate(per1000),
shown in column D, is based on the number of individuals dying during the age interval (column B) divided by
the number of individuals surviving at the beginning of the interval (Column C), multiplied by 1000.
number of individuals dying
mortality rate = x 1000
number of individuals surviving
Forexample,betweenagesthreeandfour,12individualsdieoutofthe776thatwereremainingfromtheoriginal
1000 sheep. This number is then multiplied by 1000 to get the mortality rate per thousand.
12
mortality rate = x 1000 ≈ 15.5
776
As can be seen from the mortality rate data (column D), a high death rate occurred when the sheep were
between6and12monthsold,andthenincreasedevenmorefrom8to12yearsold,afterwhichtherewerefew
survivors.Thedataindicatethatifasheepinthispopulationweretosurvivetoageone,itcouldbeexpectedto
live another 7.7 years on average, as shown by the life expectancy numbers in column E.
[1]
Life Table of Dall Mountain Sheep
Number Number surviving Mortality rate Life expectancy or
Age
dying in age at beginning of per 1000 alive mean lifetime
interval
interval out age interval out of at beginning of remaining to those
(years)
of 1000 born 1000 born age interval attaining age interval
0-0.5 54 1000 54.0 7.06
0.5-1 145 946 153.3 --
1-2 12 801 15.0 7.7
2-3 13 789 16.5 6.8
3-4 12 776 15.5 5.9
4-5 30 764 39.3 5.0
5-6 46 734 62.7 4.2
6-7 48 688 69.8 3.4
7-8 69 640 107.8 2.6
8-9 132 571 231.2 1.9
9-10 187 439 426.0 1.3
10-11 156 252 619.0 0.9
11-12 90 96 937.5 0.6
12-13 3 6 500.0 1.2
13-14 3 3 1000 0.7
Table 45.1This life table ofOvis dallishows the number of deaths, number of survivors, mortality rate,
and life expectancy at each age interval for the Dall mountain sheep.
Survivorship Curves
Another tool used by population ecologists is a survivorship curve, which is a graph of the number of
1. Data Adapted from Edward S. Deevey, Jr., “Life Tables for Natural Populations of Animals,”The Quarterly Review of Biology22, no. 4
(December 1947): 283-314.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1424
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1413
individuals surviving at each age interval plotted versus time (usually with data compiled from a life table).
These curves allow us to compare the life histories of different populations (Figure 45.6). Humans and most
primatesexhibitaTypeIsurvivorshipcurvebecauseahighpercentageofoffspringsurvivetheirearlyandmiddle
years—death occurspredominantly inolderindividuals. These types ofspeciesusuallyhavesmallnumbersof
offspring at one time, and they give a high amount of parental care to them to ensure their survival. Birds are
anexampleofanintermediateorTypeIIsurvivorshipcurvebecausebirdsdiemoreorlessequallyateachage
interval. These organisms also may have relatively few offspring and provide significant parental care. Trees,
marineinvertebrates,andmostfishesexhibitaTypeIIIsurvivorshipcurvebecauseveryfewoftheseorganisms
survivetheiryoungeryears;however,thosethatmakeittoanoldagearemorelikelytosurviveforarelatively
longperiodoftime.Organismsinthiscategoryusuallyhaveaverylargenumberofoffspring,butoncetheyare
born, little parental care is provided. Thus these offspring are “on their own” and vulnerable to predation, but
their sheer numbers assure the survival of enough individuals to perpetuate the species.
Figure 45.6 Survivorship curves show the distribution of individuals in a population according to age. Humans and
mostmammalshaveaTypeIsurvivorshipcurvebecausedeathprimarilyoccursintheolderyears.BirdshaveaType
IIsurvivorshipcurve,asdeathatanyageisequallyprobable.TreeshaveaTypeIIIsurvivorshipcurvebecausevery
few survive the younger years, but after a certain age, individuals are much more likely to survive.
45.2 | Life Histories and Natural Selection
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how life history patterns are influenced by natural selection
• Explain different life history patterns and how different reproductive strategies affect species’ survival
A species’ life history describes the series of events over its lifetime, such as how resources are allocated
for growth, maintenance, and reproduction. Life history traits affect the life table of an organism. A species’ life
history is genetically determined and shaped by the environment and natural selection.
Life History Patterns and Energy Budgets
Energy is required by all living organisms for their growth, maintenance, and reproduction; at the same time,
energyisoftenamajorlimitingfactorindetermininganorganism’ssurvival.Plants,forexample,acquireenergy
fromthesunviaphotosynthesis,butmustexpendthisenergytogrow,maintainhealth,andproduceenergy-rich
seedstoproducethenextgeneration.Animalshavetheadditionalburdenofusingsomeoftheirenergyreserves
to acquire food. Furthermore, some animals must expend energy caring for their offspring. Thus, all species
haveanenergybudget:theymustbalanceenergyintakewiththeiruseofenergyformetabolism,reproduction,
parental care, and energy storage (such as bears building up body fat for winter hibernation).
PAGE: 1425
1414 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Parental Care and Fecundity
Fecundity is the potential reproductive capacity of an individual within a population. In other words, fecundity
describes how many offspring could ideally be produced if an individual has as many offspring as possible,
repeating the reproductive cycle as soon as possible after the birth of the offspring. In animals, fecundity is
inverselyrelatedtotheamountofparentalcaregiventoanindividualoffspring.Species,suchasmanymarine
invertebrates,thatproducemanyoffspringusuallyprovidelittleifanycarefortheoffspring(theywouldnothave
the energy or the ability to do so anyway). Most of their energy budget is used to produce many tiny offspring.
Animals with this strategy are often self-sufficient at a very early age. This is because of the energy tradeoff
theseorganismshavemadetomaximizetheirevolutionaryfitness.Becausetheirenergyisusedforproducing
offspring instead of parental care, it makes sense that these offspring have some ability to be able to move
within their environment and find food and perhaps shelter. Even with these abilities, their small size makes
themextremelyvulnerabletopredation,sotheproductionofmanyoffspringallowsenoughofthemtosurviveto
maintain the species.
Animalspeciesthathavefewoffspringduringareproductiveeventusuallygiveextensiveparentalcare,devoting
muchoftheirenergybudgettotheseactivities, sometimesattheexpenseoftheirownhealth. Thisisthecase
with many mammals, such as humans, kangaroos, and pandas. The offspring of these species are relatively
helpless at birth and need to develop before they achieve self-sufficiency.
Plants with low fecundity produce few energy-rich seeds (such as coconuts and chestnuts) with each having a
goodchancetogerminateintoaneworganism;plantswithhighfecundityusuallyhavemanysmall,energy-poor
seeds (like orchids) that have a relatively poor chance of surviving. Although it may seem that coconuts and
chestnutshaveabetterchanceofsurviving,theenergytradeoffoftheorchidisalsoveryeffective.Itisamatter
of where the energy is used, for large numbers of seeds or for fewer seeds with more energy.
Early versus Late Reproduction
The timing of reproduction in a life history also affects species survival. Organisms that reproduce at an early
age have a greater chance of producing offspring, but this is usually at the expense of their growth and the
maintenanceoftheirhealth.Conversely,organismsthatstartreproducinglaterinlifeoftenhavegreaterfecundity
orarebetterabletoprovideparentalcare,buttheyriskthattheywillnotsurvivetoreproductiveage.Examples
ofthiscanbeseeninfishes.Smallfish,likeguppies,usetheirenergytoreproducerapidly,butneverattainthe
sizethatwouldgivethemdefenseagainstsomepredators.Largerfish,likethebluegillorshark,usetheirenergy
to attain a large size, but do so with the risk that they will die before they can reproduce or at least reproduce
to their maximum. These different energy strategies and tradeoffs are key to understanding the evolution of
each species as it maximizes its fitness and fills its niche. In terms of energy budgeting, some species “blow it
all” and use up most of their energy reserves to reproduce early before they die. Other species delay having
reproductiontobecomestronger,moreexperiencedindividualsandtomakesurethattheyarestrongenoughto
provide parental care if necessary.
Single versus Multiple Reproductive Events
Somelifehistorytraits,suchasfecundity,timingofreproduction,andparentalcare,canbegroupedtogetherinto
generalstrategiesthatareusedbymultiplespecies.Semelparityoccurswhenaspeciesreproducesonlyonce
during its lifetime and then dies. Such species use most of their resource budget during a single reproductive
event,sacrificingtheirhealthtothepointthattheydonotsurvive.Examplesofsemelparityarebamboo,which
flowersonceandthendies,andtheChinooksalmon(Figure45.7a),whichusesmostofitsenergyreservesto
migratefromtheoceantoitsfreshwaternestingarea,whereitreproducesandthendies.Scientistshaveposited
alternateexplanationsfortheevolutionaryadvantageoftheChinook’spost-reproduction death:aprogrammed
suicide caused by a massive release of corticosteroid hormones, presumably so the parents can become food
for the offspring, or simple exhaustion caused by the energy demands of reproduction; these are still being
debated.
Iteroparitydescribesspeciesthatreproducerepeatedlyduringtheirlives.Someanimalsareabletomateonly
once per year, but survive multiple mating seasons. The pronghorn antelope is an example of an animal that
goes into a seasonal estrus cycle (“heat”): a hormonally induced physiological condition preparing the body for
successful mating (Figure 45.7b). Females of these species mate only during the estrus phase of the cycle. A
different pattern is observed in primates, including humans and chimpanzees, which may attempt reproduction
atanytimeduringtheirreproductiveyears,eventhoughtheirmenstrualcyclesmakepregnancylikelyonlyafew
days per month during ovulation (Figure 45.7c).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1426
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1415
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 45.7 The (a) Chinook salmon mates once and dies. The (b) pronghorn antelope mates during specific times
of the year during its reproductive life. Primates, such as humans and (c) chimpanzees, may mate on any day,
independent of ovulation. (credit a: modification of work by Roger Tabor, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by
Mark Gocke, USDA; credit c: modification of work by “Shiny Things”/Flickr)
Play this interactive PBS evolution-based mating game (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/mating_game) to
learn more about reproductive strategies.
PAGE: 1427
1416 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Energy Budgets, Reproductive Costs, and Sexual Selection in
Drosophila
Researchintohowanimalsallocatetheirenergyresourcesforgrowth,maintenance,andreproductionhas
used a variety of experimental animal models. Some of this work has been done using the common fruit
fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Studies have shown that not only does reproduction have a cost as far as
how long male fruit flies live, but also fruit flies that have already mated several times have limited sperm
remaining for reproduction. Fruit flies maximize their last chances at reproduction by selecting optimal
mates.
In a 1981 study, male fruit flies were placed in enclosures with either virgin or inseminated females. The
males that mated with virgin females had shorter life spans than those in contact with the same number
ofinseminated females with whichthey wereunabletomate. This effect occurredregardlessofhowlarge
(indicative of their age) the males were. Thus, males that did not mate lived longer, allowing them more
opportunities to find mates in the future.
More recent studies, performed in 2006, show how males select the female with which they will mate and
[2]
how this is affected by previous matings (Figure 45.8). Males were allowed to select between smaller
and larger females. Findings showed that larger females had greater fecundity, producing twice as many
offspring per mating as the smaller females did. Males that had previously mated, and thus had lower
supplies of sperm, were termed “resource-depleted,” while males that had not mated were termed “non-
resource-depleted.”Thestudyshowedthatalthoughnon-resource-depletedmalespreferentiallymatedwith
larger females, this selection of partners was more pronounced in the resource-depleted males. Thus,
maleswithdepletedspermsupplies,whichwerelimitedinthenumberoftimesthattheycouldmatebefore
they replenished their sperm supply, selected larger, more fecund females, thus maximizing their chances
for offspring. This study was one of the first to show that the physiological state of the male affected its
mating behavior in a way that clearly maximizes its use of limited reproductive resources.
Figure45.8Malefruitfliesthathadpreviouslymated(sperm-depleted)pickedlarger,morefecundfemalesmore
often than those that had not mated (non-sperm-depleted). This change in behavior causes an increase in the
efficiency of a limited reproductive resource: sperm.
These studies demonstrate two ways in which the energy budget is a factor in reproduction. First, energy
expended on mating may reduce an animal’s lifespan, but by this time they have already reproduced, so
in the context of natural selection this early death is not of much evolutionary importance. Second, when
resources such as sperm (and the energy needed to replenish it) are low, an organism’s behavior can
change to give them the best chance of passing their genes on to the next generation. These changes in
behavior, so important to evolution, are studied in a discipline known as behavioral biology, or ethology, at
the interface between population biology and psychology.
2. Adapted from Phillip G. Byrne and William R. Rice, “Evidence for adaptive male mate choice in the fruit flyDrosophila melanogaster,”
Proc Biol Sci. 273, no. 1589 (2006): 917-922, doi: 10.1098/rspb.2005.3372.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1428
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1417
45.3 | Environmental Limits to Population Growth
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Explain the characteristics of and differences between exponential and logistic growth patterns
• Give examples of exponential and logistic growth in natural populations
• Describehownaturalselectionandenvironmentaladaptationledtotheevolutionofparticularlifehistory
patterns
Althoughlifehistoriesdescribethewaymanycharacteristicsofapopulation(suchastheiragestructure)change
overtimeinageneralway,populationecologistsmakeuseofavarietyofmethodstomodelpopulationdynamics
mathematically. These more precise models can then be used to accurately describe changes occurring in a
population and better predict future changes. Certain long-accepted models are now being modified or even
abandoned due to their lack of predictive ability, and scholars strive to create effective new models.
Exponential Growth
Charles Darwin, in his theory of natural selection, was greatly influenced by the English clergyman Thomas
Malthus. Malthus published a book in 1798 stating that populations with unlimited natural resources grow very
rapidly, and then population growth decreases as resources become depleted. This accelerating pattern of
increasing population size is calledexponential growth.
The best example of exponential growth is seen in bacteria. Bacteria reproduce by prokaryotic fission. This
division takes about an hour for many bacterial species. If 1000 bacteria are placed in a large flask with an
unlimited supply of nutrients (so the nutrients will not become depleted), after an hour, there is one round of
division and each organism divides, resulting in 2000 organisms—an increase of 1000. In another hour, each
of the 2000 organisms will double, producing 4000, an increase of 2000 organisms. After the third hour, there
should be 8000 bacteria in the flask, an increase of 4000 organisms. The important concept of exponential
growth is the accelerating population growth rate—the number of organisms added in each reproductive
generation—that is, it is increasing at a greater and greater rate. After 1 day and 24 of these cycles, the
populationwouldhaveincreasedfrom1000tomorethan16billion.Whenthepopulationsize,N,isplottedover
time, aJ-shaped growth curveis produced (Figure 45.9).
The bacteria example is not representative of the real world where resources are limited. Furthermore, some
bacteria will die during the experiment and thus not reproduce, lowering the growth rate. Therefore, when
calculating the growth rate of a population, the death rate (D) (number organisms that die during a particular
timeinterval)issubtractedfromthebirthrate(B)(numberorganismsthatarebornduringthatinterval).Thisis
shown in the following formula:
ΔN (change in number)
= B (birth rate) - D (death rate)
ΔT (change in time)
Thebirthrateisusuallyexpressedonapercapita(foreachindividual)basis.Thus,B(birthrate)=bN(theper
capita birth rate “b” multiplied by the number of individuals “N”) and D (death rate) = dN (the per capita death
rate“d”multipliedbythenumberofindividuals“N”).Additionally,ecologistsareinterestedinthepopulationata
particularpointintime,aninfinitelysmalltimeinterval.Forthisreason,theterminologyofdifferentialcalculusis
usedtoobtainthe“instantaneous”growthrate,replacingthechangeinnumberandtimewithaninstant-specific
measurement of number and time.
dN
= bN − dN = (b - d)N
dT
Notice that the “d” associated with the first term refers to the derivative (as the term is used in calculus) and is
differentfromthedeathrate,alsocalled“d.”Thedifferencebetweenbirthanddeathratesisfurthersimplifiedby
substituting the term “r” (intrinsic rate of increase) for the relationship between birth and death rates:
dN
= rN
dT
Thevalue“r”canbepositive,meaningthepopulationisincreasinginsize;ornegative,meaningthepopulation
PAGE: 1429
1418 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
isdecreasinginsize;orzero,wherethepopulation’ssizeisunchanging,aconditionknownaszeropopulation
growth. A further refinement of the formula recognizes that different species have inherent differences in
their intrinsic rate of increase (often thought of as the potential for reproduction), even under ideal conditions.
Obviously,abacteriumcanreproducemorerapidlyandhaveahigherintrinsicrateofgrowththanahuman.The
maximal growth rate for a species is itsbiotic potential, orrmax, thus changing the equation to:
dN
dT
=r
max
N
Figure 45.9 When resources are unlimited, populations exhibit exponential growth, resulting in a J-shaped curve.
Whenresourcesarelimited,populationsexhibitlogisticgrowth.Inlogisticgrowth,populationexpansiondecreasesas
resources become scarce, and it levels off when the carrying capacity of the environment isreached, resulting inan
S-shaped curve.
Logistic Growth
Exponentialgrowthispossibleonlywheninfinitenaturalresourcesareavailable;thisisnotthecaseinthereal
world. Charles Darwin recognized this fact in his description of the “struggle for existence,” which states that
individualswillcompete(withmembersoftheirownorotherspecies)forlimitedresources.Thesuccessfulones
will survive to pass on their own characteristics and traits (which we know now are transferred by genes) to
the next generation at a greater rate (natural selection). To model the reality of limited resources, population
ecologists developed thelogistic growthmodel.
Carrying Capacity and the Logistic Model
Intherealworld,withitslimitedresources,exponentialgrowthcannotcontinueindefinitely.Exponentialgrowth
may occur in environments where there are few individuals and plentiful resources, but when the number of
individuals gets large enough, resources will be depleted, slowing the growth rate. Eventually, the growth rate
willplateauorleveloff(Figure45.9).Thispopulationsize,whichrepresentsthemaximumpopulationsizethat
a particular environment can support, is called thecarrying capacity, orK.
The formula we use to calculate logistic growth adds the carrying capacity as a moderating force in the growth
rate.Theexpression“K–N”indicateshowmanyindividualsmaybeaddedtoapopulationatagivenstage,and
“K–N”dividedby“K”isthefraction ofthecarryingcapacityavailableforfurther growth. Thus, theexponential
growth model is restricted by this factor to generate the logistic growth equation:
dN dN (K - N)
dT
=r
maxdT
=r
max
N
K
NoticethatwhenNisverysmall,(K-N)/KbecomesclosetoK/Kor1,andtherightsideoftheequationreduces
tormaxN,whichmeansthepopulationisgrowingexponentiallyandisnotinfluencedbycarryingcapacity.Onthe
other hand, when N is large, (K-N)/K comes close to zero, which means that population growth will be slowed
greatlyorevenstopped.Thus,populationgrowthisgreatlyslowedinlargepopulationsbythecarryingcapacity
K.Thismodelalsoallowsforthepopulationofanegativepopulationgrowth,orapopulationdecline.Thisoccurs
whenthenumberofindividualsinthepopulationexceedsthecarryingcapacity(becausethevalueof(K-N)/Kis
negative).
AgraphofthisequationyieldsanS-shapedcurve(Figure45.9),anditisamorerealisticmodelofpopulation
growth than exponential growth. There are three different sections to an S-shaped curve. Initially, growth is
exponential because there are few individuals and ample resources available. Then, as resources begin to
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1430
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1419
becomelimited,thegrowthratedecreases.Finally,growthlevelsoffatthecarryingcapacityoftheenvironment,
with little change in population size over time.
Role of Intraspecific Competition
The logistic model assumes that every individual within a population will have equal access to resources and,
thus,anequalchanceforsurvival.Forplants,theamountofwater,sunlight,nutrients,andthespacetogroware
the important resources, whereas in animals, important resources include food, water, shelter, nesting space,
and mates.
In the real world, phenotypic variation among individuals within a population means that some individuals will
be better adapted to their environment than others. The resulting competition between population members of
the same species for resources is termed intraspecific competition (intra- = “within”; -specific = “species”).
Intraspecific competition for resources may not affect populations that are well below their carrying
capacity—resources are plentiful and all individuals can obtain what they need. However, as population size
increases, this competition intensifies. In addition, the accumulation of waste products can reduce an
environment’s carrying capacity.
Examples of Logistic Growth
Yeast,amicroscopicfungususedtomakebreadandalcoholicbeverages,exhibitstheclassicalS-shapedcurve
whengrowninatesttube(Figure45.10a).Itsgrowthlevelsoffasthepopulationdepletesthenutrients.Inthe
real world, however, there are variations to this idealized curve. Examples in wild populations include sheep
andharborseals(Figure45.10b).Inbothexamples,thepopulationsizeexceedsthecarryingcapacityforshort
periodsoftimeandthenfallsbelowthecarryingcapacityafterwards.Thisfluctuationinpopulationsizecontinues
tooccurasthepopulationoscillatesarounditscarryingcapacity.Still,evenwiththisoscillation,thelogisticmodel
is confirmed.
PAGE: 1431
1420 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Figure45.10(a)YeastgrowninidealconditionsinatesttubeshowaclassicalS-shapedlogisticgrowthcurve,
whereas (b) a natural population of seals shows real-world fluctuation.
If the major food source of the seals declines due to pollution or overfishing, which of the following would
likely occur?
a. The carrying capacity of seals would decrease, as would the seal population.
b. The carrying capacity of seals would decrease, but the seal population would remain the same.
c. The number of seal deaths would increase but the number of births would also increase, so the
population size would remain the same.
d. The carrying capacity of seals would remain the same, but the population of seals would decrease.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1432
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1421
45.4 | Population Dynamics and Regulation
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Give examples of how the carrying capacity of a habitat may change
• Compareandcontrastdensity-dependentgrowthregulationanddensity-independentgrowthregulation,
giving examples
• Give examples of exponential and logistic growth in wild animal populations
• Describe how natural selection and environmental adaptation leads to the evolution of particular life-
history patterns
The logistic model of population growth, while valid in many natural populations and a useful model, is a
simplification of real-world population dynamics. Implicit in the model is that the carrying capacity of the
environmentdoesnotchange,whichisnotthecase.Thecarryingcapacityvariesannually:forexample,some
summersarehotanddrywhereasothersarecoldandwet.Inmanyareas,thecarryingcapacityduringthewinter
ismuchlowerthanitisduringthesummer.Also,naturaleventssuchasearthquakes,volcanoes,andfirescan
alter an environment and hence its carrying capacity. Additionally, populations do not usually exist in isolation.
Theyengageininterspecificcompetition:thatis,theysharetheenvironmentwithotherspeciescompetingfor
the same resources. These factors are also important to understanding how a specific population will grow.
Natureregulatespopulationgrowthinavarietyofways.Thesearegroupedintodensity-dependentfactors,in
whichthedensityofthepopulationatagiventimeaffectsgrowthrateandmortality,anddensity-independent
factors, which influence mortality in a population regardless of population density. Note that in the former,
the effect of the factor on the population depends on the density of the population at onset. Conservation
biologistswanttounderstandbothtypesbecausethishelpsthemmanagepopulationsandpreventextinctionor
overpopulation.
Density-Dependent Regulation
Most density-dependent factors are biological in nature (biotic), and include predation, inter- and intraspecific
competition, accumulation of waste, and diseases such as those caused by parasites. Usually, the denser
a population is, the greater its mortality rate. For example, during intra- and interspecific competition, the
reproductiveratesoftheindividualswillusuallybelower,reducingtheirpopulation’srateofgrowth.Inaddition,
low prey density increases the mortality of its predator because it has more difficulty locating its food source.
An example of density-dependent regulation is shown in Figure 45.11 with results from a study focusing on
[3]
the giant intestinal roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), a parasite of humans and other mammals. Denser
populations of the parasite exhibited lower fecundity: they contained fewer eggs. One possible explanation for
this is that females would be smaller in more dense populations (due to limited resources) and that smaller
femaleswouldhavefewereggs.Thishypothesiswastestedanddisprovedina2009studywhichshowedthat
[4]
female weight had no influence. The actual cause of the density-dependence of fecundity in this organism is
still unclear and awaiting further investigation.
3. N.A. Croll et al., “The Population Biology and Control ofAscaris lumbricoidesin a Rural Community in Iran.”Transactions of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene76, no. 2 (1982): 187-197, doi:10.1016/0035-9203(82)90272-3.
4. Martin Walker et al., “Density-Dependent Effects on the Weight of FemaleAscaris lumbricoidesInfections of Humans and its Impact on
Patterns of Egg Production.”Parasites & Vectors2, no. 11 (February 2009), doi:10.1186/1756-3305-2-11.
PAGE: 1433
1422 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
[5]
Figure 45.11In this population of roundworms, fecundity (number of eggs) decreases with population density.
Density-Independent Regulation and Interaction with Density-
Dependent Factors
Manyfactors,typicallyphysicalorchemicalinnature(abiotic),influencethemortalityofapopulationregardless
of its density, including weather, natural disasters, and pollution. An individual deer may be killed in a forest
fire regardless of how many deer happen to be in that area. Its chances of survival are the same whether the
population density is high or low. The same holds true for cold winter weather.
Inreal-lifesituations,populationregulationisverycomplicatedanddensity-dependentandindependentfactors
can interact. A dense population that is reduced in a density-independent manner by some environmental
factor(s)willbeabletorecoverdifferentlythanasparsepopulation.Forexample,apopulationofdeeraffected
by a harsh winter will recover faster if there are more deer remaining to reproduce.
5. N.A. Croll et al., “The Population Biology and Control ofAscaris lumbricoidesin a Rural Community in Iran.”Transactions of the Royal
Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene76, no. 2 (1982): 187-197, doi:10.1016/0035-9203(82)90272-3.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1434
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1423
Why Did the Woolly Mammoth Go Extinct?
(a)
(b) (c)
Figure45.12Thethreephotosinclude:(a)1916muralofamammothherdfromtheAmericanMuseumofNatural
History,(b)theonlystuffedmammothintheworld,fromtheMuseumofZoologylocatedinSt.Petersburg,Russia,
and (c) a one-month-old baby mammoth, named Lyuba, discovered in Siberia in 2007. (credit a: modification of
workbyCharlesR.Knight;creditb:modificationofworkby“Tanapon”/Flickr;creditc:modificationofworkbyMatt
Howry)
It'seasytogetlostinthediscussionaboutwhydinosaurswentextinct65millionyearsago.Wasitduetoa
meteor slamming into Earth near the coast of modern-day Mexico, or was it from some long-term weather
cycle that is not yet understood? Scientists are continually exploring these and other theories.
Woollymammothsbegantogoextinctmuchmorerecently,whentheysharedtheEarthwithhumanswho
were no different anatomically than humans today (Figure 45.12). Mammoths survived in isolated island
populationsasrecentlyas1700BC.Weknowalotabouttheseanimalsfromcarcassesfoundfrozeninthe
ice of Siberia and other regions of the north. Scientists have sequenced at least 50 percent of its genome
and believe mammoths are between 98 and 99 percent identical to modern elephants.
It is commonly thought that climate change and human hunting led to their extinction. A 2008 study
estimated that climate change reduced the mammoth’s range from 3,000,000 square miles 42,000 years
[6]
ago to 310,000 square miles 6,000 years ago. It is also well documented that humans hunted these
animals. A 2012 study showed that no single factor was exclusively responsible for the extinction of these
[7]
magnificent creatures. In addition to human hunting, climate change, and reduction of habitat, these
scientistsdemonstratedanotherimportantfactorinthemammoth’sextinctionwasthemigrationofhumans
across the Bering Strait to North America during the last ice age 20,000 years ago.
Themaintenanceofstablepopulationswasandisverycomplex,withmanyinteractingfactorsdetermining
the outcome. It is important to remember that humans are also part of nature. We once contributed to a
species’ decline using only primitive hunting technology.
Life Histories of K-selected and r-selected Species
Whilereproductivestrategiesplayakeyroleinlifehistories,theydonotaccountforimportantfactorslikelimited
resources and competition. The regulation of population growth by these factors can be used to introduce a
classical concept in population biology, that ofK-selected versusr-selected species.
The concept relates to a species’ reproductive strategies, habitat, and behavior, especially in the way that
they obtain resources and care for their young. It includes length of life and survivorship factors as well.
Populationbiologistshavegroupedspeciesintothetwolargecategories—K-selectedandr-selected—although
the categories are really two ends of a continuum.
K-selected species are species selected by stable, predictable environments. Populations of K-selected
speciestendtoexistclosetotheircarryingcapacity(hencethetermK-selected)whereintraspecificcompetition
is high. These species have few, large offspring, a long gestation period, and often give long-term care to their
offspring(Table45.2).Whilelargerinsizewhenborn,theoffspringarerelativelyhelplessandimmatureatbirth.
6. David Nogués-Bravo et al., “Climate Change, Humans, and the Extinction of the Woolly Mammoth.”PLoS Biol6 (April 2008): e79,
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0060079.
7. G.M. MacDonald et al., “Pattern of Extinction of the Woolly Mammoth in Beringia.”Nature Communications3, no. 893 (June 2012),
doi:10.1038/ncomms1881.
PAGE: 1435
1424 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Bythetimetheyreachadulthood,theymustdevelopskillstocompetefornaturalresources.Inplants,scientists
think of parental care more broadly: how long fruit takes to develop or how long it remains on the plant are
determining factors in the time to the next reproductive event. Examples of K-selected species are primates
(including humans), elephants, and plants such as oak trees (Figure 45.13a).
Oak trees grow very slowly and take, on average, 20 years to produce their first seeds, known as acorns. As
manyas50,000acornscanbeproducedbyanindividualtree,butthegerminationrateislowasmanyofthese
rotorareeatenbyanimalssuchassquirrels.Insomeyears,oaksmayproduceanexceptionallylargenumber
of acorns, and these years may be on a two- or three-year cycle depending on the species of oak (r-selection).
As oak trees grow to a large size and for many years before they begin to produce acorns, they devote a
large percentage of their energy budget to growth and maintenance. The tree’s height and size allow it to
dominate other plants in the competition for sunlight, the oak’s primary energy resource. Furthermore, when it
does reproduce, the oak produces large, energy-rich seeds that use their energy reserve to become quickly
established (K-selection).
Incontrast,r-selectedspecieshavealargenumberofsmalloffspring(hencetheirrdesignation(Table45.2)).
This strategy is often employed in unpredictable or changing environments. Animals that are r-selected do
not give long-term parental care and the offspring are relatively mature and self-sufficient at birth. Examples
of r-selected species are marine invertebrates, such as jellyfish, and plants, such as the dandelion (Figure
45.13b). Dandelions have small seeds that are wind dispersed long distances. Many seeds are produced
simultaneously to ensure that at least some of them reach a hospitable environment. Seeds that land in
inhospitable environments have little chance for survival since their seeds are low in energy content. Note that
survival is not necessarily a function of energy stored in the seed itself.
Characteristics of K-selected and r-selected species
Characteristics ofK-selected species Characteristics ofr-selected species
Mature late Mature early
Greater longevity Lower longevity
Increased parental care Decreased parental care
Increased competition Decreased competition
Fewer offspring More offspring
Larger offspring Smaller offspring
Table 45.2
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1436
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1425
Figure 45.13 (a) Elephants are considered K-selected species as they live long, mature late, and provide long-term
parentalcaretofewoffspring.Oaktreesproducemanyoffspringthatdonotreceiveparentalcare,butareconsidered
K-selectedspeciesbasedonlongevityandlatematuration.(b)Dandelionsandjellyfisharebothconsideredr-selected
species as they mature early, have short lifespans, and produce many offspring that receive no parental care.
Modern Theories of Life History
Bythesecondhalfofthetwentiethcentury,theconceptofK-andr-selectedspecieswasusedextensivelyand
successfully to study populations. The r- and K-selection theory, although accepted for decades and used for
much groundbreaking research, has now been reconsidered, and many population biologists have abandoned
or modified it. Over the years, several studies attempted to confirm the theory, but these attempts have largely
failed.Manyspecieswereidentifiedthatdidnotfollowthetheory’spredictions.Furthermore,thetheoryignored
the age-specific mortality of the populations which scientists now know is very important. New demographic-
based models of life history evolution have been developed which incorporate many ecological concepts
included inr- andK-selection theory as well as population age structure and mortality factors.
45.5 | Human Population Growth
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss exponential human population growth
• Explain how humans have expanded the carrying capacity of their habitat
• Relate population growth and age structure to the level of economic development in different countries
• Discuss the long-term implications of unchecked human population growth
Population dynamics can be applied to human population growth. Earth’s human population is growing rapidly,
to the extent that some worry about the ability of the earth’s environment to sustain this population. Long-term
exponential growth carries the potential risks of famine, disease, and large-scale death.
Although humans have increased the carrying capacity of their environment, the technologies used to achieve
this transformation have caused unprecedented changes to Earth’s environment, altering ecosystems to the
PAGE: 1437
1426 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
point where some may be in danger of collapse. The depletion of the ozone layer, erosion due to acid rain,
and damage from global climate change are caused by human activities. The ultimate effect of these changes
on our carrying capacity is unknown. As some point out, it is likely that the negative effects of increasing
carryingcapacitywilloutweighthepositiveones—theworld’scarryingcapacityforhumanbeingsmightactually
decrease.
The human population is currently experiencing exponential growth even though human reproduction is far
belowitsbioticpotential(Figure45.14).Toreachitsbioticpotential,allfemaleswouldhavetobecomepregnant
every nine months or so during their reproductive years. Also, resources would have to be such that the
environment would support such growth. Neither of these two conditions exists. In spite of this fact, human
population is still growing exponentially.
Figure45.14Humanpopulationgrowthsince1000ADisexponential(darkblueline).Noticethatwhilethepopulation
in Asia (yellow line), which has many economically underdeveloped countries, is increasing exponentially, the
populationinEurope(lightblueline),wheremostofthecountriesareeconomicallydeveloped,isgrowingmuchmore
slowly.
A consequence of exponential human population growth is a reduction in time that it takes to add a particular
number of humans to the Earth. Figure 45.15 shows that 123 years were necessary to add 1 billion humans
in 1930, but it only took 24 years to add two billion people between 1975 and 1999. As already discussed,
ourabilitytoincreaseourcarryingcapacityindefinitelymybelimited.Withoutnewtechnologicaladvances,the
human growth rate has been predicted to slow in the coming decades. However, the population will still be
increasing and the threat of overpopulation remains.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1438
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1427
Figure 45.15 The time between the addition of each billion human beings to Earth decreases over time. (credit:
modification of work by Ryan T. Cragun)
Clickthroughthisinteractiveview(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/human_growth)ofhowhumanpopulations
have changed over time.
Overcoming Density-Dependent Regulation
Humans are unique in their ability to alter their environment with the conscious purpose of increasing carrying
capacity.Thisabilityisamajorfactorresponsibleforhumanpopulationgrowthandawayofovercomingdensity-
dependent growth regulation. Much of this ability is related to human intelligence, society, and communication.
Humans can construct shelter to protect them from the elements and have developed agriculture and
domesticated animals to increase their food supplies. In addition, humans use language to communicate this
technology to new generations, allowing them to improve upon previous accomplishments.
Otherfactorsinhumanpopulationgrowtharemigrationandpublichealth.HumansoriginatedinAfrica,buthave
sincemigratedtonearlyallinhabitablelandontheEarth.Publichealth,sanitation,andtheuseofantibioticsand
vaccineshavedecreasedtheabilityofinfectiousdiseasetolimithumanpopulationgrowth.Inthepast,diseases
such as the bubonic plaque of the fourteenth century killed between 30 and 60 percent of Europe’s population
and reduced the overall world population by as many as 100 million people. Today, the threat of infectious
disease, while not gone, is certainly less severe. According to the World Health Organization, global death
from infectious disease declined from 16.4 million in 1993 to 14.7 million in 1992. To compare to some of the
epidemics of the past, the percentage of the world's population killed between 1993 and 2002 decreased from
0.30percentoftheworld'spopulation to0.24percent. Thus, infectious diseaseinfluenceonhumanpopulation
growth is becoming less significant.
Age Structure, Population Growth, and Economic Development
Theagestructureofapopulationisanimportantfactorinpopulationdynamics.Agestructureistheproportion
of a population at different age ranges. Age structure allows better prediction of population growth, plus the
abilitytoassociatethisgrowthwiththelevelofeconomicdevelopmentintheregion.Countrieswithrapidgrowth
have a pyramidal shape in their age structure diagrams, showing a preponderance of younger individuals,
many of whom are of reproductive age or will be soon (Figure 45.16). This pattern is most often observed in
underdevelopedcountrieswhereindividualsdonotlivetooldagebecauseofless-than-optimallivingconditions.
PAGE: 1439
1428 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Age structures ofareaswith slowgrowth, including developed countries suchastheUnited States, still havea
pyramidal structure, but with many fewer young and reproductive-aged individuals and a greater proportion of
older individuals. Other developed countries, such as Italy, have zero population growth. The age structure of
these populations is more conical, with an even greater percentage of middle-aged and older individuals. The
actual growth ratesindifferent countries areshowninFigure 45.17,with thehighest ratestending tobeinthe
less economically developed countries of Africa and Asia.
Figure45.16Typicalagestructurediagramsareshown.Therapidgrowthdiagramnarrowstoapoint,indicating
that the number of individuals decreases rapidly with age. In the slow growth model, the number of individuals
decreases steadily with age. Stable population diagrams are rounded on the top, showing that the number of
individuals per age group decreases gradually, and then increases for the older part of the population.
Age structure diagrams for rapidly growing, slow growing, and stable populations are shown in stages 1
through 3. What type of population change do you think stage 4 represents?
Figure 45.17 The percent growth rate of population in different countries is shown. Notice that the highest growth is
occurring in less economically developed countries in Africa and Asia.
Long-Term Consequences of Exponential Human Population Growth
Many dire predictions have been made about the world’s population leading to a major crisis called the
“population explosion.” In the 1968 book The Population Bomb, biologist Dr. Paul R. Ehrlich wrote, “The battle
to feed all of humanity is over. In the 1970s hundreds of millions of people will starve to death in spite of any
crash programs embarked upon now. At this late date nothing can prevent a substantial increase in the world
[8]
death rate.” While many experts view this statement as incorrect based on evidence, the laws of exponential
population growth are still in effect, and unchecked human population growth cannot continue indefinitely.
Severalnationshaveinstitutedpoliciesaimedatinfluencingpopulation.Effortstocontrolpopulationgrowthled
8. Paul R. Erlich, prologue toThe Population Bomb, (1968; repr., New York: Ballantine, 1970).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1440
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1429
to the one-child policy in China, which is now being phased out. India also implements national and regional
populations to encourage family planning. On the other hand, Japan, Spain, Russia, Iran, and other countries
havemadeeffortstoincreasepopulationgrowthafterbirthratesdipped.Suchpoliciesarecontroversial,andthe
humanpopulationcontinuestogrow.Atsomepointthefoodsupplymayrunout,buttheoutcomesaredifficult
topredict.TheUnitedNationsestimatesthatfutureworldpopulationgrowthmayvaryfrom6billion(adecrease)
to 16 billion people by the year 2100.
Another result of population growth is the endangerment of the natural environment. Many countries have
attempted to reduce the human impact on climate change by reducing their emission of the greenhouse gas
carbon dioxide. However, these treaties have not been ratified by every country. The role of human activity in
causingclimatechangehasbecomeahotlydebatedsocio-politicalissueinsomecountries,includingtheUnited
States.Thus,weenterthefuturewithconsiderableuncertaintyaboutourabilitytocurbhumanpopulationgrowth
and protect our environment.
Visit this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/populations) and select “Launch movie” for an animation
discussing the global impacts of human population growth.
45.6 | Community Ecology
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the predator-prey cycle
• Give examples of defenses against predation and herbivory
• Describe the competitive exclusion principle
• Give examples of symbiotic relationships between species
• Describe community structure and succession
Populations rarely, if ever, live in isolation from populations of other species. In most cases, numerous species
share a habitat. The interactions between these populations play a major role in regulating population growth
andabundance.Allpopulationsoccupyingthesamehabitatformacommunity:populationsinhabitingaspecific
areaatthesametime.Thenumberofspeciesoccupyingthesamehabitatandtheirrelativeabundanceisknown
as species diversity. Areas with low diversity, such as the glaciers of Antarctica, still contain a wide variety of
livingthings,whereasthediversityoftropicalrainforestsissogreatthatitcannotbecounted.Ecologyisstudied
atthecommunityleveltounderstandhowspeciesinteractwitheachotherandcompeteforthesameresources.
Predation and Herbivory
Perhapstheclassicalexampleofspeciesinteractionispredation:theconsumptionofpreybyitspredator.Nature
showsontelevisionhighlightthedramaofonelivingorganismkillinganother.Populationsofpredatorsandprey
inacommunityarenotconstantovertime:inmostcases,theyvaryincyclesthatappeartoberelated.Themost
often cited example of predator-prey dynamics is seen in the cycling of the lynx (predator) and the snowshoe
hare (prey), using nearly 200 year-old trapping data from North American forests (Figure 45.18). This cycle of
predator and prey lasts approximately 10 years, with the predator population lagging 1–2 years behind that of
the prey population. As the hare numbers increase, there is more food available for the lynx, allowing the lynx
populationtoincreaseaswell.Whenthelynxpopulationgrowstoathresholdlevel,however,theykillsomany
haresthatharepopulationbeginstodecline,followedbyadeclineinthelynxpopulationbecauseofscarcityof
food. When the lynx population is low, the hare population size begins to increase due, at least in part, to low
predation pressure, starting the cycle anew.
PAGE: 1441
1430 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Figure45.18ThecyclingoflynxandsnowshoeharepopulationsinNorthernOntarioisanexampleofpredator-prey
dynamics.
Some researchers question the idea that predation models entirely control the population cycling of the two
species. More recent studies have pointed to undefined density-dependent factors as being important in the
cycling, in addition to predation. One possibility is that the cycling is inherent in the hare population due
to density-dependent effects such as lower fecundity (maternal stress) caused by crowding when the hare
population gets too dense. The hare cycling would then induce the cycling of the lynx because it is the lynxes’
majorfoodsource.Themorewestudycommunities,themorecomplexitieswefind,allowingecologiststoderive
more accurate and sophisticated models of population dynamics.
Herbivory describes the consumption of plants by insects and other animals, and it is another interspecific
relationshipthataffectspopulations.Unlikeanimals,mostplantscannotoutrunpredatorsorusemimicrytohide
fromhungryanimals.Someplantshavedevelopedmechanismstodefendagainstherbivory.Otherspecieshave
developedmutualisticrelationships;forexample,herbivoryprovidesamechanismofseeddistributionthataids
in plant reproduction.
Defense Mechanisms against Predation and Herbivory
Thestudyofcommunitiesmustconsiderevolutionaryforcesthatactonthemembersofthevariouspopulations
contained within it. Species are not static, but slowly changing and adapting to their environment by natural
selectionandotherevolutionaryforces.Specieshaveevolvednumerousmechanismstoescapepredationand
herbivory. These defenses may be mechanical, chemical, physical, or behavioral.
Mechanical defenses, such as the presence of thorns on plants or the hard shell on turtles, discourage animal
predation and herbivory by causing physical pain to the predator or by physically preventing the predator from
being able to eat the prey. Chemical defenses are produced by many animals as well as plants, such as the
foxglovewhichisextremelytoxicwheneaten.Figure45.19showssomeorganisms’defensesagainstpredation
and herbivory.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1442
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1431
Figure45.19The(a)honeylocusttree(Gleditsiatriacanthos)usesthorns,amechanicaldefense,againstherbivores,
whilethe(b)Floridared-belliedturtle(Pseudemysnelsoni)usesitsshellasamechanicaldefenseagainstpredators.
(c) Foxglove (Digitalis sp.) uses a chemical defense: toxins produced by the plant can cause nausea, vomiting,
hallucinations,convulsions,ordeathwhenconsumed.(d)TheNorthAmericanmillipede(Narceusamericanus)uses
both mechanical and chemical defenses: when threatened, the millipede curls into a defensive ball and produces a
noxioussubstance that irritates eyesandskin.(credit a:modification ofworkbyHuwWilliams; credit b:modification
ofworkby“JamieS93”/Flickr;creditc:modificationofworkbyPhilipJägenstedt;creditd:modificationofworkbyCory
Zanker)
Many species use their body shape and coloration to avoid being detected by predators. The tropical walking
stickisaninsectwiththecolorationandbodyshapeofatwigwhichmakesitveryhardtoseewhenstationary
againstabackgroundofrealtwigs(Figure45.20a).Inanotherexample,thechameleoncanchangeitscolorto
match its surroundings (Figure 45.20b). Both of these are examples of camouflage, or avoiding detection by
blending in with the background.
(a) (b)
Figure 45.20 (a) The tropical walking stick and (b) the chameleon use body shape and/or coloration to prevent
detectionbypredators.(credita:modificationofworkbyLindaTanner;creditb:modificationofworkbyFrankVassen)
Some species use coloration as a way of warning predators that they are not good to eat. For example, the
cinnabarmothcaterpillar,thefire-belliedtoad,andmanyspeciesofbeetlehavebrightcolorsthatwarnofafoul
PAGE: 1443
1432 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
taste, the presence of toxic chemicals, and/or the ability to sting or bite, respectively. Predators that ignore this
colorationandeattheorganismswillexperiencetheirunpleasanttasteorpresenceoftoxicchemicalsandlearn
not to eat them in the future. This type of defensive mechanism is called aposematic coloration, or warning
coloration (Figure 45.21).
Figure 45.21 (a) The strawberry poison dart frog (Oophaga pumilio) uses aposematic coloration to warn predators
that it is toxic, while the (b) striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis) uses aposematic coloration to warn predators of the
unpleasant odor it produces. (credit a: modification of work by Jay Iwasaki; credit b: modification of work by Dan
Dzurisin)
Whilesomepredatorslearntoavoideatingcertainpotentialpreybecauseoftheircoloration,otherspecieshave
evolved mechanisms to mimic this coloration to avoid being eaten, even though they themselves may not be
unpleasant to eat or contain toxic chemicals. In Batesian mimicry, a harmless species imitates the warning
colorationofaharmfulone.Assumingtheysharethesamepredators,thiscolorationthenprotectstheharmless
ones, even though they do not have the same level of physical or chemical defenses against predation as the
organismtheymimic.Manyinsectspeciesmimicthecolorationofwaspsorbees,whicharestinging,venomous
insects, thereby discouraging predation (Figure 45.22).
(a) (b)
Figure45.22Batesianmimicryoccurswhenaharmlessspeciesmimicsthecolorationofaharmfulspecies,asisseen
with the (a) bumblebee and (b) bee-like robber fly. (credit a, b: modification of work by Cory Zanker)
In Müllerian mimicry, multiple species share the same warning coloration, but all of them actually have
defenses. Figure 45.23 shows a variety of foul-tasting butterflies with similar coloration. In Emsleyan/
Mertensianmimicry,adeadlypreymimicsalessdangerousone,suchasthevenomouscoralsnakemimicking
the nonvenomous milk snake. This type of mimicry is extremely rare and more difficult to understand than the
previoustwotypes.Forthistypeofmimicrytowork,itisessentialthateatingthemilksnakehasunpleasantbut
not fatal consequences. Then, these predators learn not to eat snakes with this coloration, protecting the coral
snakeaswell.Ifthesnakewerefataltothepredator,therewouldbenoopportunityforthepredatortolearnnot
to eat it, and the benefit for the less toxic species would disappear.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1444
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1433
Figure 45.23 Several unpleasant-tasting Heliconius butterfly species share a similar color pattern with better-tasting
varieties, an example of Müllerian mimicry. (credit: Joron M, Papa R, Beltrán M, Chamberlain N, Mavárez J, et al.)
Go to thiswebsite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/find_the_mimic)to view stunning examples of mimicry.
Competitive Exclusion Principle
Resourcesareoftenlimitedwithinahabitatandmultiplespeciesmaycompetetoobtainthem.Allspecieshave
anecologicalnicheintheecosystem,whichdescribeshowtheyacquiretheresourcestheyneedandhowthey
interact with other species in the community. The competitive exclusion principle states that two species
cannot occupy the same niche in a habitat. In other words, different species cannot coexist in a community if
theyarecompetingforallthesameresources.AnexampleofthisprincipleisshowninFigure 45.24,withtwo
protozoanspecies,ParameciumaureliaandParameciumcaudatum.Whengrownindividuallyinthelaboratory,
they both thrive. But when they are placed together in the same test tube (habitat), P. aurelia outcompetes P.
caudatumfor food, leading to the latter’s eventual extinction.
PAGE: 1445
1434 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Figure 45.24 Paramecium aurelia and Paramecium caudatum grow well individually, but when they compete for the
same resources, theP. aureliaoutcompetes theP. caudatum.
Thisexclusionmaybeavoidedifapopulationevolvestomakeuseofadifferentresource,adifferentareaofthe
habitat,orfeedsduringadifferenttimeofday,calledresourcepartitioning.Thetwoorganismsarethensaidto
occupy different microniches. These organisms coexist by minimizing direct competition.
Symbiosis
Symbiotic relationships, or symbioses (plural), are close interactions between individuals of different species
over an extended period of time which impact the abundance and distribution of the associating populations.
Mostscientistsacceptthisdefinition,butsomerestrictthetermtoonlythosespeciesthataremutualistic,where
both individuals benefit from the interaction. In this discussion, the broader definition will be used.
Commensalism
A commensal relationship occurs when one species benefits from the close, prolonged interaction, while the
other neither benefits nor is harmed. Birds nesting in trees provide an example of a commensal relationship
(Figure 45.25). The tree is not harmed by the presence of the nest among its branches. The nests are light
andproducelittlestrainonthestructuralintegrityofthebranch,andmostoftheleaves,whichthetreeusesto
getenergybyphotosynthesis,areabovethenestsotheyareunaffected.Thebird,ontheotherhand,benefits
greatly.Ifthebirdhadtonestintheopen,itseggsandyoungwouldbevulnerabletopredators.Anotherexample
ofacommensalrelationshipistheclownfishandtheseaanemone.Theseaanemoneisnotharmedbythefish,
and the fish benefits with protection from predators who would be stung upon nearing the sea anemone.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1446
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1435
Figure 45.25 The southern masked-weaver bird is starting to make a nest in a tree in Zambezi Valley, Zambia. This
isanexampleofacommensalrelationship,inwhichonespecies(thebird)benefits,whiletheother(thetree)neither
benefits nor is harmed. (credit: “Hanay”/Wikimedia Commons)
Mutualism
A second type of symbiotic relationship is called mutualism, where two species benefit from their interaction.
Some scientists believe that these are the only true examples of symbiosis. For example, termites have a
mutualisticrelationshipwithprotozoathatliveintheinsect’sgut(Figure45.26a).Thetermitebenefitsfromthe
abilityofbacterialsymbiontswithintheprotozoatodigestcellulose.Thetermiteitselfcannotdothis,andwithout
the protozoa, it would not be able to obtain energy from its food (cellulose from the wood it chews and eats).
The protozoa and the bacterial symbionts benefit by having a protective environment and a constant supply of
foodfromthewoodchewingactionsofthetermite.Lichenshaveamutualisticrelationshipbetweenfungusand
photosynthetic algae or bacteria (Figure 45.26b). As these symbionts grow together, the glucose produced by
the algae provides nourishment for both organisms, whereas the physical structure of the lichen protects the
algae from the elements and makes certain nutrients in the atmosphere more available to the algae.
(a) (b)
Figure 45.26 (a) Termites form a mutualistic relationship with symbiotic protozoa in their guts, which allow both
organisms to obtain energy from the cellulose the termite consumes. (b) Lichen is a fungus that has symbiotic
photosyntheticalgaelivinginsideitscells.(credita:modificationofworkbyScottBauer,USDA;creditb:modification
of work by Cory Zanker)
Parasitism
A parasite is an organism that lives in or on another living organism and derives nutrients from it. In this
relationship, the parasite benefits, but the host is harmed. The host is usually weakened by the parasite as it
siphons resources the host would normally use to maintain itself. The parasite, however, is unlikely to kill the
host,especiallynotquickly,becausethiswouldallownotimefortheorganismtocompleteitsreproductivecycle
by spreading to another host.
Thereproductivecyclesofparasitesareoftenverycomplex,sometimesrequiringmorethanonehostspecies.
A tapeworm is a parasite that causes disease in humans when contaminated, undercooked meat is consumed
PAGE: 1447
1436 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
(Figure45.27).Thetapewormcanliveinsidetheintestineofthehostforseveralyears,benefitingfromthefood
thehostiseating,andmaygrowtobeover50ftlongbyaddingsegments.Theparasitemovesfromspeciesto
species in a cycle, making two hosts necessary to complete its life cycle.
Another common parasite is Plasmodium falciparum, the protozoan cause of malaria, a significant disease in
many parts of the world. Living in human liver and red blood cells, the organism reproduces asexually in the
gut of blood-feeding mosquitoes to complete its life cycle. Thus malaria is spread from human to human by
mosquitoes, one of many arthropod-borne infectious diseases.
Figure45.27Thisdiagramshowsthelifecycleofaporktapeworm(Taeniasolium),ahumanwormparasite.(credit:
modification of work by CDC)
Characteristics of Communities
Communitiesarecomplexentitiesthatcanbecharacterizedbytheirstructure(thetypesandnumbersofspecies
present)anddynamics(howcommunitieschangeovertime).Understandingcommunitystructureanddynamics
enables community ecologists to manage ecosystems more effectively.
Foundation Species
Foundation species are considered the “base” or “bedrock” of a community, having the greatest influence on
its overall structure. They are usually the primary producers: organisms that bring most of the energy into the
community. Kelp, or brown algae, is a foundation species, forming the basis of the kelp forests off the coast of
California.
Foundation species may physically modify the environment to produce and maintain habitats that benefit the
other organisms that use them. An example is the photosynthetic corals of the coral reef (Figure 45.28).
Coralsthemselvesarenotphotosynthetic,butharborsymbiontswithintheirbodytissues(dinoflagellatescalled
zooxanthellae)thatperformphotosynthesis;thisisanotherexampleofamutualism.Theexoskeletonsofliving
and dead coral make up most of the reef structure, which protects many other species from waves and ocean
currents.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1448
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1437
Figure 45.28Coral is the foundation species of coral reef ecosystems. (credit: Jim E. Maragos, USFWS)
Biodiversity, Species Richness, and Relative Species Abundance
Biodiversity describes a community’s biological complexity: it is measured by the number of different species
(species richness) in a particular area and their relative abundance (species evenness). The area in question
could be a habitat, a biome, or the entire biosphere. Species richness is the term that is used to describe the
number of species living in a habitat or biome. Species richness varies across the globe (Figure 45.29). One
factor in determining species richness is latitude, with the greatest species richness occurring in ecosystems
near the equator, which often have warmer temperatures, large amounts of rainfall, and low seasonality. The
lowest species richness occurs near the poles, which are much colder, drier, and thus less conducive to life in
Geologic time (time since glaciations). The predictability of climate or productivity is also an important factor.
Other factors influence species richness as well. For example, the study of island biogeography attempts to
explain the relatively high species richness found in certain isolated island chains, including the Galápagos
IslandsthatinspiredtheyoungDarwin.Relativespeciesabundanceisthenumberofindividualsinaspecies
relativetothetotalnumberofindividualsinallspecieswithinahabitat,ecosystem,orbiome.Foundationspecies
often have the highest relative abundance of species.
Figure45.29ThegreatestspeciesrichnessformammalsinNorthandSouthAmericaisassociatedwiththeequatorial
latitudes. (credit: modification of work by NASA, CIESIN, Columbia University)
Keystone Species
A keystone species is one whose presence is key to maintaining biodiversity within an ecosystem and to
upholding an ecological community’s structure. The intertidal sea star, Pisaster ochraceus, of the northwestern
United States is a keystone species (Figure 45.30). Studies have shown that when this organism is removed
from communities, populations of their natural prey (mussels) increase, completely altering the species
compositionandreducingbiodiversity.Anotherkeystonespeciesisthebandedtetra,afishintropicalstreams,
PAGE: 1449
1438 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
whichsuppliesnearlyallofthephosphorus,anecessaryinorganicnutrient,totherestofthecommunity.Ifthese
fish were to become extinct, the community would be greatly affected.
Figure 45.30ThePisaster ochraceussea star is a keystone species. (credit: Jerry Kirkhart)
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1450
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1439
Invasive Species
Invasive species are nonnative organisms that, when introduced to an area out of their native range,
threatentheecosystembalanceofthathabitat.ManysuchspeciesexistintheUnitedStates,asshownin
Figure45.31.Whetherenjoyingaforesthike,takingasummerboattrip,orsimplywalkingdownanurban
street, you have likely encountered an invasive species.
Figure45.31IntheUnitedStates,invasivespecieslike(a)purpleloosestrife(Lythrumsalicaria)andthe(b)zebra
mussel(Dreissenapolymorpha)threatencertainaquaticecosystems.Someforestsarethreatenedbythespread
of (c) common buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica), (d) garlic mustard (Alliaria petiolata), and (e) the emerald ash
borer(Agrilusplanipennis).The(f)Europeanstarling(Sturnusvulgaris)maycompetewithnativebirdspeciesfor
nest holes. (credit a: modification of work by Liz West; credit b: modification of work by M. McCormick, NOAA;
creditc:modificationofworkbyE.Dronkert;creditd:modificationofworkbyDanDavison;credite:modification
of work by USDA; credit f: modification of work by Don DeBold)
OneofthemanyrecentproliferationsofaninvasivespeciesconcernsthegrowthofAsiancarppopulations.
Asian carp were introduced to the United States in the 1970s by fisheries and sewage treatment facilities
that used the fish’s excellent filter feeding capabilities to clean their ponds of excess plankton. Some of
the fish escaped, however, and by the 1980s they had colonized many waterways of the Mississippi River
basin, including the Illinois and Missouri Rivers.
Voracious eaters and rapid reproducers, Asian carp may outcompete native species for food, potentially
leading to their extinction. For example, black carp are voracious eaters of native mussels and snails,
limiting this food source for native fish species. Silver carp eat plankton that native mussels and snails
feed on, reducing this food source by a different alteration of the food web. In some areas of the
Mississippi River, Asian carp species have become the most predominant, effectively outcompeting native
fishes for habitat. In some parts of the Illinois River, Asian carp constitute 95 percent of the community's
biomass. Although edible, the fish is bony and not a desired food in the United States. Moreover, their
presencethreatensthenativefishandfisheriesoftheGreatLakes,whichareimportanttolocaleconomies
and recreational anglers. Asian carp have even injured humans. The fish, frightened by the sound of
approaching motorboats, thrust themselves into the air, often landing in the boat or directly hitting the
boaters.
TheGreatLakesandtheirprizedsalmonandlaketroutfisheriesarealsobeingthreatenedbytheseinvasive
fish. Asian carp have already colonized rivers and canals that lead into Lake Michigan. One infested
waterway of particular importance is the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Channel, the major supply waterway
linkingtheGreatLakestotheMississippiRiver.TopreventtheAsiancarpfromleavingthecanal,aseriesof
PAGE: 1451
1440 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
electricbarriershavebeensuccessfullyusedtodiscouragetheirmigration;however,thethreatissignificant
enough that several states and Canada have sued to have the Chicago channel permanently cut off from
Lake Michigan. Local and national politicians have weighed in on how to solve the problem, but no one
knowswhethertheAsiancarpwillultimatelybeconsideredanuisance,likeotherinvasivespeciessuchas
thewaterhyacinthandzebramussel,orwhetheritwillbethedestroyerofthelargestfreshwaterfisheryof
the world.
The issues associated with Asian carp show how population and community ecology, fisheries
management, and politics intersect on issues of vital importance to the human food supply and economy.
Socio-political issues like this make extensive use of the sciences of population ecology (the study of
members of a particular species occupying a particular area known as a habitat) and community ecology
(the study of the interaction of all species within a habitat).
Community Dynamics
Community dynamics are the changes in community structure and composition over time. Sometimes these
changes are induced by environmental disturbances such as volcanoes, earthquakes, storms, fires, and
climatechange.Communitieswithastablestructurearesaidtobeatequilibrium. Followingadisturbance, the
community may or may not return to the equilibrium state.
Succession describes the sequential appearance and disappearance of species in a community over time.
In primary succession, newly exposed or newly formed land is colonized by living things; in secondary
succession, part of an ecosystem is disturbed and remnants of the previous community remain.
Primary Succession and Pioneer Species
Primary succession occurs when new land is formed or rock is exposed: for example, following the eruption
of volcanoes, such as those on the Big Island of Hawaii. As lava flows into the ocean, new land is continually
beingformed.OntheBigIsland,approximately32acresoflandisaddedeachyear.First,weatheringandother
natural forces break down the substrate enough for the establishment of certain hearty plants and lichens with
few soil requirements, known as pioneer species (Figure 45.32). These species help to further break down
the mineral rich lava into soil where other, less hardy species will grow and eventually replace the pioneer
species. In addition, as these early species grow and die, they add to an ever-growing layer of decomposing
organicmaterialandcontributetosoilformation.Overtimetheareawillreachanequilibriumstate,withasetof
organisms quite different from the pioneer species.
Figure 45.32 During primary succession in lava on Maui, Hawaii, succulent plants are the pioneer species. (credit:
Forest and Kim Starr)
Secondary succession
Aclassicexampleofsecondarysuccessionoccursinoakandhickoryforestsclearedbywildfire(Figure45.33).
Wildfires will burn most vegetation and kill those animals unable to flee the area. Their nutrients, however, are
returnedtothegroundintheformofash.Thus,evenwhenareasaredevoidoflifeduetoseverefires,thearea
will soon be ready for new life to take hold.
Before the fire, the vegetation was dominated by tall trees with access to the major plant energy resource:
sunlight. Their height gave them access to sunlight while also shading the ground and other low-lying species.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1452
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1441
Afterthefire,though,thesetreesarenolongerdominant.Thus,thefirstplantstogrowbackareusuallyannual
plants followed within a few years by quickly growing and spreading grasses and other pioneer species. Due
to, at least in part, changes in the environment brought on by the growth of the grasses and other species,
over many years, shrubs will emerge along with small pine, oak, and hickory trees. These organisms are
calledintermediatespecies.Eventually,over150years,theforestwillreachitsequilibriumpointwherespecies
compositionisnolongerchangingandresemblesthecommunitybeforethefire.Thisequilibriumstateisreferred
to as theclimax community, which will remain stable until the next disturbance.
Figure 45.33Secondary succession is shown in an oak and hickory forest after a forest fire.
45.7 | Behavioral Biology: Proximate and Ultimate
Causes of Behavior
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Compare innate and learned behavior
• Discuss how movement and migration behaviors are a result of natural selection
• Discuss the different ways members of a population communicate with each other
• Give examples of how species use energy for mating displays and other courtship behaviors
• Differentiate between various mating systems
• Describe different ways that species learn
Behavior is the change in activity of an organism in response to a stimulus. Behavioral biology is the study
of the biological and evolutionary bases for such changes. The idea that behaviors evolved as a result of the
pressuresofnaturalselectionisnotnew.Fordecades,severaltypesofscientistshavestudiedanimalbehavior.
Biologistsdosointhescienceofethology;psychologistsinthescienceofcomparativepsychology;andother
scientists in the science of neurobiology. The first two, ethology and comparative psychology, are the most
consequential for the study of behavioral biology.
One goal of behavioral biology is to the innate behaviors, which have a strong genetic component and are
largelyindependentofenvironmentalinfluences,fromthelearnedbehaviors,whichresultfromenvironmental
conditioning. Innate behavior, or instinct, is important because there is no risk of an incorrect behavior being
learned. They are “hard wired” into the system. On the other hand, learned behaviors, although riskier, are
flexible, dynamic, and can be altered according to changes in the environment.
Innate Behaviors: Movement and Migration
Innate or instinctual behaviors rely on response to stimuli. The simplest example of this is a reflex action, an
involuntaryandrapidresponsetostimulus.Totestthe“knee-jerk”reflex,adoctortapsthepatellartendonbelow
thekneecapwitharubberhammer.Thestimulationofthenervesleadstothereflexofextendingthelegatthe
knee.Thisissimilartothereactionofsomeonewhotouchesahotstoveandinstinctuallypullshisorherhand
away. Even humans, with our great capacity to learn, still exhibit a variety of innate behaviors.
PAGE: 1453
1442 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Kinesis and Taxis
Another activity or movement of innate behavior is kinesis, or the undirected movement in response to a
stimulus. Orthokinesis is the increased or decreased speed of movement of an organism in response to a
stimulus.Woodlice,forexample,increasetheirspeedofmovementwhenexposedtohighorlowtemperatures.
This movement, although random, increases the probability that the insect spends less time in the unfavorable
environment. Another example is klinokinesis, an increase in turning behaviors. It is exhibited by bacteria
such as E. coli which, in association with orthokinesis, helps the organisms randomly find a more hospitable
environment.
Asimilar,butmoredirectedversionofkinesisistaxis:thedirectedmovementtowardsorawayfromastimulus.
This movement can be in response to light (phototaxis), chemical signals (chemotaxis), or gravity (geotaxis)
and can be directed toward (positive) or away (negative) from the source of the stimulus. An example of a
positive chemotaxis is exhibited by the unicellular protozoan Tetrahymena thermophila. This organism swims
using its cilia, at times moving in a straight line, and at other times making turns. The attracting chemotactic
agentaltersthefrequencyofturningastheorganismmovesdirectlytowardthesource,followingtheincreasing
concentration gradient.
Fixed Action Patterns
A fixed action pattern is a series of movements elicited by a stimulus such that even when the stimulus
is removed, the pattern goes on to completion. An example of such a behavior occurs in the three-spined
stickleback, a small freshwater fish (Figure 45.34). Males of this species develop a red belly during breeding
season and show instinctual aggressiveness to other males during this time. In laboratory experiments,
researchersexposedsuchfishtoobjectsthatinnowayresembleafishintheirshape,butwhichwerepainted
redontheirlowerhalves.Themalesticklebacksrespondedaggressivelytotheobjectsjustasiftheywerereal
male sticklebacks.
Figure45.34Malethree-spinedsticklebackfishexhibitafixedactionpattern.Duringmatingseason,themales,which
develop a bright red belly, react strongly to red-bottomed objects that in no way resemble fish.
Migration
Migration is the long-range seasonal movement of animals. It is an evolved, adapted response to variation in
resource availability, and it is a common phenomenon found in all major groups of animals. Birds fly south for
the winter to get to warmer climates with sufficient food, and salmon migrate to their spawning grounds. The
popular2005documentaryMarchofthePenguinsfollowedthe62-milemigrationofemperorpenguinsthrough
Antarcticatobringfoodbacktotheirbreedingsiteandtotheiryoung.Wildebeests(Figure45.35)migrateover
1800 miles each year in search of new grasslands.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1454
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1443
Figure45.35Wildebeestsmigrateinaclockwisefashionover1800mileseachyearinsearchofrain-ripenedgrass.
(credit: Eric Inafuku)
Although migration is thought of as innate behavior, only some migrating species always migrate (obligate
migration).Animalsthatexhibitfacultativemigrationcanchoosetomigrateornot.Additionally,insomeanimals,
only a portion of the population migrates, whereas the rest does not migrate (incomplete migration). For
example, owls that live in the tundra may migrate in years when their food source, small rodents, is relatively
scarce, but not migrate during the years when rodents are plentiful.
Foraging
Foraging is the act of searching for and exploiting food resources. Feeding behaviors that maximize energy
gain and minimize energy expenditure are called optimal foraging behaviors, and these are favored by natural
section. The painted stork, for example, uses its long beak to search the bottom of a freshwater marshland for
crabs and other food (Figure 45.36).
Figure 45.36The painted stork uses its long beak to forage. (credit: J.M. Garg)
Innate Behaviors: Living in Groups
Notallanimalsliveingroups,buteventhosethatliverelativelysolitarylives,withtheexceptionofthosethatcan
reproduceasexually,mustmate.Matingusuallyinvolvesoneanimalsignalinganothersoastocommunicatethe
desiretomate.Thereareseveraltypesofenergy-intensivebehaviorsordisplaysassociatedwithmating,called
mating rituals. Other behaviors found in populations that live in groups are described in terms of which animal
benefits from the behavior. In selfish behavior, only the animal in question benefits; in altruistic behavior, one
animal’sactionsbenefitanotheranimal;cooperativebehaviordescribeswhenbothanimalsbenefit.Allofthese
behaviors involve some sort of communication between population members.
Communication within a Species
Animals communicate with each other using stimuli known as signals. An example of this is seen in the
three-spined stickleback, where the visual signal of a red region in the lower half of a fish signals males to
becomeaggressiveandsignalsfemalestomate.Othersignalsarechemical(pheromones),aural(sound),visual
(courtship and aggressive displays), or tactile (touch). These types of communication may be instinctual or
learned or a combination of both. These are not the same as the communication we associate with language,
which has been observed only in humans and perhaps in some species of primates and cetaceans.
PAGE: 1455
1444 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
A pheromone is a secreted chemical signal used to obtain a response from another individual of the same
species. The purpose of pheromones is to elicit a specific behavior from the receiving individual. Pheromones
are especially common among social insects, but they are used by many species to attract the opposite sex,
to sound alarms, to mark food trails, and to elicit other, more complex behaviors. Even humans are thought to
respond to certain pheromones called axillary steroids. These chemicals influence human perception of other
people,andinonestudywereresponsibleforagroupofwomensynchronizingtheirmenstrualcycles.Therole
of pheromones in human-to-human communication is not fully understood and continues to be researched.
Songsareanexampleofanauralsignal,onethatneedstobeheardbytherecipient.Perhapsthebestknown
of these are songs of birds, which identify the species and are used to attract mates. Other well-known songs
are those of whales, which are of such low frequency that they can travel long distances underwater. Dolphin
speciescommunicatewitheachother(andoccasionallyevenwithotherspeciesofdolphins)usingawidevariety
of vocalizations. Male crickets make chirping sounds using a specialized organ to attract a mate, repel other
males, and to announce a successful mating.
Courtship displays are a series of ritualized visual behaviors (signals) designed to attract and convince a
memberoftheoppositesextomate.Thesedisplaysareubiquitousintheanimalkingdom.Oftenthesedisplays
involveaseriesofsteps,includinganinitialdisplaybyonememberfollowedbyaresponsefromtheother.Ifat
anypoint,thedisplayisperformedincorrectlyoraproperresponseisnotgiven,thematingritualisabandoned
and the mating attempt will be unsuccessful. The mating display of the common stork is shown inFigure 45.37.
Aggressive displays are also common in the animal kingdom. For example, a dog bares its teeth when it
wantsanotherdogtobackdown.Presumably,thesedisplayscommunicatenotonlythewillingnessoftheanimal
to fight, but also its fighting ability. Although these displays do signal aggression on the part of the sender, it
is thought that these displays are actually a mechanism to reduce the amount of actual fighting that occurs
betweenmembersofthesamespecies:theyallowindividualstoassessthefightingabilityoftheiropponentand
thus decide whether it is “worth the fight.” The testing of certain hypotheses using game theory has led to the
conclusion that some of these displays may overstate an animal’s actual fighting ability and are used to “bluff”
theopponent.Thistypeofinteraction,evenif“dishonest,”wouldbefavoredbynaturalselectionifitissuccessful
more times than not.
Figure 45.37This stork’s courtship display is designed to attract potential mates. (credit: Linda “jinterwas”/Flickr)
Distraction displays are seen in birds and some fish. They are designed to attract a predator away from the
nest. This is an example of an altruistic behavior: it benefits the young more than the individual performing the
display, which is putting itself at risk by doing so.
Manyanimals,especiallyprimates,communicatewithothermembersinthegroupthroughtouch.Activitiessuch
as grooming, touching the shoulder or root of the tail, embracing, lip contact, and greeting ceremonies have
all been observed in the Indian langur, an Old World monkey. Similar behaviors are found in other primates,
especially in the great apes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1456
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1445
The killdeer bird distracts predators from its eggs by faking a broken wing display in this video taken in Boise,
Idaho. (This multimedia resource will open in a browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66699/1.3/#eip-
id1171734275996)
Altruistic Behaviors
Behaviors that lower the fitness of the individual but increase the fitness of another individual are termed
altruistic.Examplesofsuchbehaviorsareseenwidelyacrosstheanimalkingdom.Socialinsectssuchasworker
beeshavenoabilitytoreproduce,yettheymaintainthequeensoshecanpopulatethehivewithheroffspring.
Meerkatskeepasentrystandingguardtowarntherestofthecolonyaboutintruders,eventhoughthesentryis
puttingitselfatrisk.Wolvesandwilddogsbringmeattopackmembersnotpresentduringahunt.Lemurstake
careofinfantsunrelatedtothem.Althoughonthesurface,thesebehaviorsappeartobealtruistic,thetruthmay
not be so simple.
There has been much discussion over why altruistic behaviors exist. Do these behaviors lead to overall
evolutionaryadvantagesfortheirspecies?Dotheyhelpthealtruisticindividualpassonitsowngenes?Andwhat
aboutsuchactivitiesbetweenunrelatedindividuals?Oneexplanationforaltruistic-typebehaviorsisfoundinthe
geneticsofnaturalselection.Inthe1976book,TheSelfishGene,scientistRichardDawkinsattemptedtoexplain
manyseeminglyaltruisticbehaviorsfromtheviewpointofthegeneitself.Althoughageneobviouslycannotbe
selfishinthehumansense,itmayappearthatwayifthesacrificeofanindividualbenefitsrelatedindividualsthat
share genes that are identical by descent (present in relatives because of common lineage). Mammal parents
make this sacrifice to take care of their offspring. Emperor penguins migrate miles in harsh conditions to bring
foodbackfortheiryoung.Selfishgenetheoryhasbeencontroversialovertheyearsandisstilldiscussedamong
scientists in related fields.
Even less-related individuals, those with less genetic identity than that shared by parent and offspring, benefit
from seemingly altruistic behavior. The activities of social insects such as bees, wasps, ants, and termites are
goodexamples.Sterileworkersinthesesocietiestakecareofthequeenbecausetheyarecloselyrelatedtoit,
andasthequeenhasoffspring,sheispassingongenesfromtheworkersindirectly.Thus,itisoffitnessbenefit
fortheworkertomaintainthequeenwithouthavinganydirectchanceofpassingonitsgenesduetoitssterility.
Theloweringofindividualfitnesstoenhancethereproductivefitnessofarelativeandthusone’sinclusivefitness
evolves through kin selection. This phenomenon can explain many superficially altruistic behaviors seen in
animals. However, these behaviors may not be truly defined as altruism in these cases because the actor is
actually increasing its own fitness either directly (through its own offspring) or indirectly (through the inclusive
fitness it gains through relatives that share genes with it).
Unrelated individuals may also act altruistically to each other, and this seems to defy the “selfish gene”
explanation. An example of this observed in many monkey species where a monkey will present its back to an
unrelatedmonkeytohavethatindividualpicktheparasitesfromitsfur.Afteracertainamountoftime,theroles
are reversed and the first monkey now grooms the second monkey. Thus, there is reciprocity in the behavior.
Bothbenefitfromtheinteractionandtheirfitnessisraisedmorethanifneithercooperatednorifonecooperated
and the other did not cooperate. This behavior is still not necessarily altruism, as the “giving” behavior of the
actor is based on the expectation that it will be the “receiver” of the behavior in the future, termed reciprocal
altruism.Reciprocalaltruismrequiresthatindividualsrepeatedlyencountereachother,oftentheresultofliving
in the same social group, and that cheaters (those that never “give back”) are punished.
Evolutionary game theory, a modification of classical game theory in mathematics, has shown that many of
these so-called “altruistic behaviors” are not altruistic at all. The definition of “pure” altruism, based on human
behavior,isanactionthatbenefitsanotherwithoutanydirectbenefittooneself.Mostofthebehaviorspreviously
describeddonotseemtosatisfy thisdefinition, andgametheorists aregoodatfinding “selfish” components in
them.Othershavearguedthattheterms“selfish”and“altruistic”shouldbedroppedcompletelywhendiscussing
animal behavior, as they describe human behavior and may not be directly applicable to instinctual animal
activity. What is clear, though, is that heritable behaviors that improve the chances of passing on one’s genes
or a portion of one’s genes are favored by natural selection and will be retained in future generations as long
PAGE: 1457
1446 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
as those behaviors convey a fitness advantage. These instinctual behaviors may then be applied, in special
circumstances, to other species, as long as it doesn’t lower the animal’s fitness.
Finding Sex Partners
Not all animals reproduce sexually, but many that do have the same challenge: they need to find a suitable
mateandoftenhavetocompetewithotherindividualstoobtainone.Significantenergyisspentintheprocess
of locating, attracting, and mating with the sex partner. Two types of selection occur during this process:
intersexualselection,whereindividualsofonesexchoosematesoftheothersex,andintrasexualselection,
the competition for mates between species members of the same sex. Intersexual selection is often complex
becausechoosingamatemaybebasedonavarietyofvisual,aural,tactile,andchemicalcues.Anexampleof
intersexual selection is when female peacocks choose to mate with the male with the brightest plumage. This
type of selection often leads to traits in the chosen sex that do not enhance survival, but are those traits most
attractive to the opposite sex (often at the expense of survival). Intrasexual selection involves mating displays
andaggressivematingritualssuchasramsbuttingheads—thewinnerofthesebattlesistheonethatisableto
mate. Many of these rituals use up considerable energy but result in the selection of the healthiest, strongest,
and/or most dominant individuals for mating.
Three general mating systems, all involving innate as opposed to learned behaviors, are seen in animal
populations: monogamous, polygynous, and polyandrous.
Visit thiswebsite (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/sex_selection)for informative videos on sexual selection.
In monogamous systems, one male and one female are paired for at least one breeding season. In some
animals, such as the gray wolf, these associations can last much longer, even a lifetime. Several theories may
explain this type of mating system. The “mate-guarding hypothesis” states that males stay with the female to
prevent other males from mating with her. This behavior is advantageous in such situations where mates are
scarceanddifficulttofind.Anotherexplanationisthe“male-assistancehypothesis,”wheremalesthathelpguard
and rear their young will have more and healthier offspring. Monogamy is observed in many bird populations
where, in addition to the parental care from the female, the male is also a major provider of parental care
for the chicks. A third explanation for the evolutionary advantages of monogamy is the “female-enforcement
hypothesis.”Inthisscenario,thefemaleensuresthatthemaledoesnothaveotheroffspringthatmightcompete
with her own, so she actively interferes with the male’s signaling to attract other mates.
Polygynous mating refers to one male mating with multiple females. In these situations, the female must be
responsible for most of the parental care as the single male is not capable of providing care to that many
offspring.Inresourced-basedpolygyny,malescompeteforterritorieswiththebestresources,andthenmatewith
females that enter the territory, drawn to its resource richness. The female benefits by mating with a dominant,
genetically fit male; however, it is at the cost of having no male help in caring for the offspring. An example is
seenintheyellow-rumpedhoneyguide,abirdwhosemalesdefendbeehivesbecausethefemalesfeedontheir
wax. As the females approach, the male defending the nest will mate with them. Harem mating structures are
a type of polygynous system where certain males dominate mating while controlling a territory with resources.
Harem mating occurs in elephant seals, where the alpha male dominates the mating within the group. A third
typeofpolygynyisaleksystem.Herethereisacommunalcourtingareawhereseveralmalesperformelaborate
displays for females, and the females choose their mate from this group. This behavior is observed in several
bird species including the sage grouse and the prairie chicken.
In polyandrous mating systems, one female mates with many males. These types of systems are much rarer
thanmonogamousandpolygynousmatingsystems.Inpipefishesandseahorses,malesreceivetheeggsfrom
thefemale,fertilizethem,protectthemwithinapouch,andgivebirthtotheoffspring(Figure45.38).Therefore,
the female is able to provide eggs to several males without the burden of carrying the fertilized eggs.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1458
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1447
(a) (b)
Figure45.38Polyandrousmating,inwhichonefemalemateswithmanymales,occursinthe(a)seahorseandthe(b)
pipefish. (credit a: modification of work by Brian Gratwicke; credit b: modification of work by Stephen Childs)
Simple Learned Behaviors
Themajorityofthebehaviorspreviouslydiscussedwereinnateoratleasthaveaninnatecomponent(variations
on the innate behaviors may be learned). They are inherited and the behaviors do not change in response
to signals from the environment. Conversely, learned behaviors, even though they may have instinctive
components, allow an organism to adapt to changes in the environment and are modified by previous
experiences.Simplelearnedbehaviorsincludehabituationandimprinting—bothareimportanttothematuration
process of young animals.
Habituation
Habituation is a simple form of learning in which an animal stops responding to a stimulus after a period
of repeated exposure. This is a form of non-associative learning, as the stimulus is not associated with any
punishment or reward. Prairie dogs typically sound an alarm call when threatened by a predator, but they
becomehabituatedtothesoundofhumanfootstepswhennoharmisassociatedwiththissound,therefore,they
no longer respond to them with an alarm call. In this example, habituation is specific to the sound of human
footsteps, as the animals still respond to the sounds of potential predators.
Imprinting
Imprintingisatypeoflearningthatoccursataparticularageoralifestagethatisrapidandindependentofthe
speciesinvolved.Hatchlingducksrecognizethefirstadulttheysee,theirmother,andmakeabondwithher.A
familiar sight is ducklings walking or swimming after their mothers (Figure 45.39). This is another type of non-
associative learning, but isveryimportant inthe maturation processofthese animalsasitencourages them to
stayneartheirmothersotheywillbeprotected,greatlyincreasingtheirchancesofsurvival.However,ifnewborn
ducks see a human before they see their mother, they will imprint on the human and follow it in just the same
manner as they would follow their real mother.
Figure45.39Theattachmentofducklingstotheirmotherisanexampleofimprinting.(credit:modificationofworkby
Mark Harkin)
PAGE: 1459
1448 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
The International Crane Foundation has helped raise the world’s population of whooping cranes from 21
individuals to about 600. Imprinting hatchlings has been a key to success: biologists wear full crane costumes
so the birds never “see” humans. Watch this video to learn more. (This multimedia resource will open in a
browser.) (http://cnx.org/content/m66699/1.3/#eip-id5650108)
Conditioned Behavior
Conditioned behaviors are types of associative learning, where a stimulus becomes associated with a
consequence. During operant conditioning, the behavioral response is modified by its consequences, with
regards to its form, strength, or frequency.
Classical Conditioning
In classical conditioning, a response called the conditioned response is associated with a stimulus that it
hadpreviouslynotbeenassociated with, theconditioned stimulus. Theresponsetotheoriginal, unconditioned
stimulusiscalledtheunconditionedresponse.ThemostcitedexampleofclassicalconditioningisIvanPavlov’s
experimentswithdogs(Figure45.40).InPavlov’sexperiments,theunconditionedresponsewasthesalivation
of dogs in response to the unconditioned stimulus of seeing or smelling their food. The conditioning stimulus
that researchers associated with the unconditioned response was the ringing of a bell. During conditioning,
every time the animal was given food, the bell was rung. This was repeated during several trials. After some
time, the dog learned to associate the ringing of the bell with food and to respond by salivating. After the
conditioning period was finished, the dog would respond by salivating when the bell was rung, even when the
unconditionedstimulus,thefood,wasabsent.Thus,theringingofthebellbecametheconditionedstimulusand
thesalivationbecametheconditionedresponse.Althoughitisthoughtbysomescientiststhattheunconditioned
and conditioned responses are identical, even Pavlov discovered that the saliva in the conditioned dogs had
characteristic differences when compared to the unconditioned dog.
Figure45.40IntheclassicPavlovianresponse,thedogbecomesconditionedtoassociatetheringingofthebellwith
food.
It had been thought by some scientists that this type of conditioning required multiple exposures to the paired
stimulus and response, but it is now known that this is not necessary in all cases, and that some conditioning
can be learned in a single pairing experiment. Classical conditioning is a major tenet of behaviorism, a branch
ofpsychologicalphilosophythatproposesthatallactions,thoughts,andemotionsoflivingthingsarebehaviors
that can be treated by behavior modification and changes in the environment.
Operant Conditioning
In operant conditioning, the conditioned behavior is gradually modified by its consequences as the animal
respondstothestimulus.AmajorproponentofsuchconditioningwaspsychologistB.F.Skinner,theinventorof
the Skinner box. Skinner put rats in his boxes that contained a lever that would dispense food to the rat when
depressed.Whileinitiallytheratwouldpushtheleverafewtimesbyaccident,iteventuallyassociatedpushing
the lever with getting the food. This type of learning is an example of operant conditioning. Operant learning
is the basis of most animal training. The conditioned behavior is continually modified by positive or negative
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1460
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1449
reinforcement, often a reward such as food or some type of punishment, respectively. In this way, the animal
is conditioned to associate a type of behavior with the punishment or reward, and, over time, can be induced
toperformbehaviorsthattheywouldnothavedoneinthewild,suchasthe“tricks”dolphinsperformatmarine
amusement park shows (Figure 45.41).
Figure 45.41 The training of dolphins by rewarding them with food is an example of positive reinforcement operant
conditioning. (credit: Roland Tanglao)
Cognitive Learning
Classicalandoperantconditioningareinefficientwaysforhumansandotherintelligentanimalstolearn.Some
primates,includinghumans,areabletolearnbyimitatingthebehaviorofothersandbytakinginstructions.The
development of complex language by humans has made cognitive learning, the manipulation of information
using the mind, the most prominent method of human learning. In fact, that is how students are learning
right now by reading this book. As students read, they can make mental images of objects or organisms
and imagine changes to them, or behaviors by them, and anticipate the consequences. In addition to visual
processing, cognitive learning is also enhanced by remembering past experiences, touching physical objects,
hearingsounds,tastingfood,andavarietyofothersensory-basedinputs.Cognitivelearningissopowerfulthat
it can be used to understand conditioning in detail. In the reverse scenario, conditioning cannot help someone
learn about cognition.
ClassicworkoncognitivelearningwasdonebyWolfgangKöhlerwithchimpanzees.Hedemonstratedthatthese
animals were capable of abstract thought by showing that they could learn how to solve a puzzle. When a
bananawashungintheircagetoohighforthemtoreach,andseveralboxeswereplacedrandomlyonthefloor,
some of the chimps were able to stack the boxes one on top of the other, climb on top of them, and get the
banana. Thisimpliesthat theycouldvisualizetheresult ofstacking theboxesevenbefore theyhadperformed
the action. This type of learning is much more powerful and versatile than conditioning.
Cognitive learning is not limited to primates, although they are the most efficient in using it. Maze running
experiments done with rats by H.C. Blodgett in the 1920s were the first to show cognitive skills in a simple
mammal. The motivation for the animals to work their way through the maze was a piece of food at its end. In
these studies, the animals in Group I were run in one trial per day and had food available to them each day
on completion of the run (Figure 45.42). Group II rats were not fed in the maze for the first six days and then
subsequent runs were done with food for several days after. Group III rats had food available on the third day
andeverydaythereafter.Theresultswerethatthecontrolrats,GroupI,learnedquickly,andfiguredouthowto
runthemazeinsevendays.GroupIIIdidnotlearnmuchduringthethreedayswithoutfood,butrapidlycaught
uptothecontrolgroupwhengiventhefoodreward.GroupIIlearnedveryslowlyforthesixdayswithnoreward
tomotivatethem,andtheydidnotbegintocatchuptothecontrolgroupuntilthedayfoodwasgiven,andthen
it took two days longer to learn the maze.
PAGE: 1461
1450 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
Figure45.42GroupI(thegreensolidline)foundfoodattheendofeachtrial,groupII(thebluedashedline)didnot
find food for the first 6 days, and group III (the red dotted line) did not find food during runs on the first three days.
Noticethatratsgivenfoodearlierlearnedfasterandeventuallycaughtuptothecontrolgroup.Theorangedotsonthe
group II and III lines show the days when food rewards were added to the mazes.
Itmaynotbeimmediatelyobviousthatthistypeoflearningisdifferentthanconditioning.Althoughonemightbe
temptedtobelievethattheratssimplylearnedhowtofindtheirwaythroughaconditionedseriesofrightandleft
turns,E.C.Tolmanprovedadecadelaterthattheratsweremakingarepresentationofthemazeintheirminds,
whichhecalleda“cognitivemap.”Thiswasanearlydemonstrationofthepowerofcognitivelearningandhow
these abilities were not just limited to humans.
Sociobiology
SociobiologyisaninterdisciplinaryscienceoriginallypopularizedbysocialinsectresearcherE.O.Wilsoninthe
1970s. Wilson defined the science as “the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social
[9]
organization.” The main thrust of sociobiology is that animal and human behavior, including aggressiveness
and other social interactions, can be explained almost solely in terms of genetics and natural selection. This
scienceiscontroversial;notedscientistssuchasthelateStephenJayGouldcriticizedtheapproachforignoring
theenvironmentaleffectsonbehavior.Thisisanotherexampleofthe“natureversusnurture”debateoftherole
of genetics versus the role of environment in determining an organism’s characteristics.
Sociobiology also links genes with behaviors and has been associated with “biological determinism,” the belief
thatallbehaviorsarehardwiredintoourgenes.Noonedisputesthatcertainbehaviorscanbeinheritedandthat
naturalselectionplaysaroleretainingthem.Itistheapplicationofsuchprinciplestohumanbehaviorthatsparks
this controversy, which remains active today.
9. Edward O. Wilson.On Human Nature(1978; repr., Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2004), xx.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1462
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1451
KEY TERMS
age structure proportion of population members at specific age ranges
aggressive display visualdisplaybyaspeciesmembertodiscourageothermembersofthesamespeciesor
different species
aposematic coloration warning coloration used as a defensive mechanism against predation
Batesian mimicry typeofmimicrywhereanon-harmfulspeciestakesonthewarningcolorationsofaharmful
one
behavior change in an organism’s activities in response to a stimulus
behavioral biology study of the biology and evolution of behavior
biotic potential (rmax) maximal potential growth rate of a species
birth rate (B) number of births within a population at a specific point in time
camouflage avoid detection by blending in with the background
carrying capacity (K) number of individuals of a species that can be supported by the limited resources of a
habitat
classical conditioning association of a specific stimulus and response through conditioning
climax community final stage of succession, where a stable community is formed by a characteristic
assortment of plant and animal species
cognitive learning knowledge and skills acquired by the manipulation of information in the mind
commensalism relationship between species wherein one species benefits from the close, prolonged
interaction, while the other species neither benefits nor is harmed
competitive exclusion principle notwospecieswithinahabitatcancoexistwhentheycompeteforthesame
resources at the same place and time
conditioned behavior behavior that becomes associated with a specific stimulus through conditioning
courtship display visual display used to attract a mate
death rate (D) number of deaths within a population at a specific point in time
demographic-based population model modernmodelofpopulationdynamicsincorporatingmanyfeaturesof
ther- andK-selection theory
demography statistical study of changes in populations over time
density-dependent regulation regulation of population that is influenced by population density, such as
crowding effects; usually involves biotic factors
density-independent regulation regulation of populations by factors that operate independent of population
density, such as forest fires and volcanic eruptions; usually involves abiotic factors
distraction display visual display used to distract predators away from a nesting site
Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry type of mimicry where a harmful species resembles a less harmful one
energy budget allocation of energy resources for body maintenance, reproduction, and parental care
environmental disturbance change in the environment caused by natural disasters or human activities
PAGE: 1463
1452 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
ethology biological study of animal behavior
exponential growth accelerating growth pattern seen in species under conditions where resources are not
limiting
fecundity potential reproductive capacity of an individual
fixed action pattern seriesofinstinctualbehaviorsthat,onceinitiated,alwaysgoestocompletionregardlessof
changes in the environment
foraging behaviors species use to find food
foundation species species which often forms the major structural portion of the habitat
habituation ability of a species to ignore repeated stimuli that have no consequence
host organism a parasite lives on
imprinting identification of parents by newborns as the first organism they see after birth
innate behavior instinctual behavior that is not altered by changes in the environment
intersexual selection selection of a desirable mate of the opposite sex
interspecific competition competition between species for resources in a shared habitat or environment
intrasexual selection competition between members of the same sex for a mate
intraspecific competition competition between members of the same species
island biogeography study of life on island chains and how their geography interacts with the diversity of
species found there
iteroparity life history strategy characterized by multiple reproductive events during the lifetime of a species
J-shaped growth curve shape of an exponential growth curve
K-selected species species suited to stable environments that produce a few, relatively large offspring and
provide parental care
keystone species specieswhosepresenceiskeytomaintainingbiodiversityinanecosystemandtoupholding
an ecological community’s structure
kin selection sacrificing one’s own life so that one’s genes will be passed on to future generations by relatives
kinesis undirected movement of an organism in response to a stimulus
learned behavior behavior that responds to changes in the environment
life history inherited pattern of resource allocation under the influence of natural selection and other
evolutionary forces
life table table showing the life expectancy of a population member based on its age
logistic growth leveling off of exponential growth due to limiting resources
mark and recapture technique used to determine population size in mobile organisms
migration long-range seasonal movement of animal species
monogamy mating system whereby one male and one female remain coupled for at least one mating season
mortality rate proportion of population surviving to the beginning of an age interval that die during the age
interval
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1464
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1453
mutualism symbiotic relationship between two species where both species benefit
Müllerian mimicry type of mimicry where species share warning coloration and all are harmful to predators
one-child policy China’s policy to limit population growth by limiting urban couples to have only one child or
face the penalty of a fine
operant conditioning learned behaviors in response to positive and/or negative reinforcement
parasite organism that uses resources from another species, the host
pioneer species first species to appear in primary and secondary succession
polyandry mating system where one female mates with many males
polygyny mating system where one male mates with many females
population density number of population members divided by the area or volume being measured
population growth rate number of organisms added in each reproductive generation
population size (N) number of population members in a habitat at the same time
primary succession succession on land that previously has had no life
quadrat square made of various materials used to determine population size and density in slow moving or
stationary organisms
r-selected species species suited to changing environments that produce many offspring and provide little or
no parental care
reflex action action in response to direct physical stimulation of a nerve
relative species abundance absolutepopulationsizeofaparticularspeciesrelativetothepopulationsizesof
other species within the community
S-shaped growth curve shape of a logistic growth curve
secondary succession succession in response to environmental disturbances that move a community away
from its equilibrium
semelparity life history strategy characterized by a single reproductive event followed by death
signal method of communication between animals including those obtained by the senses of smell, hearing,
sight, or touch
species dispersion pattern (also,speciesdistributionpattern)spatiallocationofindividualsofagivenspecies
within a habitat at a particular point in time
species richness number of different species in a community
survivorship curve graph of the number of surviving population members versus the relative age of the
member
symbiosis close interaction between individuals of different species over an extended period of time that
impacts the abundance and distribution of the associating populations
taxis directed movement in response to a stimulus
zero population growth steady population size where birth rates and death rates are equal
PAGE: 1465
1454 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
CHAPTER SUMMARY
45.1Population Demography
Populations are individuals of a species that live in a particular habitat. Ecologists measure characteristics of
populations: size, density, dispersion pattern, age structure, and sex ratio. Life tables are useful to calculate life
expectancies of individual population members. Survivorship curves show the number of individuals surviving
at each age interval plotted versus time.
45.2Life Histories and Natural Selection
All species have evolved a pattern of living, called a life history strategy, in which they partition energy for
growth, maintenance, and reproduction. These patterns evolve through natural selection; they allow species to
adapt to their environment to obtain the resources they need to successfully reproduce. There is an inverse
relationship between fecundity and parental care. A species may reproduce early in life to ensure surviving to a
reproductive age or reproduce later in life to become larger and healthier and better able to give parental care.
A species may reproduce once (semelparity) or many times (iteroparity) in its life.
45.3Environmental Limits to Population Growth
Populations with unlimited resources grow exponentially, with an accelerating growth rate. When resources
become limiting, populations follow a logistic growth curve. The population of a species will level off at the
carrying capacity of its environment.
45.4Population Dynamics and Regulation
Populations are regulated by a variety of density-dependent and density-independent factors. Species are
divided into two categories based on a variety of features of their life history patterns:r-selected species, which
have large numbers of offspring, andK-selected species, which have few offspring. Ther- andK-selection
theory has fallen out of use; however, many of its key features are still used in newer, demographically-based
models of population dynamics.
45.5Human Population Growth
The world’s human population is growing at an exponential rate. Humans have increased the world’s carrying
capacity through migration, agriculture, medical advances, and communication. The age structure of a
population allows us to predict population growth. Unchecked human population growth could have dire long-
term effects on our environment.
45.6Community Ecology
Communities include all the different species living in a given area. The variety of these species is called
species richness. Many organisms have developed defenses against predation and herbivory, including
mechanical defenses, warning coloration, and mimicry, as a result of evolution and the interaction with other
members of the community. Two species cannot exist in the same habitat competing directly for the same
resources. Species may form symbiotic relationships such as commensalism or mutualism. Community
structure is described by its foundation and keystone species. Communities respond to environmental
disturbances by succession (the predictable appearance of different types of plant species) until a stable
community structure is established.
45.7Behavioral Biology: Proximate and Ultimate Causes of Behavior
Behaviors are responses to stimuli. They can either be instinctual/innate behaviors, which are not influenced by
the environment, or learned behaviors, which are influenced by environmental changes. Instinctual behaviors
include mating systems and methods of communication. Learned behaviors include imprinting and habituation,
conditioning, and, most powerfully, cognitive learning.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 45.2As this graph shows, population density typically decreases with increasing body size.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1466
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1455
Why do you think this is the case? 3.Figure 45.16Age structure diagrams for rapidly
growing, slow growing, and stable populations are
2.Figure 45.10bIf the major food source of the
shown in stages 1 through 3. What type of population
seals declines due to pollution or overfishing, which
change do you think stage 4 represents?
of the following would likely occur?
a. The carrying capacity of seals would
decrease, as would the seal population.
b. The carrying capacity of seals would
decrease, but the seal population would
remain the same.
c. The number of seal deaths would increase
but the number of births would also
increase, so the population size would
remain the same.
d. The carrying capacity of seals would remain
the same, but the population of seals would
decrease.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.Which of the following methods will tell an a. few offspring
ecologist about both the size and density of a b. many offspring
population? c. semelparity
a. mark and recapture d. fecundity
b. mark and release
9.Which of the following is associated with multiple
c. quadrat
reproductive episodes during a species’ lifetime?
d. life table
5.Which of the following is best at showing the life a. semiparity
expectancy of an individual within a population? b. iteroparity
c. semelparity
a. quadrat d. fecundity
b. mark and recapture
10.Which of the following is associated with the
c. survivorship curve
reproductive potential of a species?
d. life table
a. few offspring
6.Humans have which type of survivorship curve? b. many offspring
c. semelparity
a. Type I d. fecundity
b. Type II
11.Species with limited resources usually exhibit
c. Type III
a(n) ________ growth curve.
d. Type IV
a. logistic
7.How is a clumped population distribution beneficial b. logical
for prey animals? c. experimental
a. Being a member of a larger group provides d. exponential
protection for each individual from
12.The maximum rate of increased characteristic of
predators.
a species is called its ________.
b. Prey animals rely on each other to acquire
a. limit
food.
b. carrying capacity
c. Prey animals live in small family groups to
c. biotic potential
raise young.
d. exponential growth pattern
d. Clumped population distributions ensure
that at least one member of the population 13.The population size of a species capable of being
knows how to identify the seasonal supported by the environment is called its ________.
migration route.
a. limit
8.Which of the following is associated with long-term
b. carrying capacity
parental care?
c. biotic potential
d. logistic growth pattern
14.Species that have many offspring at one time are
PAGE: 1467
1456 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
usually: formed from volcanic lava, are called ________.
a. r-selected
b. K-selected a. climax community
c. bothr- andK-selected b. keystone species
d. not selected c. foundation species
d. pioneer species
15.A forest fire is an example of ________
regulation. 23.Which type of mimicry involves multiple species
a. density-dependent with similar warning coloration that are all toxic to
b. density-independent predators?
c. r-selected a. Batesian mimicry
d. K-selected b. Müllerian mimicry
c. Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry
16.Primates are examples of:
d. Mertensian mimicry
a. density-dependent species
b. density-independent species 24.A symbiotic relationship where both of the
c. r-selected species coexisting species benefit from the interaction is
d. K-selected species called ________.
a. commensalism
17.Which of the following statements does not
b. parasitism
support the conclusion that giraffes arek-selected
c. mutualism
species?
d. communism
a. Giraffes are approximately 6’ tall and weigh
150 lbs at birth. 25.Which of the following isnota mutualistic
b. Wild giraffes begin mating at 6-7 years of relationship?
age. a. a shark using an aquatic cleaning station
c. Newborn giraffes are capable of coordinated b. a helminth feeding from its host
walking within an hour of birth, and running c. a bumblebee collecting pollen from a flower
within 24 hours of birth. d. bacteria living in the gut of humans
d. Giraffes rarely give birth to twins.
26.The ability of rats to learn how to run a maze is
18.Which of the following events wouldnot an example of ________.
negatively impact Yellowstone’s grey wolf carrying a. imprinting
capacity? b. classical conditioning
a. snow in winter c. operant conditioning
b. a beaver damming a river upstream d. cognitive learning
c. a forest fire
27.The training of animals usually involves
d. chronic wasting disease in the deer
________.
population
a. imprinting
19.A country with zero population growth is likely to b. classical conditioning
be ________. c. operant conditioning
a. in Africa d. cognitive learning
b. in Asia
28.The sacrifice of the life of an individual so that the
c. economically developed
genes of relatives may be passed on is called
d. economically underdeveloped
________.
20.Which type of country has the greatest proportion a. operant learning
of young individuals? b. kin selection
a. economically developed c. kinesis
b. economically underdeveloped d. imprinting
c. countries with zero population growth
29.Why are polyandrous mating systems more rare
d. countries in Europe
than polygynous matings?
21.Which of the following is not a way that humans a. Only males are capable of multiple rounds
have increased the carrying capacity of the of reproduction within a single breeding
environment? season.
a. agriculture b. Only females care for the young.
b. using large amounts of natural resources c. Females usually experience more
c. domestication of animals intrasexual selection pressure than males.
d. use of language d. Females usually devote more energy to
offspring production and development.
22.The first species to live on new land, such as that
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1468
Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology 1457
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
30.Describe how a researcher would determine the 34.Describe the rate of population growth that would
size of a penguin population in Antarctica using the be expected at various parts of the S-shaped curve
mark and release method. of logistic growth.
31.The CDC released the following data in its 2013 35.Describe how the population of a species that
Vital Statistics report. survives a mass extinction event would change in
size and growth pattern over time beginning
immediately after the extinction event.
Age Number dying Number surviving at
interval in age interval beginning of age interval 36.Give an example of how density-dependent and
density-independent factors might interact.
0-10 756 100,000
37.Describe the age structures in rapidly growing
11-20 292 99,244
countries, slowly growing countries, and countries
21-30 890 98,953 with zero population growth.
31-40 1,234 98,164 38.Since the introduction of the Endangered Species
Act the number of species on the protected list has
41-50 2,457 96,811
more than doubled. Describe how the human
51-60 5,564 94,352 population’s growth pattern contributes to the rise in
endangered species.
61-70 10,479 88,788
39.Describe the competitive exclusion principle and
Table 45.3 its effects on competing species.
40.Jaguars are a keystone species in the Amazon.
Describe how they can be so essential to the
Calculate the mortality rate for each age interval, and
ecosystem despite being significantly less abundant
describe the trends in adult and childhood mortality
than many other species.
per 100,000 births in the United States in 2013.
41.Describe Pavlov’s dog experiments as an
32.Why is long-term parental care not associated
example of classical conditioning.
with having many offspring during a reproductive
episode? 42.Describe the advantage of using an aural or
pheromone signal to attract a mate as opposed to a
33.Describe the difference in evolutionary pressures
visual signal. How might the population density
experienced by an animal that begins reproducing
contribute to the evolution of aural or visual mating
early and an animal that reproduces late in its
rituals?
lifecycle.
PAGE: 1469
1458 Chapter 45 | Population and Community Ecology
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1470
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1459
46 | ECOSYSTEMS
Figure46.1InthesouthwesternUnitedStates,rainyweathercausesanincreaseinproductionofpinyonnuts,causing
the deer mouse population to explode. Deer mice may carry a virus called Sin Nombre (a hantavirus) that causes
respiratorydiseaseinhumansandhasahighfatalityrate.In1992–1993,wetElNiñoweathercausedaSinNombre
epidemic. Navajo healers, who were aware of the link between this disease and weather, predicted the outbreak.
(credit "highway": modification of work by Phillip Capper; credit "mouse": modification of work by USFWS)
Chapter Outline
46.1:Ecology of Ecosystems
46.2:Energy Flow through Ecosystems
46.3:Biogeochemical Cycles
Introduction
In 1993, an interesting example of ecosystem dynamics occurred when a rare lung disease struck inhabitants
of the southwestern United States. This disease had an alarming rate of fatalities, killing more than half of
earlypatients,manyofwhomwereNativeAmericans.Theseformerlyhealthyyoungadultsdiedfromcomplete
respiratory failure. The disease was unknown, and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the United States
governmentagencyresponsibleformanagingpotentialepidemics,wasbroughtintoinvestigate.Thescientists
couldhavelearnedaboutthediseasehadtheyknowntotalkwiththeNavajohealerswholivedintheareaand
who had observed the connection between rainfall and mice populations, thereby predicting the 1993 outbreak.
Thecauseofthedisease,determinedwithinafewweeksbytheCDCinvestigators,wasthehantavirusknown
as Sin Nombre, the virus with “no name.” With insights from traditional Navajo medicine, scientists were able
to characterize the disease rapidly and institute effective health measures to prevent its spread. This example
illustratestheimportanceofunderstandingthecomplexitiesofecosystemsandhowtheyrespondtochangesin
the environment.
46.1 | Ecology of Ecosystems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe the basic ecosystem types
• Explain the methods that ecologists use to study ecosystem structure and dynamics
• Identify the different methods of ecosystem modeling
• Differentiate between food chains and food webs and recognize the importance of each
PAGE: 1471
1460 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
Life in an ecosystem is often about competition for limited resources, a characteristic of the theory of natural
selection. Competition in communities (all living things within specific habitats) is observed both within species
and among different species. The resources for which organisms compete include organic material, sunlight,
and mineral nutrients, which provide the energy for living processes and the matter to make up organisms’
physicalstructures.Othercriticalfactorsinfluencingcommunitydynamicsarethecomponentsofitsphysicaland
geographic environment: a habitat’s latitude, amount of rainfall, topography (elevation), and available species.
These are all important environmental variables that determine which organisms can exist within a particular
area.
An ecosystem is a community of living organisms and their interactions with their abiotic (nonliving)
environment.Ecosystemscanbesmall,suchasthetidepoolsfoundneartherockyshoresofmanyoceans,or
large, such as the Amazon Rainforest in Brazil (Figure 46.2).
Figure 46.2 A (a) tidal pool ecosystem in Matinicus Island in Maine is a small ecosystem, while the (b) Amazon
RainforestinBrazilisalargeecosystem.(credita:modificationofworkby“takomabibelot”/Flickr;creditb:modification
of work by Ivan Mlinaric)
There are three broad categories of ecosystems based on their general environment: freshwater, ocean water,
and terrestrial. Within these broad categories are individual ecosystem types based on the organisms present
and the type of environmental habitat.
Ocean ecosystems are the most common, comprising over 70 percent of the Earth's surface and consisting
of three basic types: shallow ocean, deep ocean water, and deep ocean surfaces (the low depth areas of the
deepoceans).Theshallowoceanecosystemsincludeextremelybiodiversecoralreefecosystems,andthedeep
oceansurfaceisknownforitslargenumbersofplanktonandkrill(smallcrustaceans)thatsupportit.Thesetwo
environmentsareespeciallyimportanttoaerobicrespiratorsworldwideasthephytoplanktonperform40percent
ofallphotosynthesisonEarth.Althoughnotasdiverseastheothertwo,deepoceanecosystemscontainawide
variety of marine organisms. Such ecosystems exist even at the bottom of the ocean where light is unable to
penetrate through the water.
Freshwater ecosystems are the rarest, occurring on only 1.8 percent of the Earth's surface. Lakes, rivers,
streams, and springs comprise these systems. They are quite diverse, and they support a variety of fish,
amphibians, reptiles, insects, phytoplankton, fungi, and bacteria.
Terrestrial ecosystems, also known for their diversity, are grouped into large categories called biomes, such
as tropical rain forests, savannas, deserts, coniferous forests, deciduous forests, and tundra. Grouping these
ecosystems into just a few biome categories obscures the great diversity of the individual ecosystems within
them. For example, there is great variation in desert vegetation: the saguaro cacti and other plant life in the
Sonoran Desert, in the United States, are relatively abundant compared to the desolate rocky desert of Boa
Vista, an island off the coast of Western Africa (Figure 46.3).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1472
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1461
Figure 46.3 Desert ecosystems, like all ecosystems, can vary greatly. The desert in (a) Saguaro National Park,
Arizona,hasabundantplantlife,whiletherockydesertof(b)BoaVistaisland,CapeVerde,Africa,isdevoidofplant
life. (credit a: modification of work by Jay Galvin; credit b: modification of work by Ingo Wölbern)
Ecosystems are complex with many interacting parts. They are routinely exposed to various disturbances, or
changes in the environment that effect their compositions: yearly variations in rainfall and temperature and
the slower processes of plant growth, which may take several years. Many of these disturbances result from
naturalprocesses.Forexample,whenlightningcausesaforestfireanddestroyspartofaforestecosystem,the
groundiseventuallypopulatedbygrasses,thenbybushesandshrubs,andlaterbymaturetrees,restoringthe
foresttoitsformerstate. Theimpactofenvironmental disturbancescausedbyhumanactivities isasimportant
as the changes wrought by natural processes. Human agricultural practices, air pollution, acid rain, global
deforestation,overfishing,eutrophication,oilspills,andwastedumpingonlandandintotheoceanareallissues
of concern to conservationists.
Equilibrium is the steady state of an ecosystem where all organisms are in balance with their environment
and with each other. In ecology, two parameters are used to measure changes in ecosystems: resistance and
resilience.Resistanceistheabilityofanecosystemtoremainatequilibriuminspiteofdisturbances.Resilience
is the speed at which an ecosystem recovers equilibrium after being disturbed. Ecosystem resistance and
resilience are especially important when considering human impact. The nature of an ecosystem may change
to such a degree that it can lose its resilience entirely. This process can lead to the complete destruction or
irreversible altering of the ecosystem.
Food Chains and Food Webs
The term “food chain” is sometimes used metaphorically to describe human social situations. Individuals who
areconsideredsuccessfulareseenasbeingatthetopofthefoodchain,consumingallothersfortheirbenefit,
whereas the less successful are seen as being at the bottom.
The scientific understanding of a food chain is more precise than in its everyday usage. In ecology, a food
chain is a linear sequence of organisms through which nutrients and energy pass: primary producers, primary
consumers, and higher-level consumers are used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics. There is a
singlepaththroughthechain.Eachorganisminafoodchainoccupieswhatiscalledatrophiclevel.Depending
ontheirroleasproducersorconsumers,speciesorgroupsofspeciescanbeassignedtovarioustrophiclevels.
In many ecosystems, the bottom of the food chain consists of photosynthetic organisms (plants and/or
phytoplankton), which are called primary producers. The organisms that consume the primary producers
are herbivores: the primary consumers. Secondary consumers are usually carnivores that eat the primary
consumers. Tertiary consumers are carnivores that eat other carnivores. Higher-level consumers feed on the
nextlowertropiclevels,andsoon,uptotheorganismsatthetopofthefoodchain:theapexconsumers.Inthe
LakeOntariofoodchainshowninFigure46.4,theChinooksalmonistheapexconsumeratthetopofthisfood
chain.
PAGE: 1473
1462 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
Figure46.4ThesearethetrophiclevelsofafoodchaininLakeOntarioattheUnitedStates-Canadaborder.Energy
and nutrients flow from photosynthetic green algae at the bottom to the top of the food chain: the Chinook salmon.
Onemajorfactorthatlimitsthelengthoffoodchainsisenergy.Energyislostasheatbetweeneachtrophiclevel
duetothesecondlawofthermodynamics.Thus,afteralimitednumberoftrophicenergytransfers,theamount
of energy remaining in the food chain may not be great enough to support viable populations at yet a higher
trophic level.
The loss of energy between trophic levels is illustrated by the pioneering studies of Howard T. Odum in the
Silver Springs, Florida, ecosystem in the 1940s (Figure 46.5). The primary producers generated 20,819 kcal/
2 2
m /yr(kilocaloriespersquaremeterperyear),theprimaryconsumersgenerated3368kcal/m /yr,thesecondary
2 2
consumers generated 383 kcal/m /yr, and the tertiary consumers only generated 21 kcal/m /yr. Thus, there is
little energy remaining for another level of consumers in this ecosystem.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1474
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1463
Figure46.5TherelativeenergyintrophiclevelsinaSilverSprings,Florida,ecosystemisshown.Eachtrophiclevel
has less energy available and supports fewer organisms at the next level.
There is a one problem when using food chains to accurately describe most ecosystems. Even when all
organismsaregroupedintoappropriatetrophiclevels,someoftheseorganismscanfeedonspeciesfrommore
thanonetrophiclevel;likewise,someoftheseorganismscanbeeatenbyspeciesfrommultipletrophiclevels.
In other words, the linear model of ecosystems, the food chain, is not completely descriptive of ecosystem
structure.Aholisticmodel—whichaccountsforalltheinteractionsbetweendifferentspeciesandtheircomplex
interconnected relationships with each other and with the environment—is a more accurate and descriptive
modelforecosystems.Afoodwebisagraphicrepresentationofaholistic,nonlinearwebofprimaryproducers,
primary consumers, and higher-level consumers used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics (Figure
46.6).
Figure 46.6 This food web shows the interactions between organisms across trophic levels in the Lake Ontario
ecosystem.Primaryproducersareoutlinedingreen,primaryconsumersinorange,secondaryconsumersinblue,and
tertiary(apex)consumersinpurple.Arrowspointfromanorganismthatisconsumedtotheorganismthatconsumes
it. Notice how some lines point to more than one trophic level. For example, the opossum shrimp eats both primary
producers and primary consumers. (credit: NOAA, GLERL)
A comparison of the two types of structural ecosystem models shows strength in both. Food chains are more
flexible for analytical modeling, are easier to follow, and are easier to experiment with, whereas food web
modelsmoreaccuratelyrepresentecosystemstructureanddynamics,anddatacanbedirectlyusedasinputfor
simulation modeling.
PAGE: 1475
1464 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
Headtothisonlineinteractivesimulator(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/food_web)toinvestigatefoodweb
function.IntheInteractiveLabsbox,underFoodWeb,clickStep1.Readtheinstructionsfirst,andthenclick
Step 2 for additional instructions. When you are ready to create a simulation, in the upper-right corner of the
Interactive Labsbox, clickOPEN SIMULATOR.
Two general types of food webs are often shown interacting within a single ecosystem. A grazing food web
(such as the Lake Ontario food web in Figure 46.6) has plants or other photosynthetic organisms at its base,
followed by herbivores and various carnivores. A detrital food web consists of a base of organisms that feed
ondecayingorganicmatter(deadorganisms),calleddecomposersordetritivores.Theseorganismsareusually
bacteriaorfungithatrecycleorganicmaterialbackintothebioticpartoftheecosystemastheythemselvesare
consumed by other organisms. As all ecosystems require a method to recycle material from dead organisms,
mostgrazingfoodwebshaveanassociateddetritalfoodweb.Forexample,inameadowecosystem,plantsmay
support a grazing food web of different organisms, primary and other levels of consumers, while at the same
timesupportingadetritalfoodwebofbacteria,fungi,anddetrivorousinvertebratesfeedingoffdeadplantsand
animals.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1476
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1465
Three-spined Stickleback
Itiswellestablishedbythetheoryofnaturalselectionthatchangesintheenvironmentplayamajorrolein
the evolution of species within an ecosystem. However, little is known about how the evolution of species
withinanecosystemcanaltertheecosystemenvironment.In2009,Dr.LukeHarmon,fromtheUniversityof
Idaho,publishedapaperthatforthefirsttimeshowedthattheevolutionoforganismsintosubspeciescan
[1]
have direct effects on their ecosystem environment.
Thethree-spinedstickleback(Gasterosteusaculeatus)isafreshwaterfishthatevolvedfromasaltwaterfish
toliveinfreshwaterlakesabout10,000yearsago,whichisconsideredarecentdevelopmentinevolutionary
time(Figure46.7).Overthelast10,000years,thesefreshwaterfishthenbecameisolatedfromeachother
indifferentlakes.Dependingonwhichlakepopulationwasstudied,findingsshowedthatthesesticklebacks
then either remained as one species or evolved into two species. The divergence of species was made
possible by their use of different areas of the pond for feeding called micro niches.
Dr. Harmon and his team created artificial pond microcosms in 250-gallon tanks and added muck from
freshwater ponds as a source of zooplankton and other invertebrates to sustain the fish. In different
experimental tanks they introduced one species of stickleback from either a single-species or double-
species lake.
Overtime,theteamobservedthatsomeofthetanksbloomedwithalgaewhileothersdidnot.Thispuzzled
thescientists,andtheydecidedtomeasurethewater'sdissolvedorganiccarbon(DOC),whichconsistsof
mostlylargemoleculesofdecayingorganicmatterthatgivepond-wateritsslightlybrownishcolor.Itturned
outthatthewaterfromthetankswithtwo-speciesfishcontainedlargerparticlesofDOC(andhencedarker
water) than water with single-species fish. This increase in DOC blocked the sunlight and prevented algal
blooming. Conversely, the water from the single-species tank contained smaller DOC particles, allowing
more sunlight penetration to fuel the algal blooms.
This change in the environment, which is due to the different feeding habits of the stickleback species in
eachlaketype,probablyhasagreatimpactonthesurvivalofotherspeciesintheseecosystems,especially
otherphotosyntheticorganisms.Thus,thestudyshowsthat,atleastintheseecosystems,theenvironment
and the evolution of populations have reciprocal effects that may now be factored into simulation models.
Figure 46.7 The three-spined stickleback evolved from a saltwater fish to freshwater fish. (credit: Barrett Paul,
USFWS)
Research into Ecosystem Dynamics: Ecosystem Experimentation and
Modeling
The study of the changes in ecosystem structure caused by changes in the environment (disturbances) or
by internal forces is called ecosystem dynamics. Ecosystems are characterized using a variety of research
1. Nature(Vol. 458, April 1, 2009)
PAGE: 1477
1466 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
methodologies. Some ecologists study ecosystems using controlled experimental systems, while some study
entire ecosystems in their natural state, and others use both approaches.
A holistic ecosystem model attempts to quantify the composition, interaction, and dynamics of entire
ecosystems; it is the most representative of the ecosystem in its natural state. A food web is an example of a
holistic ecosystem model. However,this type of study islimited bytime andexpense, aswellasthe fact that it
isneitherfeasiblenorethicaltodoexperimentsonlargenaturalecosystems.Itisdifficulttoquantifyalldifferent
speciesinanecosystemandthedynamicsintheirhabitat,especiallywhenstudyinglargehabitatssuchasthe
Amazon Rainforest.
Forthesereasons,scientistsstudyecosystemsundermorecontrolledconditions.Experimentalsystemsusually
involveeitherpartitioningapartofanaturalecosystemthatcanbeusedforexperiments,termedamesocosm,
or by recreating an ecosystem entirely in an indoor or outdoor laboratory environment, which is referred
to as a microcosm. A major limitation to these approaches is that removing individual organisms from
their natural ecosystem or altering a natural ecosystem through partitioning may change the dynamics of
the ecosystem. These changes are often due to differences in species numbers and diversity and also to
environmentalterationscausedbypartitioning(mesocosm)orrecreating(microcosm)thenaturalhabitat.Thus,
these types of experiments are not totally predictive of changes that would occur in the ecosystem from which
they were gathered.
Asbothoftheseapproacheshavetheirlimitations,someecologistssuggestthatresultsfromtheseexperimental
systems should be used only in conjunction with holistic ecosystem studies to obtain the most representative
data about ecosystem structure, function, and dynamics.
Scientistsusethedatageneratedbytheseexperimentalstudiestodevelopecosystemmodelsthatdemonstrate
the structure and dynamics of ecosystems. They use three basic types of ecosystem modeling in research
andecosystemmanagement:aconceptualmodel,ananalyticalmodel,andasimulationmodel.Aconceptual
model is an ecosystem model that consists of flow charts to show interactions of different compartments of
the living and nonliving components of the ecosystem. A conceptual model describes ecosystem structure
and dynamics and shows how environmental disturbances affect the ecosystem; however, its ability to predict
the effects of these disturbances is limited. Analytical and simulation models, in contrast, are mathematical
methods of describing ecosystems that are indeed capable of predicting the effects of potential environmental
changes without direct experimentation, although with some limitations as to accuracy. An analytical model is
anecosystemmodelthatiscreatedusingsimplemathematicalformulastopredicttheeffectsofenvironmental
disturbancesonecosystemstructureanddynamics.Asimulationmodelisanecosystemmodelthatiscreated
usingcomplexcomputeralgorithmstoholisticallymodelecosystemsandtopredicttheeffectsofenvironmental
disturbances on ecosystem structure and dynamics. Ideally, these models are accurate enough to determine
which components of the ecosystem are particularly sensitive to disturbances, and they can serve as a guide
toecosystemmanagers(suchasconservationecologistsorfisheriesbiologists)inthepracticalmaintenanceof
ecosystem health.
Conceptual Models
Conceptual models are useful for describing ecosystem structure and dynamics and for demonstrating the
relationshipsbetweendifferentorganismsinacommunityandtheirenvironment.Conceptualmodelsareusually
depictedgraphicallyasflowcharts.Theorganismsandtheirresourcesaregroupedintospecificcompartments
with arrows showing the relationship and transfer of energy or nutrients between them. Thus, these diagrams
are sometimes called compartment models.
To model the cycling of mineral nutrients, organic and inorganic nutrients are subdivided into those that are
bioavailable (ready to be incorporated into biological macromolecules) and those that are not. For example,
in a terrestrial ecosystem near a deposit of coal, carbon will be available to the plants of this ecosystem as
carbon dioxide gas in a short-term period, not from the carbon-rich coal itself. However, over a longer period,
microorganismscapableofdigestingcoalwillincorporateitscarbonorreleaseitasnaturalgas(methane,CH4),
changing this unavailable organic source into an available one. This conversion is greatly accelerated by the
combustionoffossilfuelsbyhumans,whichreleaseslargeamountsofcarbondioxideintotheatmosphere.This
is thought to be a major factor in the rise of the atmospheric carbon dioxide levels in the industrial age. The
carbon dioxide released from burning fossil fuels is produced faster than photosynthetic organisms can use it.
This process is intensified by the reduction of photosynthetic trees because of worldwide deforestation. Most
scientists agree that high atmospheric carbon dioxide is a major cause of global climate change.
Conceptual models are also used to show the flow of energy through particular ecosystems. Figure 46.8 is
basedonHowardT.Odum’sclassicalstudyoftheSilverSprings,Florida,holisticecosysteminthemid-twentieth
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1478
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1467
[2]
century. This study shows the energy content and transfer between various ecosystem compartments.
Figure 46.8 This conceptual model shows the flow of energy through a spring ecosystem in Silver Springs,
Florida. Notice that the energy decreases with each increase in trophic level.
Whydoyouthinkthevalueforgrossproductivityoftheprimaryproducersisthesameasthevaluefortotal
2
heat and respiration (20,810 kcal/m /yr)?
Analytical and Simulation Models
Themajorlimitationofconceptualmodelsistheirinabilitytopredicttheconsequencesofchangesinecosystem
species and/or environment. Ecosystems are dynamic entities and subject to a variety of abiotic and biotic
disturbances caused by natural forces and/or human activity. Ecosystems altered from their initial equilibrium
state can often recover from such disturbances and return to a state of equilibrium. As most ecosystems are
subjecttoperiodicdisturbancesandareofteninastateofchange,theyareusuallyeithermovingtowardoraway
from their equilibrium state. There are many of these equilibrium states among the various components of an
2. Howard T. Odum, “Trophic Structure and Productivity of Silver Springs, Florida,”Ecological Monographs27, no. 1 (1957): 47–112.
PAGE: 1479
1468 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
ecosystem,whichaffectstheecosystemoverall.Furthermore,ashumanshavetheabilitytogreatlyandrapidly
alterthespeciescontentandhabitatofanecosystem,theneedforpredictivemodelsthatenableunderstanding
of how ecosystems respond to these changes becomes more crucial.
Analyticalmodelsoftenusesimple,linearcomponentsofecosystems,suchasfoodchains,andareknowntobe
complexmathematically;therefore,theyrequireasignificantamountofmathematicalknowledgeandexpertise.
Although analytical models have great potential, their simplification of complex ecosystems is thought to limit
their accuracy. Simulation models that use computer programs are better able to deal with the complexities of
ecosystem structure.
A recent development in simulation modeling uses supercomputers to create and run individual-based
simulations, which accounts for the behavior of individual organisms and their effects on the ecosystem as a
whole. These simulations are considered to be the most accurate and predictive of the complex responses of
ecosystems to disturbances.
Visit The Darwin Project (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/Darwin_project) to view a variety of ecosystem
models.
46.2 | Energy Flow through Ecosystems
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Describe how organisms acquire energy in a food web and in associated food chains
• Explain how the efficiency of energy transfers between trophic levels affects ecosystem structure and
dynamics
• Discuss trophic levels and how ecological pyramids are used to model them
Alllivingthingsrequireenergyinoneformoranother.Energyisrequiredbymostcomplexmetabolicpathways
(often in the form of adenosine triphosphate, ATP), especially those responsible for building large molecules
from smaller compounds, and life itself is an energy-driven process. Living organisms would not be able to
assemble macromolecules (proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and complex carbohydrates) from their monomeric
subunits without a constant energy input.
Itisimportanttounderstandhoworganismsacquireenergyandhowthatenergyispassedfromoneorganismto
anotherthroughfoodwebsandtheirconstituentfoodchains.Foodwebsillustratehowenergyflowsdirectionally
through ecosystems, including how efficiently organisms acquire it, use it, and how much remains for use by
other organisms of the food web.
How Organisms Acquire Energy in a Food Web
Energy is acquired by living things in three ways: photosynthesis, chemosynthesis, and the consumption and
digestion of other living or previously living organisms by heterotrophs.
Photosynthetic and chemosynthetic organisms are both grouped into a category known as autotrophs:
organisms capable of synthesizing their own food (more specifically, capable of using inorganic carbon as
a carbon source). Photosynthetic autotrophs (photoautotrophs) use sunlight as an energy source, whereas
chemosynthetic autotrophs (chemoautotrophs) use inorganic molecules as an energy source. Autotrophs are
criticalforallecosystems.Withouttheseorganisms,energywouldnotbeavailabletootherlivingorganismsand
life itself would not be possible.
Photoautotrophs,suchasplants,algae,andphotosyntheticbacteria,serveastheenergysourceforamajorityof
theworld’secosystems.Theseecosystemsareoftendescribedbygrazingfoodwebs.Photoautotrophsharness
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1480
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1469
the solar energy of the sun by converting it to chemical energy in the form of ATP (and NADP). The energy
stored in ATP is used to synthesize complex organic molecules, such as glucose.
Chemoautotrophs are primarily bacteria that are found in rare ecosystems where sunlight is not available,
such as in those associated with dark caves or hydrothermal vents at the bottom of the ocean (Figure 46.9).
Manychemoautotrophsinhydrothermalventsusehydrogensulfide(H2S),whichisreleasedfromtheventsas
a source of chemical energy. This allows chemoautotrophs to synthesize complex organic molecules, such as
glucose, for their own energy and in turn supplies energy to the rest of the ecosystem.
Figure46.9Swimmingshrimp,afewsquatlobsters,andhundredsofventmusselsareseenatahydrothermalvent
atthebottomoftheocean.Asnosunlightpenetratestothisdepth,theecosystemissupportedbychemoautotrophic
bacteriaandorganicmaterialthatsinksfromtheocean’ssurface.Thispicturewastakenin2006atthesubmergedNW
EifukuvolcanooffthecoastofJapanbytheNationalOceanicandAtmosphericAdministration(NOAA).Thesummitof
this highly active volcano lies 1535 m below the surface.
Productivity within Trophic Levels
Productivity within an ecosystem can be defined as the percentage of energy entering the ecosystem
incorporated into biomass in a particular trophic level. Biomass is the total mass, in a unit area at the time
of measurement, of living or previously living organisms within a trophic level. Ecosystems have characteristic
amountsofbiomassateachtrophiclevel.Forexample,intheEnglishChannelecosystemtheprimaryproducers
2
accountforabiomassof4g/m (gramspersquaremeter),whiletheprimaryconsumersexhibitabiomassof21
2
g/m .
The productivity of the primary producers is especially important in any ecosystem because these organisms
bringenergytootherlivingorganismsbyphotoautotrophyorchemoautotrophy.Therateatwhichphotosynthetic
primaryproducersincorporateenergyfromthesuniscalledgrossprimaryproductivity.Anexampleofgross
primary productivity is shown in the compartment diagram of energy flow within the Silver Springs aquatic
ecosystem as shown (Figure 46.8). In this ecosystem, the total energy accumulated by the primary producers
2
(gross primary productivity) was shown to be 20,810 kcal/m /yr.
Because all organisms need to use some of this energy for their own functions (like respiration and resulting
metabolic heat loss) scientists often refer to the net primary productivity of an ecosystem. Net primary
productivityistheenergythatremainsintheprimaryproducersafteraccountingfortheorganisms’respiration
and heat loss. The net productivity is then available to the primary consumers at the next trophic level. In our
2
SilverSpringsexample,13,187ofthe20,810kcal/m /yrwereusedforrespirationorwerelostasheat,leaving
2
7,633 kcal/m /yr of energy for use by the primary consumers.
Ecological Efficiency: The Transfer of Energy between Trophic Levels
As illustrated in (Figure 46.8), as energy flows from primary producers through the various trophic levels, the
ecosystemloseslargeamountsofenergy.Themainreasonforthislossisthesecondlawofthermodynamics,
PAGE: 1481
1470 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
which states that whenever energy is converted from one form to another, there is a tendency toward disorder
(entropy) in the system. In biologic systems, this energy takes the form of metabolic heat, which is lost when
the organisms consume other organisms. In the Silver Springs ecosystem example (Figure 46.8), we see that
2 2
the primary consumers produced 1103 kcal/m /yr from the 7618 kcal/m /yr of energy available to them from
theprimaryproducers.Themeasurementofenergytransferefficiencybetweentwosuccessivetrophiclevelsis
termed thetrophic level transfer efficiency (TLTE)and is defined by the formula:
production at present trophic level
TLTE = × 100
production at previous trophic level
In Silver Springs, the TLTE between the first two trophic levels was approximately 14.8 percent. The low
efficiencyofenergytransferbetweentrophiclevelsisusuallythemajorfactorthatlimitsthelengthoffoodchains
observedinafoodweb.Thefactis,afterfourtosixenergytransfers,thereisnotenoughenergylefttosupport
anothertrophiclevel.IntheLakeOntarioexampleshownin(Figure46.6),onlythreeenergytransfersoccurred
between the primary producer, (green algae), and the apex consumer (Chinook salmon).
Ecologists have many different methods of measuring energy transfers within ecosystems. Measurement
difficulty depends on the complexity of the ecosystem and how much access scientists have to observe the
ecosystem. In other words, some ecosystems are more difficult to study than others, and sometimes the
quantification of energy transfers has to be estimated.
Otherparametersareimportant incharacterizing energyflowwithinanecosystem. Netproduction efficiency
(NPE)allowsecologiststoquantifyhowefficientlyorganismsofaparticulartrophiclevelincorporatetheenergy
they receive into biomass; it is calculated using the following formula:
net consumer productivity
NPE = × 100
assimilation
Net consumer productivity is the energy content available to the organisms of the next trophic level.
Assimilation is the biomass (energy content generated per unit area) of the present trophic level after
accountingfortheenergylostduetoincompleteingestionoffood,energyusedforrespiration,andenergylost
aswaste.Incompleteingestionreferstothefactthatsomeconsumerseatonlyapartoftheirfood.Forexample,
whenalionkillsanantelope,itwilleateverythingexceptthehideandbones.Thelionismissingtheenergy-rich
bone marrow inside the bone, so the lion does not make use of all the calories its prey could provide.
Thus, NPE measures how efficiently each trophic level uses and incorporates the energy from its food into
biomasstofuelthenexttrophiclevel.Ingeneral,cold-bloodedanimals(ectotherms),suchasinvertebrates,fish,
amphibians,andreptiles,uselessoftheenergytheyobtainforrespirationandheatthanwarm-bloodedanimals
(endotherms), such as birds and mammals. The extra heat generated in endotherms, although an advantage
in terms of the activity of these organisms in colder environments, is a major disadvantage in terms of NPE.
Therefore,manyendothermshavetoeatmoreoftenthanectothermstogettheenergytheyneedforsurvival.In
general,NPEforectothermsisanorderofmagnitude(10x)higherthanforendotherms.Forexample,theNPE
for a caterpillar eating leaves has been measured at 18 percent, whereas the NPE for a squirrel eating acorns
may be as low as 1.6 percent.
The inefficiency of energy use by warm-blooded animals has broad implications for the world's food supply. It
is widely accepted that the meat industry uses large amounts of crops to feed livestock, and because the NPE
is low, much of the energy from animal feed is lost. For example, it costs about $0.01 to produce 1000 dietary
calories (kcal) of corn or soybeans, but approximately $0.19 to produce a similar number of calories growing
cattle for beef consumption. The same energy content of milk from cattle is also costly, at approximately $0.16
per1000kcal.MuchofthisdifferenceisduetothelowNPEofcattle.Thus,therehasbeenagrowingmovement
worldwide to promote the consumption of nonmeat and nondairy foods so that less energy is wasted feeding
animals for the meat industry.
Modeling Ecosystems Energy Flow: Ecological Pyramids
The structure of ecosystems can be visualized with ecological pyramids, which were first described by the
pioneering studies of Charles Elton in the 1920s. Ecological pyramids show the relative amounts of various
parameters (such as number of organisms, energy, and biomass) across trophic levels.
Pyramidsofnumberscanbeeitheruprightorinverted,dependingontheecosystem.AsshowninFigure46.10,
typical grassland during the summer has a base of many plants, and the numbers of organisms decrease at
each trophic level. However, during the summer in a temperate forest, the base of the pyramid consists of few
trees compared with the number of primary consumers, mostly insects. Because trees are large, they have
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1482
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1471
great photosynthetic capability, and dominate other plants in this ecosystem to obtain sunlight. Even in smaller
numbers, primary producers in forests are still capable of supporting other trophic levels.
Anotherwaytovisualizeecosystemstructureiswithpyramidsofbiomass.Thispyramidmeasurestheamount
ofenergyconvertedintolivingtissueatthedifferenttrophiclevels.UsingtheSilverSpringsecosystemexample,
this data exhibits an upright biomass pyramid (Figure 46.10), whereas the pyramid from the English Channel
exampleisinverted.Theplants(primaryproducers)oftheSilverSpringsecosystemmakeupalargepercentage
ofthebiomassfoundthere.However,thephytoplanktonintheEnglishChannelexamplemakeuplessbiomass
than the primary consumers, the zooplankton. As with inverted pyramids of numbers, this inverted pyramid
is not due to a lack of productivity from the primary producers, but results from the high turnover rate of
the phytoplankton. The phytoplankton are consumed rapidly by the primary consumers, thus, minimizing their
biomassatanyparticularpointintime.However,phytoplanktonreproducequickly,thustheyareabletosupport
the rest of the ecosystem.
Pyramid ecosystem modeling can also be used to show energy flow through the trophic levels. Notice that
thesenumbersarethesameasthoseusedintheenergyflowcompartmentdiagramin(Figure46.8).Pyramids
of energy are always upright, and an ecosystem without sufficient primary productivity cannot be supported.
All types of ecological pyramids are useful for characterizing ecosystem structure. However, in the study of
energy flow through the ecosystem, pyramids of energy are the most consistent and representative models of
ecosystem structure (Figure 46.10).
Figure46.10Ecologicalpyramidsdepictthe(a)biomass,(b)numberoforganisms,and(c)energyineachtrophic
level.
Pyramidsdepictingthenumberoforganismsorbiomassmaybeinverted,upright,orevendiamond-shaped.
Energy pyramids, however, are always upright. Why?
Consequences of Food Webs: Biological Magnification
One of the most important environmental consequences of ecosystem dynamics is biomagnification.
Biomagnification is the increasing concentration of persistent, toxic substances in organisms at each trophic
PAGE: 1483
1472 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
level,fromtheprimaryproducerstotheapexconsumers.Manysubstanceshavebeenshowntobioaccumulate,
including the pesticide dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), which was described in the 1960s bestseller,
Silent Spring, by Rachel Carson. DDT was a commonly used pesticide before its dangers became known. In
some aquatic ecosystems, organisms from each trophic level consumed many organisms of the lower level,
which caused DDT to increase in birds (apex consumers) that ate fish. Thus, the birds accumulated sufficient
amountsofDDTtocausefragilityintheireggshells.Thiseffectincreasedeggbreakageduringnestingandwas
shown to have adverse effects on these bird populations. The use of DDT was banned in the United States in
the 1970s.
Other substances that biomagnify are polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), which were used in coolant liquids in
theUnitedStates untiltheirusewasbannedin1979,andheavymetals,suchasmercury,lead,andcadmium.
These substances were best studied in aquatic ecosystems, where fish species at different trophic levels
accumulatetoxicsubstancesbroughtthroughtheecosystembytheprimaryproducers.Asillustratedinastudy
performedbytheNationalOceanicandAtmosphericAdministration(NOAA)intheSaginawBayofLakeHuron
(Figure46.11),PCBconcentrationsincreasedfromtheecosystem’sprimaryproducers(phytoplankton)through
thedifferenttrophiclevelsoffishspecies.Theapexconsumer(walleye)hasmorethanfourtimestheamountof
PCBscomparedtophytoplankton.Also,basedonresultsfromotherstudies,birdsthateatthesefishmayhave
PCB levels at least one order of magnitude higher than those found in the lake fish.
Figure 46.11 This chart shows the PCB concentrations found at the various trophic levels in the Saginaw Bay
ecosystemofLakeHuron.Numbersonthex-axisreflectenrichmentwithheavyisotopesofnitrogen(15N),whichisa
markerforincreasingtrophiclevel.NoticethatthefishinthehighertrophiclevelsaccumulatemorePCBsthanthose
in lower trophic levels. (credit: Patricia Van Hoof, NOAA, GLERL)
Otherconcernshavebeenraisedbytheaccumulationofheavymetals,suchasmercuryandcadmium,incertain
typesofseafood.TheUnitedStatesEnvironmentalProtectionAgency(EPA)recommendsthatpregnantwomen
and young children should not consume any swordfish, shark, king mackerel, or tilefish because of their high
mercury content. These individuals are advised to eat fish low in mercury: salmon, tilapia, shrimp, pollock, and
catfish. Biomagnification is a good example of how ecosystem dynamics can affect our everyday lives, even
influencing the food we eat.
46.3 | Biogeochemical Cycles
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Discuss the biogeochemical cycles of water, carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur
• Explain how human activities have impacted these cycles and the potential consequences for Earth
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1484
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1473
Energy flows directionally through ecosystems, entering as sunlight (or inorganic molecules for
chemoautotrophs) and leaving as heat during the many transfers between trophic levels. However, the matter
that makes up living organisms is conserved and recycled. The six most common elements associated with
organic molecules—carbon, nitrogen, hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur—take a variety of chemical
forms and may exist for long periods in the atmosphere, on land, in water, or beneath the Earth’s surface.
Geologicprocesses,suchasweathering,erosion,waterdrainage,andthesubductionofthecontinentalplates,
all play a role in this recycling of materials. Because geology and chemistry have major roles in the study
of this process, the recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their environment is called a
biogeochemical cycle.
Water contains hydrogen and oxygen, which is essential to all living processes. The hydrosphere is the area
of the Earth where water movement and storage occurs. On or beneath the surface, water occurs in liquid or
solid form in rivers, lakes, oceans, groundwater, polar ice caps, and glaciers. And it occurs as water vapor in
the atmosphere. Carbon is found in all organic macromolecules and is an important constituent of fossil fuels.
Nitrogenisamajorcomponentofournucleicacidsandproteinsandiscriticaltohumanagriculture.Phosphorus,
amajorcomponentofnucleicacid(alongwithnitrogen),isoneofthemainingredientsinartificialfertilizersused
inagricultureandtheirassociatedenvironmentalimpactsonoursurfacewater.Sulfuriscriticaltothe3-Dfolding
of proteins, such as in disulfide binding.
Thecyclingoftheseelementsisinterconnected.Forexample,themovementofwateriscriticalfortheleaching
of nitrogen and phosphate into rivers, lakes, and oceans. Furthermore, the ocean itself is a major reservoir for
carbon.Thus,mineralnutrientsarecycled,eitherrapidlyorslowly,throughtheentirebiosphere,fromoneliving
organism to another, and between the biotic and abiotic world.
Head to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/biogeochemical) to learn more about biogeochemical
cycles.
The Water (Hydrologic) Cycle
WateristhebasisofalllivingprocessesonEarth.WhenexaminingthestoresofwateronEarth,97.5percentof
it is non-potable salt water (Figure 46.12). Of the remaining water, 99 percent is locked underground as water
orasice.Thus,lessthan1percentoffreshwateriseasilyaccessiblefromlakesandrivers.Manylivingthings,
suchasplants, animals,andfungi, aredependentonthatsmallamountoffreshsurfacewater,alackofwhich
canhavemassiveeffectsonecosystemdynamics.Tobesuccessful,organismsmustadapttofluctuatingwater
supplies.Humans,ofcourse,havedevelopedtechnologiestoincreasewateravailability,suchasdiggingwells
to harvest groundwater, storing rainwater, and using desalination to obtain drinkable water from the ocean.
Figure 46.12 Only 2.5 percent of water on Earth is fresh water, and less than 1 percent of fresh water is easily
accessible to living things.
PAGE: 1485
1474 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
Water cycling is extremely important to ecosystem dynamics. Water has a major influence on climate and,
thus, on the environments of ecosystems. Most of the water on Earth is stored for long periods in the oceans,
underground,andasice.Figure46.13illustratestheaveragetimethatanindividualwatermoleculemayspend
in the Earth’s major water reservoirs. Residence time is a measure of the average time an individual water
molecule stays in a particular reservoir.
Figure 46.13This graph shows the average residence time for water molecules in the Earth’s water reservoirs.
There are various processes that occur during the cycling of water, shown in Figure 46.14. These processes
include the following:
• evaporation/sublimation
• condensation/precipitation
• subsurface water flow
• surface runoff/snowmelt
• streamflow
The water cycle is driven by the sun’s energy as it warms the oceans and other surface waters. This leads to
theevaporation(watertowatervapor)ofliquidsurfacewaterandthesublimation(icetowatervapor)offrozen
water,whichdepositslargeamountsofwatervaporintotheatmosphere.Overtime,thiswatervaporcondenses
into clouds as liquid or frozen droplets and is eventually followed by precipitation (rain or snow), which returns
water to the Earth’s surface. Rain eventually permeates into the ground, where it may evaporate again if it is
nearthesurface,flowbeneaththesurface,orbestoredforlongperiods.Moreeasilyobservedissurfacerunoff:
theflowoffreshwatereitherfromrainormeltingice.Runoffcanthenmakeitswaythroughstreamsandlakes
to the oceans or flow directly to the oceans themselves.
Head to this website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/freshwater) to learn more about the world’s fresh water
supply.
Rain and surface runoff are major ways in which minerals, including carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur,
are cycled from land to water. The environmental effects of runoff will be discussed later as these cycles are
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1486
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1475
described.
Figure 46.14 Water from the land and oceans enters the atmosphere by evaporation or sublimation, where it
condensesintocloudsandfallsasrainorsnow.Precipitated watermayenterfreshwater bodiesorinfiltrate thesoil.
Thecycleiscompletewhensurfaceorgroundwaterreenterstheocean.(credit:modificationofworkbyJohnM.Evans
and Howard Perlman, USGS)
The Carbon Cycle
Carbon is the second most abundant element in living organisms. Carbon is present in all organic molecules,
and its role in the structure of macromolecules is of primary importance to living organisms.
The carbon cycle is most easily studied as two interconnected sub-cycles: one dealing with rapid carbon
exchange among living organisms and the other dealing with the long-term cycling of carbon through geologic
processes. The entire carbon cycle is shown inFigure 46.15.
PAGE: 1487
1476 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
Figure46.15Carbondioxidegasexistsintheatmosphereandisdissolvedinwater.Photosynthesisconvertscarbon
dioxide gas to organic carbon, and respiration cycles the organic carbon back into carbon dioxide gas. Long-term
storage of organic carbon occurs when matter from living organisms is buried deep underground and becomes
fossilized.Volcanicactivityand,morerecently,humanemissions,bringthisstoredcarbonbackintothecarboncycle.
(credit: modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS)
Click this link (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/carbon_cycle) to read information about the United States
Carbon Cycle Science Program.
The Biological Carbon Cycle
Living organisms are connected in many ways, even between ecosystems. A good example of this connection
is the exchange of carbon between autotrophs and heterotrophs within and between ecosystems by way of
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Carbon dioxide is the basic building block that most autotrophs use to build
multicarbon, high energy compounds, such as glucose. The energy harnessed from the sun is used by these
organismstoformthecovalentbondsthatlinkcarbonatomstogether.Thesechemicalbondstherebystorethis
energyforlateruseintheprocessofrespiration.Mostterrestrialautotrophsobtaintheircarbondioxidedirectly
−
fromtheatmosphere,whilemarineautotrophsacquireitinthedissolvedform(carbonicacid,H2CO3 ).However
carbondioxideisacquired,aby-productoftheprocessisoxygen.Thephotosyntheticorganismsareresponsible
for depositing approximately 21 percent oxygen content of the atmosphere that we observe today.
Heterotrophs and autotrophs are partners in biological carbon exchange (especially the primary consumers,
largelyherbivores).Heterotrophsacquirethehigh-energycarboncompoundsfromtheautotrophsbyconsuming
them, and breaking them down by respiration to obtain cellular energy, such as ATP. The most efficient type of
respiration,aerobicrespiration,requiresoxygenobtainedfromtheatmosphereordissolvedinwater.Thus,there
isaconstantexchangeofoxygenandcarbondioxidebetweentheautotrophs(whichneedthecarbon)andthe
heterotrophs (which need the oxygen). Gas exchange through the atmosphere and water is one way that the
carbon cycle connects all living organisms on Earth.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1488
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1477
The Biogeochemical Carbon Cycle
Themovementofcarbonthroughtheland,water,andairiscomplex,andinmanycases,itoccursmuchmore
slowlygeologicallythanasseenbetweenlivingorganisms.Carbonisstoredforlongperiodsinwhatareknown
as carbon reservoirs, which include the atmosphere, bodies of liquid water (mostly oceans), ocean sediment,
soil, land sediments (including fossil fuels), and the Earth’s interior.
As stated, the atmosphere is a major reservoir of carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and is essential to the
process of photosynthesis. The level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is greatly influenced by the reservoir
ofcarbonintheoceans.Theexchangeofcarbonbetweentheatmosphereandwaterreservoirsinfluenceshow
much carbon is found in each location, and each one affects the other reciprocally. Carbon dioxide (CO2) from
theatmospheredissolvesinwaterandcombineswithwatermoleculestoformcarbonicacid,andthenitionizes
to carbonate and bicarbonate ions (Figure 46.16)
Figure 46.16Carbon dioxide reacts with water to form bicarbonate and carbonate ions.
The equilibrium coefficients are such that more than 90 percent of the carbon in the ocean is found as
bicarbonate ions. Some of these ions combine with seawater calcium to form calcium carbonate (CaCO3), a
major component of marine organism shells. These organisms eventually form sediments on the ocean floor.
Over geologic time, the calcium carbonate forms limestone, which comprises the largest carbon reservoir on
Earth.
Onland,carbonisstoredinsoilasaresultofthedecompositionoflivingorganisms(bydecomposers)orfrom
weathering of terrestrial rock and minerals. This carbon can be leached into the water reservoirs by surface
runoff. Deeper underground, on land and at sea, are fossil fuels: the anaerobically decomposed remains of
plants that take millions of years to form. Fossil fuels are considered a nonrenewable resource because their
use far exceeds their rate of formation. A nonrenewable resource, such as fossil fuel, is either regenerated
veryslowlyornotatall.Anotherwayforcarbontoentertheatmosphereisfromland(includinglandbeneaththe
surface of the ocean) by the eruption of volcanoes and other geothermal systems. Carbon sediments from the
oceanflooraretakendeepwithintheEarthbytheprocessofsubduction:themovementofonetectonicplate
beneath another. Carbon is released as carbon dioxide when a volcano erupts or from volcanic hydrothermal
vents.
Humanscontributetoatmosphericcarbonbytheburningoffossilfuelsandothermaterials.SincetheIndustrial
Revolution, humans have significantly increased the release of carbon and carbon compounds, which has in
turn affected the climate and overall environment.
Animalhusbandrybyhumansalsoincreasesatmosphericcarbon.Thelargenumbersoflandanimalsraisedto
feedtheEarth’sgrowingpopulationresultsinincreasedcarbondioxidelevelsintheatmosphereduetofarming
practices and respiration and methane production. This is another example of how human activity indirectly
affects biogeochemical cycles in a significant way. Although much of the debate about the future effects of
increasing atmospheric carbon on climate change focuses on fossils fuels, scientists take natural processes,
such as volcanoes and respiration, into account as they model and predict the future impact of this increase.
The Nitrogen Cycle
Getting nitrogen into the living world is difficult. Plants and phytoplankton are not equipped to incorporate
nitrogen from the atmosphere (which exists as tightly bonded, triple covalent N2) even though this molecule
comprises approximately 78 percent of the atmosphere. Nitrogen enters the living world via free-living and
symbioticbacteria,whichincorporatenitrogenintotheirmacromoleculesthroughnitrogenfixation(conversionof
N2). Cyanobacteria live in most aquatic ecosystems where sunlight is present; they play a key role in nitrogen
fixation. Cyanobacteria are able to use inorganic sources of nitrogen to “fix” nitrogen. Rhizobium bacteria live
symbiotically in the root nodules of legumes (such as peas, beans, and peanuts) and provide them with the
organic nitrogen they need. (For example, gardeners often grow peas both for their produce and to naturally
add nitrogen to the soil. This practice goes back to ancient times, even if the science has only been recently
PAGE: 1489
1478 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
understood.) Free-living bacteria, such asAzotobacter, are also important nitrogen fixers.
Organicnitrogenisespeciallyimportanttothestudyofecosystemdynamicssincemanyecosystemprocesses,
such as primary production and decomposition, are limited by the available supply of nitrogen. As shown
in Figure 46.17, the nitrogen that enters living systems by nitrogen fixation is successively converted from
organic nitrogen back into nitrogen gas by bacteria. This process occurs in three steps in terrestrial systems:
ammonification, nitrification, and denitrification. First, the ammonification process converts nitrogenous waste
+
from living animals or from the remains of dead animals into ammonium (NH4 ) by certain bacteria and fungi.
−
Second, the ammonium is converted to nitrites (NO2 ) by nitrifying bacteria, such as Nitrosomonas, through
−
nitrification. Subsequently, nitrites are converted to nitrates (NO3 ) by similar organisms. Third, the process
of denitrification occurs, whereby bacteria, such as Pseudomonas and Clostridium, convert the nitrates into
nitrogen gas, allowing it to reenter the atmosphere.
Figure46.17Nitrogenentersthelivingworldfromtheatmospherevianitrogen-fixingbacteria.Thisnitrogenand
nitrogenouswastefromanimalsisthenprocessedbackintogaseousnitrogenbysoilbacteria,whichalsosupply
terrestrial food webs with the organic nitrogen they need. (credit: modification of work by John M. Evans and
Howard Perlman, USGS)
Which of the following statements about the nitrogen cycle is false?
+
a. Ammonification converts organic nitrogenous matter from living organisms into ammonium (NH4 ).
−
b. Denitrification by bacteria converts nitrates (NO3 ) to nitrogen gas (N2).
− −
c. Nitrification by bacteria converts nitrates (NO3 ) to nitrites (NO2 ).
d. Nitrogen fixing bacteria convert nitrogen gas (N2) into organic compounds.
Humanactivitycanreleasenitrogenintotheenvironmentbytwoprimarymeans:thecombustionoffossilfuels,
which releases different nitrogen oxides, and by the use of artificial fertilizers in agriculture, which are then
washedintolakes,streams,andriversbysurfacerunoff.Atmosphericnitrogenisassociatedwithseveraleffects
on Earth’s ecosystems including the production of acid rain (as nitric acid, HNO3) and greenhouse gas (as
nitrous oxide, N2O) potentially causing climate change. A major effect from fertilizer runoff is saltwater and
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1490
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1479
freshwater eutrophication, a process whereby nutrient runoff causes the excess growth of microorganisms,
depleting dissolved oxygen levels and killing ecosystem fauna.
Asimilarprocessoccursinthemarinenitrogencycle,wheretheammonification,nitrification,anddenitrification
processes are performed by marine bacteria. Some of this nitrogen falls to the ocean floor as sediment, which
can then be moved to land in geologic time by uplift of the Earth’s surface and thereby incorporated into
terrestrial rock. Although the movement of nitrogen from rock directly into living systems has been traditionally
seenasinsignificantcomparedwithnitrogenfixedfromtheatmosphere,arecentstudyshowedthatthisprocess
[3]
may indeed be significant and should be included in any study of the global nitrogen cycle.
The Phosphorus Cycle
Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for living processes; it is a major component of nucleic acid and
phospholipids, and, as calcium phosphate, makes up the supportive components of our bones. Phosphorus is
often the limiting nutrient (necessary for growth) in aquatic ecosystems (Figure 46.18).
3−
Phosphorus occurs in nature as the phosphate ion (PO4 ). In addition to phosphate runoff as a result of
humanactivity,naturalsurfacerunoffoccurswhenitisleachedfromphosphate-containingrockbyweathering,
thus sending phosphates into rivers, lakes, and the ocean. This rock has its origins in the ocean. Phosphate-
containing ocean sediments form primarily from the bodies of ocean organisms and from their excretions.
However,inremoteregions,volcanicash,aerosols,andmineraldustmayalsobesignificantphosphatesources.
This sediment then is moved to land over geologic time by the uplifting of areas of the Earth’s surface.
Phosphorusisalsoreciprocallyexchangedbetweenphosphatedissolvedintheoceanandmarineecosystems.
Themovementofphosphatefromtheoceantothelandandthroughthesoilisextremelyslow,withtheaverage
phosphate ion having an oceanic residence time between 20,000 and 100,000 years.
Figure 46.18 In nature, phosphorus exists as the phosphate ion (PO4 3−). Weathering of rocks and volcanic activity
releasesphosphateintothesoil,water,andair,whereitbecomesavailabletoterrestrialfoodwebs.Phosphateenters
theoceansviasurfacerunoff,groundwaterflow,andriverflow.Phosphatedissolvedinoceanwatercyclesintomarine
food webs. Some phosphate from the marine food webs falls to the ocean floor, where it forms sediment. (credit:
modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS)
AsdiscussedinChapter44,excessphosphorusandnitrogenthatenterstheseecosystemsfromfertilizerrunoff
3. Scott L. Morford, Benjamin Z. Houlton, and Randy A. Dahlgren, “Increased Forest Ecosystem Carbon and Nitrogen Storage from
Nitrogen Rich Bedrock,”Nature477, no. 7362 (2011): 78–81.
PAGE: 1491
1480 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
andfromsewagecausesexcessivegrowthofmicroorganismsanddepletesthedissolvedoxygen,whichleads
tothedeathofmanyecosystemfauna,suchasshellfishandfinfish.Thisprocessisresponsiblefordeadzones
in lakes and at the mouths of many major rivers (Figure 46.19).
Figure 46.19 Dead zones occur when phosphorus and nitrogen from fertilizers cause excessive growth of
microorganisms, which depletes oxygen and kills fauna. Worldwide, large dead zones are found in coastal areas of
high population density. (credit: NASA Earth Observatory)
As discussed earlier, a dead zone is an area within a freshwater or marine ecosystem where large areas are
depleted of their normal flora and fauna; these zones can be caused by eutrophication, oil spills, dumping of
toxicchemicals,andotherhumanactivities. Thenumberofdeadzoneshasbeenincreasingforseveralyears,
andmorethan400ofthesezoneswerepresentasof2008.Oneoftheworstdeadzonesisoffthecoastofthe
United States in the Gulf of Mexico, where fertilizer runoff from the Mississippi River basin has created a dead
zoneofover8463squaremiles.Phosphateandnitraterunofffromfertilizersalsonegativelyaffectseverallake
and bay ecosystems including the Chesapeake Bay in the eastern United States.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1492
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1481
Chesapeake Bay
Figure46.20This(a)satelliteimageshowstheChesapeakeBay,anecosystemaffectedbyphosphateandnitrate
runoff.A(b)memberoftheArmyCorpsofEngineersholdsaclumpofoystersbeingusedasapartoftheoyster
restorationeffortinthebay.(credita:modificationofworkbyNASA/MODIS;creditb:modificationofworkbyU.S.
Army)
TheChesapeakeBayhaslongbeenvaluedasoneofthemostscenicareasonEarth;itisnowindistress
and is recognized as a declining ecosystem. In the 1970s, the Chesapeake Bay was one of the first
ecosystems to have identified dead zones, which continue to kill many fish and bottom-dwelling species,
suchasclams,oysters,andworms.SeveralspecieshavedeclinedintheChesapeakeBayduetosurface
water runoff containing excess nutrients from artificial fertilizer used on land. The source of the fertilizers
(with high nitrogen and phosphate content) is not limited to agricultural practices. There are many nearby
urban areas and more than 150 rivers and streams empty into the bay that are carrying fertilizer runoff
from lawns and gardens. Thus, the decline of the Chesapeake Bay is a complex issue and requires the
cooperation of industry, agriculture, and everyday homeowners.
Of particular interest to conservationists is the oyster population; it is estimated that more than 200,000
acres of oyster reefs existed in the bay in the 1700s, but that number has now declined to only 36,000
acres.OysterharvestingwasonceamajorindustryforChesapeakeBay,butitdeclined88percentbetween
1982and2007.Thisdeclinewasduenotonlytofertilizerrunoffanddeadzonesbutalsotooverharvesting.
Oystersrequireacertainminimumpopulationdensitybecausetheymustbeincloseproximitytoreproduce.
Human activity has altered the oyster population and locations, greatly disrupting the ecosystem.
The restoration of the oyster population in the Chesapeake Bay has been ongoing for several years with
mixedsuccess.Notonlydomanypeoplefindoystersgoodtoeat,buttheyalsocleanupthebay.Oysters
are filter feeders, and as they eat, they clean the water around them. In the 1700s, it was estimated that
it took only a few days for the oyster population to filter the entire volume of the bay. Today, with changed
water conditions, it is estimated that the present population would take nearly a year to do the same job.
Restorationeffortshavebeenongoingforseveralyearsbynonprofitorganizations,suchastheChesapeake
Bay Foundation. The restoration goal is to find a way to increase population density so the oysters can
reproduce more efficiently. Many disease-resistant varieties (developed at the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science for the College of William and Mary) are now available and have been used in the construction
of experimental oyster reefs. Efforts to clean and restore the bay by Virginia and Delaware have been
hamperedbecausemuchofthepollutionenteringthebaycomesfromotherstates,whichstressestheneed
for interstate cooperation to gain successful restoration.
The new, hearty oyster strains have also spawned a new and economically viable industry—oyster
PAGE: 1493
1482 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
aquaculture—whichnotonlysuppliesoystersforfoodandprofit,butalsohastheaddedbenefitofcleaning
the bay.
The Sulfur Cycle
Sulfurisanessentialelementforthemacromoleculesoflivingthings.Asapartoftheaminoacidcysteine,itis
involved in the formation of disulfide bonds within proteins, which help to determine their 3-D folding patterns,
andhencetheirfunctions.AsshowninFigure46.21,sulfurcyclesbetweentheoceans,land,andatmosphere.
Atmospheric sulfur is found in the form of sulfur dioxide (SO2) and enters the atmosphere in three ways: from
the decomposition of organic molecules, from volcanic activity and geothermal vents, and from the burning of
fossil fuels by humans.
Figure 46.21 Sulfur dioxide from the atmosphere becomes available to terrestrial and marine ecosystems when it is
dissolvedinprecipitationasweaksulfuricacidorwhenitfallsdirectlytotheEarthasfallout.Weatheringofrocksalso
makes sulfates available to terrestrial ecosystems. Decomposition of living organisms returns sulfates to the ocean,
soil, and atmosphere. (credit: modification of work by John M. Evans and Howard Perlman, USGS)
Onland,sulfurisdepositedinfourmajorways:precipitation,directfalloutfromtheatmosphere,rockweathering,
andgeothermalvents(Figure46.21).Atmosphericsulfurisfoundintheformofsulfurdioxide(SO2),andasrain
falls through the atmosphere, sulfur is dissolved in the form of weak sulfuric acid (H2SO4). Sulfur can also fall
directlyfromtheatmosphereinaprocesscalledfallout.Also,theweatheringofsulfur-containingrocksreleases
sulfurintothesoil.Theserocksoriginatefromoceansedimentsthataremovedtolandbythegeologicuplifting
of ocean sediments. Terrestrial ecosystems can then make use of these soil sulfates (SO − ), and upon the
4
death and decomposition of these organisms, release the sulfur back into the atmosphere as hydrogen sulfide
(H2S) gas.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1494
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1483
Figure 46.22 At this sulfur vent in Lassen Volcanic National Park in northeastern California, the yellowish sulfur
deposits are visible near the mouth of the vent.
Sulfur enters the ocean via runoff from land, from atmospheric fallout, and from underwater geothermal vents.
Someecosystems(Figure46.9)relyonchemoautotrophsusingsulfurasabiologicalenergysource.Thissulfur
then supports marine ecosystems in the form of sulfates.
Human activities have played a major role in altering the balance of the global sulfur cycle. The burning of
large quantities of fossil fuels, especially from coal, releases larger amounts of hydrogen sulfide gas into the
atmosphere.Acidrainiscausedbyrainwaterfallingtothegroundthroughthissulfurdioxidegas,turningitinto
weaksulfuricacid.AcidraindamagesthenaturalenvironmentbyloweringthepHoflakes,whichkillsmanyof
theresidentfauna;italsoaffectstheman-madeenvironmentthroughthechemicaldegradationofbuildings.For
example,manymarblemonuments,suchastheLincolnMemorialinWashington,DC,havesufferedsignificant
damage from acid rain over the years.
Click thislink (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/climate_change)to learn more about global climate change.
PAGE: 1495
1484 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
KEY TERMS
acid rain corrosiveraincausedbyrainwaterfallingtothegroundthroughsulfurdioxidegas,turningitintoweak
sulfuric acid; can damage structures and ecosystems
analytical model ecosystem model that is created with mathematical formulas to predict the effects of
environmental disturbances on ecosystem structure and dynamics
apex consumer organism at the top of the food chain
assimilation biomassconsumedandassimilatedfromtheprevioustrophiclevelafteraccountingfortheenergy
lost due to incomplete ingestion of food, energy used for respiration, and energy lost as waste
biogeochemical cycle cycling of mineral nutrients through ecosystems and through the nonliving world
biomagnification increasingconcentrationsofpersistent,toxicsubstancesinorganismsateachtrophiclevel,
from the primary producers to the apex consumers
biomass totalweight,atthetimeofmeasurement,oflivingorpreviouslylivingorganismsinaunitareawithina
trophic level
chemoautotroph organism capable of synthesizing its own food using energy from inorganic molecules
conceptual model (also, compartment model) ecosystem model that consists of flow charts that show the
interactions of different compartments of the living and nonliving components of the ecosystem
dead zone area within an ecosystem in lakes and near the mouths of rivers where large areas of ecosystems
are depleted of their normal flora and fauna; these zones can be caused by eutrophication, oil spills,
dumping of toxic chemicals, and other human activities
detrital food web type of food web in which the primary consumers consist of decomposers; these are often
associated with grazing food webs within the same ecosystem
ecological pyramid (also,Eltonianpyramid)graphicalrepresentationofdifferenttrophiclevelsinanecosystem
based of organism numbers, biomass, or energy content
ecosystem community of living organisms and their interactions with their abiotic environment
ecosystem dynamics study of the changes in ecosystem structure caused by changes in the environment or
internal forces
equilibrium steadystateofanecosystemwhereallorganismsareinbalancewiththeirenvironmentandeach
other
eutrophication process whereby nutrient runoff causes the excess growth of microorganisms, depleting
dissolved oxygen levels and killing ecosystem fauna
fallout direct deposit of solid minerals on land or in the ocean from the atmosphere
food chain linear representation of a chain of primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-level
consumers used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics
food web graphic representation of a holistic, nonlinear web of primary producers, primary consumers, and
higher-level consumers used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics
grazing food web typeoffoodwebinwhichtheprimaryproducersareeitherplantsonlandorphytoplanktonin
the water; often associated with a detrital food web within the same ecosystem
gross primary productivity rate at which photosynthetic primary producers incorporate energy from the sun
holistic ecosystem model studythatattemptstoquantifythecomposition,interactions,anddynamicsofentire
ecosystems; often limited by economic and logistical difficulties, depending on the ecosystem
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1496
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1485
hydrosphere area of the Earth where water movement and storage occurs
mesocosm portion of a natural ecosystem to be used for experiments
microcosm re-creation of natural ecosystems entirely in a laboratory environment to be used for experiments
net consumer productivity energy content available to the organisms of the next trophic level
net primary productivity energy that remains in the primary producers after accounting for the organisms’
respiration and heat loss
net production efficiency (NPE) measureoftheabilityofatrophicleveltoconverttheenergyitreceivesfrom
the previous trophic level into biomass
nonrenewable resource resource, such as fossil fuel, that is either regenerated very slowly or not at all
primary consumer trophic level that obtains its energy from the primary producers of an ecosystem
primary producer trophic level that obtains its energy from sunlight, inorganic chemicals, or dead and/or
decaying organic material
residence time measure of the average time an individual water molecule stays in a particular reservoir
resilience (ecological) speed at which an ecosystem recovers equilibrium after being disturbed
resistance (ecological) ability of an ecosystem to remain at equilibrium in spite of disturbances
secondary consumer usually a carnivore that eats primary consumers
simulation model ecosystem model that is created with computer programs to holistically model ecosystems
and to predict the effects of environmental disturbances on ecosystem structure and dynamics
subduction movement of one tectonic plate beneath another
tertiary consumer carnivore that eats other carnivores
trophic level position of a species or group of species in a food chain or a food web
trophic level transfer efficiency (TLTE) energy transfer efficiency between two successive trophic levels
CHAPTER SUMMARY
46.1Ecology of Ecosystems
Ecosystems exist on land, at sea, in the air, and underground. Different ways of modeling ecosystems are
necessary to understand how environmental disturbances will affect ecosystem structure and dynamics.
Conceptual models are useful to show the general relationships between organisms and the flow of materials
or energy between them. Analytical models are used to describe linear food chains, and simulation models
work best with holistic food webs.
46.2Energy Flow through Ecosystems
Organisms in an ecosystem acquire energy in a variety of ways, which is transferred between trophic levels as
the energy flows from the bottom to the top of the food web, with energy being lost at each transfer. The
efficiency of these transfers is important for understanding the different behaviors and eating habits of warm-
blooded versus cold-blooded animals. Modeling of ecosystem energy is best done with ecological pyramids of
energy, although other ecological pyramids provide other vital information about ecosystem structure.
46.3Biogeochemical Cycles
Mineral nutrients are cycled through ecosystems and their environment. Of particular importance are water,
carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur. All of these cycles have major impacts on ecosystem structure and
PAGE: 1497
1486 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
function. A variety of human activities, such as pollution, oil spills, and other events have damaged
ecosystems, potentially causing global climate change. The health of Earth depends on understanding these
cycles and how to protect the environment from irreversible damage.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 46.8Why do you think the value for gross a. Ammonification converts organic
productivity of the primary producers is the same as nitrogenous matter from living organisms
the value for total heat and respiration (20,810 kcal/ into ammonium (NH4 + ).
2
m /yr)? b. Denitrification by bacteria converts nitrates
−
2.Figure 46.10Pyramids depicting the number of (NO3 ) to nitrogen gas (N2).
organisms or biomass may be inverted, upright, or c. Nitrification by bacteria converts nitrates
even diamond-shaped. Energy pyramids, however, (NO3 − ) to nitrites (NO2 − ).
are always upright. Why? d. Nitrogen fixing bacteria convert nitrogen gas
3.Figure 46.17Which of the following statements (N2) into organic compounds.
about the nitrogen cycle is false?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
4.The ability of an ecosystem to return to its a. locus
equilibrium state after an environmental disturbance b. location
is called ________. c. trophic level
a. resistance d. microcosm
b. restoration
10.The loss of an apex consumer would impact
c. reformation
which trophic level of a food web?
d. resilience
a. primary producers
5.A re-created ecosystem in a laboratory b. primary consumers
environment is known as a ________. c. secondary consumers
a. mesocosm d. all of the above
b. simulation
11.A food chain would be a better resource than a
c. microcosm
food web to answer which question?
d. reproduction
a. How does energy move from an organism in
6.Decomposers are associated with which class of one trophic level to an organism on the next
food web? trophic level?
a. grazing b. How does energy move within a trophic
b. detrital level?
c. inverted c. What preys on grasses?
d. aquatic d. How is organic matter recycled in a forest?
7.The primary producers in an ocean grazing food 12.The weight of living organisms in an ecosystem
web are usually ________. at a particular point in time is called:
a. plants a. energy
b. animals b. production
c. fungi c. entropy
d. phytoplankton d. biomass
8.What term describes the use of mathematical 13.Which term describes the process whereby toxic
equations in the modeling of linear aspects of substances increase along trophic levels of an
ecosystems? ecosystem?
a. analytical modeling a. biomassification
b. simulation modeling b. biomagnification
c. conceptual modeling c. bioentropy
d. individual-based modeling d. heterotrophy
9.The position of an organism along a food chain is 14.Organisms that can make their own food using
known as its ________. inorganic molecules are called:
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1498
Chapter 46 | Ecosystems 1487
a. autotrophs a. ice
b. heterotrophs b. water vapor
c. photoautotrophs c. fresh water
d. chemoautotrophs d. salt water
15.In the English Channel ecosystem, the number of 21.The average time a molecule spends in its
primary producers is smaller than the number of reservoir is known as ________.
primary consumers because________. a. residence time
a. the apex consumers have a low turnover b. restriction time
rate c. resilience time
b. the primary producers have a low turnover d. storage time
rate
22.The process whereby oxygen is depleted by the
c. the primary producers have a high turnover
growth of microorganisms due to excess nutrients in
rate
aquatic systems is called ________.
d. the primary consumers have a high turnover
a. dead zoning
rate
b. eutrophication
16.What law of chemistry determines how much c. retrofication
energy can be transferred when it is converted from d. depletion
one form to another?
23.The process whereby nitrogen is brought into
a. the first law of thermodynamics
organic molecules is called ________.
b. the second law of thermodynamics
a. nitrification
c. the conservation of matter
b. denitrification
d. the conservation of energy
c. nitrogen fixation
17.The mussels that live at the NW Eifuku volcano d. nitrogen cycling
are examples of _______.
24.Which of the following approaches would be the
a. chemoautotrophs
most effective way to reduce greenhouse carbon
b. photoautotrophs
dioxide?
c. apex predators
a. Increase waste deposition into the deep
d. primary consumers
ocean.
18.The movement of mineral nutrients through b. Plant more environmentally-suitable plants.
organisms and their environment is called a c. Increase use of fuel sources that do not
________ cycle. produce carbon dioxide as a by-product.
a. biological d. Decrease livestock agriculture.
b. bioaccumulation
25.How would loss of fungi in a forest effect
c. biogeochemical
biogeochemical cycles in the area?
d. biochemical
a. Nitrogen could no longer be fixed into
19.Carbon is present in the atmosphere as organic molecules.
________. b. Phosphorus stores would be released for
a. carbon dioxide use by other organisms.
b. carbonate ion c. Sulfur release from eroding rocks would
c. carbon dust cease.
d. carbon monoxide d. Carbon would accumulate in dead organic
matter and waste.
20.The majority of water found on Earth is:
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
26.Compare and contrast food chains and food 30.How do conceptual and analytical models of
webs. What are the strengths of each concept in ecosystems compliment each other?
describing ecosystems?
31.Compare the three types of ecological pyramids
27.Describe freshwater, ocean, and terrestrial and how well they describe ecosystem structure.
ecosystems. Identify which ones can be inverted and give an
example of an inverted pyramid for each.
28.Compare grazing and detrital food webs. Why
would they both be present in the same ecosystem? 32.How does the amount of food a warm-blooded
animal (endotherm) eats relate to its net production
29.How does the microcosm modeling approach
efficiency (NPE)?
differ from utilizing a holistic model for ecological
research? 33.A study uses an inverted pyramid to demonstrate
PAGE: 1499
1488 Chapter 46 | Ecosystems
the relationship between sharks, their aquatic prey, to agriculture.
and phytoplankton in an ocean region. What type of
36.What are the factors that cause dead zones?
pyramid must be used? What does this convey to
Describe eutrophication, in particular, as a cause.
readers about predation in the area?
37.Why are drinking water supplies still a major
34.Describe what a pyramid of numbers would like if
concern for many countries?
an ecologist models the relationship between bird
parasites, blue jays, and oak trees in a hectare. Does 38.Discuss how the human disruption of the carbon
this match the energy flow pyramid? cycle has caused ocean acidification.
35.Describe nitrogen fixation and why it is important
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1500
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1489
47 | CONSERVATION
BIOLOGY AND
BIODIVERSITY
Figure 47.1 Lake Victoria in Africa, shown in this satellite image, was the site of one of the most extraordinary
evolutionaryfindingsontheplanet,aswellasacasualtyofdevastatingbiodiversityloss.(credit:modificationofwork
by Rishabh Tatiraju, using NASA World Wind software)
Chapter Outline
47.1:The Biodiversity Crisis
47.2:The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
47.3:Threats to Biodiversity
47.4:Preserving Biodiversity
Introduction
In the 1980s, biologists working in Lake Victoria in Africa discovered one of the most extraordinary products
of evolution on the planet. Located in the Great Rift Valley, Lake Victoria is an enormous and deep lake about
2
68,900km inarea(largerthanLakeHuron,thesecondlargestofNorthAmerica’sGreatLakes).Biologistswere
studyingspeciesofafamilyoffishcalledcichlids.Whentheysampledforfishindifferentlocationsofthelake,
the researchers identified over 500 evolved species in total. However, the scientists soon discovered that the
invasiveNilePerchwasdestroyingthelake’scichlidpopulation,bringinghundredsofcichlidspeciestoextinction
with devastating rapidity.
PAGE: 1501
1490 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
47.1 | The Biodiversity Crisis
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Define biodiversity in terms of species diversity and abundance
• Describe biodiversity as the equilibrium of naturally fluctuating rates of extinction and speciation
• Identify historical causes of high extinction rates in Earth’s history
Traditionally, ecologists have measured biodiversity, a general term for the number of species present in the
biosphere, by taking into account both the number of species and their relative abundance to each other.
Biodiversitycanbeestimatedatanumberoflevelsoforganizationoflivingorganisms.Theseestimationindices,
whichcamefrominformationtheory,aremostusefulasafirststepinquantifyingbiodiversitybetweenandwithin
ecosystems; they are less useful when the main concern among conservation biologists is simply the loss of
biodiversity.However,biologistsrecognizethatmeasuresofbiodiversity,intermsofspeciesdiversity,mayhelp
focus efforts to preserve the biologically or technologically important elements of biodiversity.
TheLakeVictoriacichlidsprovideanexamplewithwhichwecanbegintounderstandbiodiversity.Thebiologists
studyingcichlidsinthe1980sdiscoveredhundredsofcichlidspeciesrepresentingavarietyofspecializationsto
specializedhabitattypesandspecificfeedingstrategies:suchaseatingplanktonfloatinginthewater,scraping/
eating algae from rocks, eating insect larvae from the lake bottom, and eating the eggs of other species of
cichlid. The cichlids of Lake Victoria are the product of an complex adaptive radiation. An adaptive radiation
is a rapid (less than three million years in the case of the Lake Victoria cichlids) branching through speciation
of a phylogenetic clade into many closely related species. Typically, the species “radiate” into different habitats
andniches.TheGalápagosIslandfinchesareanexampleofamodestadaptiveradiationwith15species.The
cichlids of Lake Victoria are an example of a spectacular adaptive radiation that formerly included about 500
species.
At the time biologists were making this discovery, some species began to quickly disappear. A culprit in these
declineswastheNileperch,aspeciesoflargepredatoryfishthatwasintroducedtoLakeVictoriabyfisheriesto
feedthepeoplelivingaroundthelake.TheNileperchwasintroducedin1963,butitspopulationsdidnotbegin
tosurgeuntilthe1980s.Theperchpopulationgrewbyconsumingcichlids,drivingspeciesafterspeciestothe
point of extinction (the disappearance of a species). In fact, there were several factors that played a role in
theextinctionofperhaps200cichlidspeciesinLakeVictoria:theNileperch,declininglakewaterqualitydueto
agriculture andlandclearingontheshoresofLakeVictoria, andincreasedfishing pressure. Scientists hadnot
even catalogued all of the species present—so many were lost that were never named. The diversity is now a
shadow of what it once was.
ThecichlidsofLakeVictoriaareathumbnailsketchofcontemporaryrapidspecieslossthatoccursalloverEarth
that is caused primarily by human activity. Extinction is a natural process of macroevolution that occurs at the
rate of about one out of 1 million species becoming extinct per year. The fossil record reveals that there have
beenfiveperiodsofmassextinctioninhistorywithmuchhigherratesofspeciesloss,andtherateofspecies
loss today is comparable to those periods of mass extinction. However, there is a major difference between
thepreviousmassextinctionsandthecurrentextinctionweareexperiencing:humanactivity.Specifically,three
human activities have a major impact: 1) destruction of habitat, 2) introduction of exotic species, and 3) over-
harvesting. Predictions of species loss within the next century, a tiny amount of time on geological timescales,
rangefrom10percentto50percent.Extinctionsonthisscalehaveonlyhappenedfiveothertimesinthehistory
oftheplanet,andtheseextinctionswerecausedbycataclysmiceventsthatchangedthecourseofthehistoryof
life in each instance.
Types of Biodiversity
Scientists generally accept that the term biodiversity describes the number and kinds of species and their
abundance in a given location or on the planet. Species can be difficult to define, but most biologists still feel
comfortable with the concept and are able to identify and count eukaryotic species in most contexts. Biologists
havealsoidentifiedalternatemeasuresofbiodiversity,someofwhichareimportantforplanninghowtopreserve
biodiversity.
Genetic diversity is one of those alternate concepts. Genetic diversity, or genetic variation defines the raw
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1502
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1491
material for evolution and adaptation in a species. A species’ future potential for adaptation depends on the
genetic diversity held in the genomes of the individuals in populations that make up the species. The same is
trueforhighertaxonomiccategories.Agenuswithverydifferenttypesofspecieswillhavemoregeneticdiversity
thanagenuswithspeciesthataregeneticallysimilarandhavesimilarecologies.Iftherewereachoicebetween
oneofthesegeneraofspeciesbeingpreserved,theonewiththegreatestpotentialforsubsequentevolutionis
the mostgenetically diverseone.
Many genes code for proteins, which in turn carry out the metabolic processes that keep organisms alive and
reproducing. Genetic diversity can be measured as chemical diversity in that different species produce a
varietyofchemicalsintheircells,boththeproteinsaswellastheproductsandbyproductsofmetabolism.This
chemical diversity has potential benefit for humans as a source of pharmaceuticals, so it provides one way to
measure diversity that is important to human health and welfare.
Humans have generated diversity in domestic animals, plants, and fungi, among many other organisms. This
diversity is also suffering losses because of migration, market forces, and increasing globalism in agriculture,
especially in densely populated regions such as China, India, and Japan. The human population directly
dependsonthisdiversityasastablefoodsource,anditsdeclineistroublingbiologistsandagriculturalscientists.
It is also useful to define ecosystem diversity, meaning the number of different ecosystems on the planet or
within a given geographic area (Figure 47.2). Whole ecosystems can disappear even if some of the species
mightsurvivebyadaptingtootherecosystems.Thelossofanecosystemmeansthelossofinteractionsbetween
species, the loss of unique features of coadaptation, and the loss of biological productivity that an ecosystem
is able to create. An example of a largely extinct ecosystem in North America is the prairie ecosystem.
Prairies once spanned central North America from the boreal forest in northern Canada down into Mexico.
They are now all but gone, replaced by crop fields, pasture lands, and suburban sprawl. Many of the species
survive elsewhere, but the hugely productive ecosystem that was responsible for creating the most productive
agriculturalsoilsintheUnitedStatesisnowgone.Asaconsequence,nativesoilsaredisappearingormustbe
maintained and enhanced at great expense.
PAGE: 1503
1492 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Figure47.2ThevarietyofecosystemsonEarth—from(a)coralreefto(b)prairie—enablesagreatdiversityofspecies
to exist. (credit a: modification of work by Jim Maragos, USFWS; credit b: modification of work by Jim Minnerath,
USFWS)
Current Species Diversity
Despite considerable effort, knowledge of the species that inhabit the planet is limited and always will be
because of a continuing lack of financial resources and political willpower. A recent estimate suggests that the
eukaryote species for which science has names, about 1.5 million species, account for less than 20 percent of
thetotalnumberofeukaryotespeciespresentontheplanet(8.7millionspecies,byoneestimate).Estimatesof
numbersofprokaryoticspeciesarelargelyguesses,butbiologistsagreethatsciencehasonlybeguntocatalog
their diversity. Even with what is known, there is no central repository of names or samples of the described
species; therefore, there isnowaytobesurethat the 1.5 milliondescriptions isanaccurate accounting. It isa
bestguessbasedontheopinionsofexpertsindifferenttaxonomicgroups.GiventhatEarthislosingspeciesat
anacceleratingpace,scienceisverymuchintheplaceitwaswiththeLakeVictoriacichlids:knowinglittleabout
what is being lost.Table 47.1presents recent estimates of biodiversity in different groups.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1504
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1493
Estimates of the Numbers of Described and Predicted Species by Taxonomic
Group
Groombridge & Jenkins
[1] [2]
Mora et al. 2011 Chapman 2009 [3]
2002
Described Predicted Described Predicted Described Predicted
Animalia 1,124,516 9,920,000 1,424,153 6,836,330 1,225,500 10,820,000
Chromista 17,892 34,900 25,044 200,500 — —
Fungi 44,368 616,320 98,998 1,500,000 72,000 1,500,000
Plantae 224,244 314,600 310,129 390,800 270,000 320,000
Protozoa 16,236 72,800 28,871 1,000,000 80,000 600,000
Prokaryotes — — 10,307 1,000,000 10,175 —
Total 1,438,769 10,960,000 1,897,502 10,897,630 1,657,675 13,240,000
Table 47.1
Therearevariousinitiativestocatalogdescribedspeciesinaccessibleways,andtheinternetisfacilitatingthat
effort.Nevertheless,ithasbeenpointedoutthatatthecurrentrateofnewspeciesdescriptions(whichaccording
totheStateofObservedSpeciesReportis17,000to20,000newspeciesperyear),itwilltakecloseto500years
[4]
tofinishdescribinglifeonthisplanet. Overtime,thetaskbecomesbothincreasinglydifficultandincreasingly
easier as extinction removes species from the planet.
Naming and counting species may seem like an unimportant pursuit given the other needs of humanity, but
determining biodiversity it is not simply an accounting of species. Describing a species is a complex process
through which biologists determine an organism’s unique characteristics and whether or not that organism
belongs to any other described species or genus. It allows biologists to find and recognize the species after
the initial discovery, and allows them to follow up on questions about its biology. In addition, the unique
characteristics of each species make it potentially valuable to humans or other species on which humans
depend.
Patterns of Biodiversity
Biodiversity is not evenly distributed on Earth. Lake Victoria contained almost 500 species of cichlids alone,
ignoring the other fish families present in the lake. All of these species were found only in Lake Victoria;
therefore,the500speciesofcichlidswereendemic.Endemicspeciesarefoundinonlyonelocation.Endemics
with highly restricted distributions are particularly vulnerable to extinction. Higher taxonomic levels, such as
generaandfamilies,canalsobeendemic.LakeMichigancontainsabout79speciesoffish,manyofwhichare
foundinotherlakesinNorthAmerica.Whataccountsforthedifferenceinfishdiversityinthesetwolakes?Lake
Victoria is an ancient tropical lake, while Lake Michigan is a recently formed temperate lake. Lake Michigan in
itspresentformisonlyabout7,000yearsold,whileLakeVictoriainitspresentformisabout15,000yearsold,
althoughitsbasinisabout400,000yearsinage.Biogeographershavesuggestedthesetwofactors,latitudeand
age, are two of several hypotheses to explain biodiversity patterns on the planet.
1. Mora Camilo et al., “How Many Species Are There on Earth and in the Ocean?”PLoS Biology(2011), doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001127.
2. Arthur D. Chapman,Numbers of Living Species in Australia and the World, 2nd ed. (Canberra, AU: Australian Biological Resources
Study, 2009).https://www.environment.gov.au/system/files/pages/2ee3f4a1-f130-465b-9c7a-79373680a067/files/nlsaw-2nd-complete.pdf/
(http://openstax.org/l/Aus_diversity).
3. Brian Groombridge and Martin D. Jenkins.World Atlas of Biodiversity: Earth’s Living Resources in the 21stCentury. Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2002.
4. International Institute for Species Exploration (IISE),2011 State of Observed Species (SOS). Tempe, AZ: IISE, 2011. Accessed May, 20,
2012.http://www.esf.edu/species/ (http://openstax.org/l/observed_species).
PAGE: 1505
1494 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Biogeographer
Biogeography is the study of the distribution of the world’s species—both in the past and in the present.
The work of biogeographers is critical to understanding our physical environment, how the environment
affectsspecies,andhowenvironmentalchangesimpactthedistributionofaspecies;ithasalsobeencritical
to developing modern evolutionary theory. Biogeographers need to understand both biology and ecology.
They also need to be well-versed in evolutionary studies, soil science, and climatology.
Therearethreemainfieldsofstudyundertheheadingofbiogeography:ecologicalbiogeography,historical
biogeography (called paleobiogeography), and conservation biogeography. Ecological biogeography
studiesthecurrentfactorsaffectingthedistributionofplantsandanimals.Historicalbiogeography,asthe
nameimplies,studiesthepastdistributionofspecies.Conservationbiogeography,ontheotherhand,is
focused on the protection and restoration of species based upon known historical and current ecological
information.Eachofthesefieldsconsidersbothzoogeographyandphytogeography—thepastandpresent
distribution of animals and plants.
One of the oldest observed patterns in ecology is that species biodiversity in almost every taxonomic group
increases as latitude declines. In other words, biodiversity increases closer to the equator (Figure 47.3).
Figure47.3Thismapillustratesthenumberofamphibianspeciesacrosstheglobeandshowsthetrendtowardhigher
biodiversityatlowerlatitudes.Asimilarpatternisobservedformosttaxonomicgroups.Thewhiteareasindicatealack
of data in this particular study.
It is not yet clear why biodiversity increases closer to the equator, but scientists have several hypotheses.
One factor may be the greater age of the ecosystems in the tropics versus those in temperate regions; the
temperate regions were largely devoid of life or were drastically reduced during the last glaciation. The idea
is that greater age provides more time for speciation. Another possible explanation is the increased direct
energy the tropics receive from the sun versus the decreased intensity of the solar energy that temperate and
polarregionsreceive.Tropicalecosystemcomplexitymaypromotespeciationbyincreasingtheheterogeneity,
or number of ecological niches, in the tropics relative to higher latitudes. The greater heterogeneity provides
moreopportunitiesforcoevolution,specialization,andperhapsgreaterselectionpressuresleadingtopopulation
differentiation. However, this hypothesis suffers from some circularity—ecosystems with more species
encourage speciation, but how did they get more species to begin with?
The tropics have been perceived as being more stable than temperate regions, which have a pronounced
climate and day-length seasonality. The tropics have their own forms of seasonality, such as rainfall, but they
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1506
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1495
are generally assumed to be more stable environments and this stability might promote speciation into highly
specialized niches.
Regardless of the mechanisms, it is certainly true that all levels of biodiversity are greatest in the tropics.
Additionally,therateofendemismishighest,andtherearemorebiodiversity“hotspots.”However,thisrichness
of diversity also means that knowledge of species is unfortunately very low, and there is a high potential for
biodiversity loss.
Conservation of Biodiversity
In 1988, British environmentalist Norman Myers developed a conservation concept to identify areas rich in
species and at significant risk for species loss: biodiversity hotspots. Biodiversity hotspots are geographical
areas that contain high numbers of endemic species. The purpose of the concept was to identify important
locations on the planet for conservation efforts, a kind of conservation triage. By protecting hotspots,
governments are able to protect a larger number of species. The original criteria for a hotspot included the
presenceof1500ormoreendemicplantspeciesand70percentoftheareadisturbedbyhumanactivity.There
arenow34biodiversityhotspots(Figure47.4)containinglargenumbersofendemicspecies,whichincludehalf
of Earth’s endemic plants.
Figure 47.4 Conservation International has identified 34 biodiversity hotspots, which cover only 2.3 percent of the
Earth’ssurfacebuthaveendemictothem42percentoftheterrestrialvertebratespeciesand50percentoftheworld’s
plants.
Biodiversity Change through Geological Time
The number of species on the planet, or in any geographical area, is the result of an equilibrium of two
evolutionary processes that are continuously ongoing: speciation and extinction. Both are natural “birth” and
“death” processes of macroevolution. When speciation rates begin to outstrip extinction rates, the number of
species will increase; likewise, the number of species will decrease when extinction rates begin to overtake
speciation rates. Throughout Earth’s history, these two processes have fluctuated—sometimes leading to
dramatic changes in the number of species on Earth as reflected in the fossil record (Figure 47.5).
PAGE: 1507
1496 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Figure47.5PercentextinctionoccurrencesasreflectedinthefossilrecordhavefluctuatedthroughoutEarth’shistory.
Sudden and dramatic losses of biodiversity, calledmass extinctions, have occurred five times.
Paleontologistshaveidentifiedfivestratainthefossilrecordthatappeartoshowsuddenanddramatic(greater
thanhalfofallextantspeciesdisappearingfromthefossilrecord)lossesinbiodiversity.Thesearecalledmass
extinctions. There are many lesser, yet still dramatic, extinction events, but the five mass extinctions have
attracted the most research. An argument can be made that the five mass extinctions are only the five most
extreme events in a continuous series of large extinction events throughout the Phanerozoic (since 542 million
years ago). In most cases, the hypothesized causes are still controversial; however, the most recent mass
extinction event seems clear.
The Five Mass Extinctions
Thefossilrecordofthemassextinctionswasthebasisfordefiningperiodsofgeologicalhistory,sotheytypically
occur at the transition point between geological periods. The transition in fossils from one period to another
reflectsthedramaticlossofspeciesandthegradualoriginofnewspecies.Thesetransitionscanbeseeninthe
rock strata.Table 47.2provides data on the five mass extinctions.
Mass Extinctions
Geological Period Mass Extinction Name Time (millions of years ago)
Ordovician–Silurian end-Ordovician O–S 450–440
Late Devonian end-Devonian 375–360
Permian–Triassic end-Permian 251
Triassic–Jurassic end-Triassic 205
Cretaceous–Paleogene end-Cretaceous K–Pg (K–T) 65.5
Table 47.2This table shows the names and dates for the five mass extinctions in
Earth’s history.
TheOrdovician-Silurian extinctioneventisthefirstrecordedmassextinctionandthesecondlargest.During
thisperiod,about85percentofmarinespecies(fewspecieslivedoutsidetheoceans)becameextinct.Themain
hypothesisforitscauseisaperiodofglaciationandthenwarming.Theextinctioneventactuallyconsistsoftwo
extinction events separated by about 1 million years. The first event was caused by cooling, and the second
event was due to the subsequent warming. The climate changes affected temperatures and sea levels. Some
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1508
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1497
researchers have suggested that a gamma-ray burst, caused by a nearby supernova, was a possible cause of
theOrdovician-Silurianextinction.Thegamma-rayburstwouldhavestrippedawaytheEarth’sprotectiveozone
layer, allowing intense ultraviolet radiation from the sun to reach the surface of the earth—and may account
forclimatechangesobservedatthetime.Thehypothesisisveryspeculative,andextraterrestrialinfluenceson
Earth’shistoryareanactivelineofresearch.Recoveryofbiodiversityafterthemassextinctiontookfrom5to20
million years, depending on the location.
ThelateDevonianextinctionmayhaveoccurredoverarelativelylongperiodoftime.Itappearstohavemostly
affectedmarinespeciesandnotsomuchtheplantsoranimalsinhabitingterrestrialhabitats.Thecausesofthis
extinction are poorly understood.
The end-Permian extinction was the largest in the history of life. Indeed, an argument could be made that
Earth became nearly devoid of life during this extinction event. Estimates are that 96 percent of all marine
species and 70 percent of all terrestrial species were lost. It was at this time, for example, that the trilobites, a
groupthatsurvivedtheOrdovician–Silurianextinction,becameextinct.Thecausesforthismassextinctionare
not clear, but the leading suspect is extended and widespread volcanic activity that led to a runaway global-
warmingevent.Theoceansbecamelargelyanoxic,suffocatingmarinelife.Terrestrialtetrapoddiversitytook30
million years to recover after the end-Permian extinction. The Permian extinction dramatically altered Earth’s
biodiversity makeup and the course of evolution.
ThecausesoftheTriassic–Jurassicextinctioneventarenotclear,andresearchersarguehypothesesincluding
climate change, asteroid impact, andvolcaniceruptions. Theextinction event occurredjustbefore thebreakup
of the supercontinent Pangaea, although recent scholarship suggests that the extinctions may have occurred
more gradually throughout the Triassic.
The causes of the end-Cretaceous extinction event are the ones that are best understood. It was during this
extinctioneventabout65millionyearsagothatthemajorityofthedinosaurs,thedominantvertebrategroupfor
millions of years, disappeared from the planet (with the exception of a theropod clade that gave rise to birds).
The cause of this extinction is now understood to be the result of a cataclysmic impact of a large meteorite,
or asteroid, off the coast of what is now the Yucatán Peninsula. This hypothesis, proposed first in 1980, was a
radical explanation based on a sharp spike in the levels of iridium (which enters our atmosphere from meteors
atafairlyconstantratebutisotherwiseabsentonEarth’ssurface)intherockstratumthatmarkstheboundary
betweentheCretaceousandPaleogeneperiods(Figure47.6).Thisboundarymarkedthedisappearanceofthe
dinosaursinfossilsaswellasmanyothertaxa.Theresearcherswhodiscoveredtheiridiumspikeinterpretedit
as a rapid influx of iridium from space to the atmosphere (in the form of a large asteroid) rather than a slowing
inthedepositionofsedimentsduringthatperiod.Itwasaradicalexplanation,butthereportofanappropriately
aged and sized impact crater in 1991 made the hypothesis more believable. Now an abundance of geological
evidencesupportsthetheory.Recoverytimesforbiodiversityaftertheend-Cretaceousextinctionareshorter,in
geological time, than for the end-Permian extinction, on the order of 10 million years.
Another possibility, perhaps coincidental with the impact of the Yucatan asteroid, was extensive volcanism that
began forming about 66 million years ago, about the same time as the Yucatan asteroid impact, at the end of
the Cretaceous. The lava flows covered over 50 percent of what is now India. The release of volcanic gases,
particularly sulphur dioxide, during the formation of the traps contributed to climate change, which may have
induced the mass extinction.
PAGE: 1509
1498 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Figure 47.6 In 1980, Luis and Walter Alvarez, Frank Asaro, and Helen Michels discovered, across the world,
a spike in the concentration of iridium within the sedimentary layer at the K–Pg boundary. These researchers
hypothesizedthatthisiridiumspikewascausedbyanasteroidimpactthatresultedintheK–Pgmassextinction.
In the photo, the iridium layer is the light band. (credit: USGS)
ScientistsmeasuredtherelativeabundanceoffernsporesaboveandbelowtheK–Pgboundaryinthisrock
sample. Which of the following statements most likely represents their findings?
a. AnabundanceoffernsporesfromseveralspecieswasfoundbelowtheK–Pgboundary,butnonewas
found above.
b. AnabundanceoffernsporesfromseveralspecieswasfoundabovetheK–Pgboundary,butnonewas
found below.
c. An abundance of fern spores was found both above and below the K–Pg boundary, but only one
species was found below the boundary, and many species were found above the boundary.
d. Many species of fern spores were found both above and below the boundary, but the total number of
spores was greater below the boundary.
Explore thisinteractive website (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/extinctions)about mass extinctions.
The Pleistocene Extinction
The Pleistocene Extinction is one of the lesser extinctions, and a recent one. It is well known that the
North American, and to some degree Eurasian, megafauna—large vertebrate animals—disappeared toward
the end of the last glaciation period. The extinction appears to have happened in a relatively restricted time
period of 10,000–12,000 years ago. In North America, the losses were quite dramatic and included the woolly
mammoths (with an extant population existing until about 4,000 years ago in isolation on Wrangel Island,
Canada),mastodon,giantbeavers,giantgroundsloths,saber-toothedcats,andtheNorthAmericancamel,just
to name a few. In the early 1900s, scientists first suggested the possibility that over-hunting caused the rapid
extinction of these large animals. Research into this hypothesis continues today.
Ingeneral,thetimingofthePleistoceneextinctionscorrelatedwiththearrivalofpaleo-humans,perhapsaslong
as 40,000 years ago, and not with climate-change events, which is the main competing hypothesis for these
extinctions.TheextinctionsbeganinAustraliaabout40,000to50,000yearsago,justafterthearrivalofhumans
inthearea:amarsupiallion,agiantone-tonwombat,andseveralgiantkangaroospeciesdisappeared.InNorth
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1510
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1499
America,theextinctionsofalmostallofthelargemammalsoccurred10,000–12,000yearsago.Allthatareleft
arethesmallermammalssuchasbears,elk,moose,andcougars.Finally,onmanyremoteoceanicislands,the
extinctionsofmanyspeciesoccurredcoincidentallywithhumanarrivals.Notalloftheislandshadlargeanimals,
but when there were large animals, they were often forced into extinction. Madagascar was colonized about
2,000 years ago and the large mammals that lived there became extinct. Eurasia and Africa do not show this
pattern,buttheyalsodidnotexperiencearecentarrivalofhunter-gathererhumans.Rather,humansarrivedin
Eurasiahundredsofthousandsofyearsago.Thistopicremainsanareaofactiveresearchandhypothesizing.
It seems clear that even if climate played a role, in most cases human hunting precipitated the extinctions.
Recent Extinctions
Thesixth,orHolocene,massextinctionappearstohavebegunearlierthanpreviouslybelievedandislargely
due to the disruptive activities of modern Homo sapiens. Since the beginning of the Holocene period, there
are numerous recent extinctions of individual species that are recorded in human writings. Most of these are
coincident with the expansion of the European colonies since the 1500s.
Oneoftheearlierandpopularlyknownexamplesisthedodobird.Theoddpigeon-likebirdlivedintheforestsof
Mauritius(anislandintheIndianOcean)andbecameextinctaround1662.Thedodowashuntedforitsmeatby
sailorsandwaseasypreybecauseitapproachedpeoplewithoutfear(thedodohadnotevolvedwithhumans).
Pigs, rats, and dogs brought to the island by European ships also killed dodo young and eggs.
Steller's sea cow became extinct in 1768; it was related to the manatee and probably once lived along the
northwest coast of North America. Steller's sea cow was first discovered by Europeans in 1741 and was
overhuntedformeatandoil.Thelastseacowwaskilledin1768.Thatamountstojust27yearsbetweenthesea
cow’s first contact with Europeans and extinction of the species!
Since 1900, a variety of species have gone extinct, including the following:
• In1914,thelastlivingpassengerpigeondiedinazooinCincinnati,Ohio.Thisspecieshadoncedarkened
the skies of North America during its migrations, but it was overhunted and suffered from habitat loss that
resulted from the clearing of forests for farmland.
• TheCarolinaparakeet,oncecommonintheeasternUnitedStates,diedoutin1918.Itsufferedhabitatloss
and was hunted to prevent it from eating orchard fruit. (The parakeet ate orchard fruit because its native
foods were destroyed to make way for farmland.)
• TheJapanesesealion,whichinhabitedabroadareaaroundJapanandthecoastofKorea,becameextinct
in the 1950s due to fishermen.
• The Caribbean monk seal was distributed throughout the Caribbean Sea but was driven to extinction via
hunting by 1952.
Theseareonlyafewoftherecordedextinctionsinthepast500years.TheInternationalUnionforConservation
of Nature (IUCN) keeps a list of extinct and endangered species called the Red List. The list is not complete,
butitdescribes380extinctspeciesofvertebratesafter1500AD,86ofwhichweredrivenextinctbyoverhunting
or overfishing.
Estimates of Present-Time Extinction Rates
Estimates of extinction rates are hampered by the fact that most extinctions are probably happening without
observation.Theextinctionofabirdormammalislikelytobenoticedbyhumans,especiallyifithasbeenhunted
orusedinsomeotherway.Buttherearemanyorganismsthatareoflessinteresttohumans(notnecessarilyof
less value) and many that are undescribed.
The background extinction rate is estimated to be about one per million species per year (E/MSY). For
example, assuming there are about ten million species in existence, the expectation is that ten species would
become extinct each year (each year represents ten million species per year).
One contemporary extinction rate estimate uses the extinctions in the written record since the year 1500. For
birdsalonethismethodyieldsanestimateof26E/MSY.However,thisvaluemaybeanunderestimateforthree
reasons. First, many species would not have been described until much later in the time period, so their loss
would have gone unnoticed. Second, the number of recently extinct vertebrate species is increasing because
extinct species now are being described from skeletal remains. And third, some species are probably already
extinct even though conservationists are reluctant to name them as such. Taking these factors into account
raisestheestimatedextinctionratecloserto100E/MSY.Thepredictedratebytheendofthecenturyis1500E/
MSY.
A second approach to estimating present-time extinction rates is to correlate species loss with habitat loss by
PAGE: 1511
1500 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
measuring forest-area loss and understanding species-area relationships. The species-area relationship is
the rate at which new species are seen when the area surveyed is increased. Studies have shown that the
number of species present increases as the size of the island increases. This phenomenon has also been
shown to hold true in other island-like habitats as well, such as the mountain-top tepuis of Venezuela, which
are surrounded by tropical forest. Turning this relationship around, if the habitat area is reduced, the number
of species living there will also decline. Estimates of extinction rates based on habitat loss and species-area
relationships have suggested that with about 90 percent habitat loss an expected 50 percent of species would
become extinct. Species-area estimates have led to species extinction rate calculations of about 1000 E/MSY
and higher. In general, actual observations do not show this amount of loss and suggestions have been made
thatthereisadelayinextinction.Recentworkhasalsocalledintoquestiontheapplicabilityofthespecies-area
relationshipwhenestimatingthelossofspecies.Thisworkarguesthatthespecies-arearelationshipleadstoan
overestimateofextinctionrates.Abetterrelationshiptousemaybetheendemics-arearelationship.Usingthis
methodwouldbringestimatesdowntoaround500E/MSYinthecomingcentury.Notethatthisvalueisstill500
times the background rate.
Figure 47.7 Studies have shown that the number of species present increases with the size of the habitat. (credit:
modification of work by Adam B. Smith)
Checkoutthisinteractiveexploration(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/what_is_missing)ofendangeredand
extinct species, their ecosystems, and the causes of the endangerment or extinction.
47.2 | The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify chemical diversity benefits to humans
• Identify biodiversity components that support human agriculture
• Describe ecosystem services
It may not be clear why biologists are concerned about biodiversity loss. When biodiversity loss is thought of
as the extinction of the passenger pigeon, the dodo bird, and even the woolly mammoth, the loss may appear
to be an emotional one. But is the loss practically important for the welfare of the human species? From the
perspective of evolution and ecology, the loss of a particular individual species is unimportant (however, we
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1512
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1501
should note that the loss of a keystone species can lead to ecological disaster). Extinction is a normal part of
macroevolution.Buttheacceleratedextinctionratetranslatesintothelossoftensofthousandsofspecieswithin
ourlifetimes,anditislikelytohavedramaticeffectsonhumanwelfarethroughthecollapseofecosystemsand
in added costs to maintain food production, clean air and water, and human health.
Agriculture began after early hunter-gatherer societies first settled in one place and heavily modified their
immediateenvironment.Thisculturaltransitionhasmadeitdifficultforhumanstorecognizetheirdependenceon
undomesticatedlivingthingsontheplanet.Biologistsrecognizethehumanspeciesisembeddedinecosystems
andisdependentonthem,justaseveryotherspeciesontheplanetisdependent.Technologysmoothsoutthe
extremes of existence, but ultimately the human species cannot exist without a supportive ecosystem.
Human Health
Archeologicalevidenceindicatesthathumanshavebeenusingplantsformedicinalusesforthousandsofyears.
A Chinese document from approximately 2800 BC is believed to be the the first written account of herbal
remedies,andsuchreferencesoccurthroughouttheglobalhistoricalrecord.Contemporaryindigenoussocieties
that live close to the land often retain broad knowledge of the medicinal uses of plants growing in their area.
Mostplantsproducesecondaryplantcompounds,whicharetoxinsusedtoprotecttheplantfrominsectsand
other animals that eat them, but some of which also work as medication.
Modern pharmaceutical science also recognizes the importance of these plant compounds. Examples of
significant medicines derived from plant compounds include aspirin, codeine, digoxin, atropine, and vincristine
(Figure 47.8). Many medicines were once derived from plant extracts but are now synthesized. It is estimated
that, at one time, 25 percent of modern drugs contained at least one plant extract. That number has probably
decreasedtoabout10percentasnaturalplantingredientsarereplacedbysyntheticversions.Antibiotics,which
areresponsibleforextraordinaryimprovementsinhealthandlifespansindevelopedcountries,arecompounds
largely derived from fungi and bacteria.
Figure47.8Catharanthusroseus,theMadagascarperiwinkle,hasvariousmedicinalproperties.Amongotheruses,it
is a source of vincristine, a drug used in the treatment of lymphomas. (credit: Forest and Kim Starr)
In recent years, animal venoms and poisons have excited intense research for their medicinal potential. By
2007,theFDAhadapprovedfivedrugsbasedonanimaltoxinstotreatdiseasessuchashypertension,chronic
pain, and diabetes. Another five drugs are undergoing clinical trials, and at least six drugs are being used in
othercountries.Othertoxinsunderinvestigationcomefrommammals,snakes,lizards,variousamphibians,fish,
snails, octopuses, and scorpions.
Aside from representing billions of dollars in profits, these medicines improve people’s lives. Pharmaceutical
companies are always looking for new compounds synthesized by living organisms that can function as
medicines.Itisestimatedthat1/3ofpharmaceuticalresearchanddevelopmentisspentonnaturalcompounds
and that about 35 percent of new drugs brought to market between 1981 and 2002 were derived from natural
compounds.Theopportunitiesfornewmedicationswillbereducedindirectproportiontothedisappearanceof
species.
Agricultural Diversity
Sincethebeginningofhumanagriculturemorethan10,000yearsago,humangroupshavebeenbreedingand
PAGE: 1513
1502 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
selecting crop varieties. This crop diversity matched the cultural diversity of highly subdivided populations of
humans. For example, potatoes were domesticated beginning around 7,000 years ago in the central Andes of
PeruandBolivia.Thepotatoesgrowninthatregionbelongtosevenspeciesandthenumberofvarietieslikelyis
inthethousands. EventheIncacapitalofMachuPicchuhadnumerousgardensgrowingvarietiesofpotatoes.
Each variety has been bred to thrive at particular elevations and soil and climate conditions. The diversity is
drivenbythediversedemandsofthetopography,thelimitedmovementofpeople,andthedemandscreatedby
crop rotation for different varieties that will do well in different fields.
Potatoes are only one example of human-generated diversity. Every plant, animal, and fungus that has been
cultivated by humans has been bred from original wild ancestor species into diverse varieties arising from the
demands for food value, adaptation to growing conditions, and resistance to pests.
Thepotatoalsodemonstratesrisksoflowcropdiversity.ThetragicIrishpotatofamineoccurredwhenthesingle
varietygrowninIrelandbecamesusceptibletoapotatoblight,wipingouttheentirecrop.Thelossofthepotato
cropledtomassfamineandtherelateddeathsofoveronemillionpeople,aswellasmassemigrationofnearly
two million people.
Disease resistance is a chief benefit of crop biodiversity, and lack of diversity in contemporary crop species
carriessimilarrisks.Seedcompanies,whicharethesourceofmostcropvarietiesindevelopedcountries,must
continuallybreednewvarietiestokeepupwithevolvingpestorganisms.Thesesameseedcompanies,however,
have participated in the decline of the number of varieties available as they focus on selling fewer varieties in
more areas of the world.
The ability to create new crop varieties relies on the diversity of varieties available and the accessibility of wild
forms related to the crop plant. These wild forms are often the source of new gene variants that can be bred
withexistingvarietiestocreatevarietieswithnewattributes.Lossofwildspeciesrelatedtoacropwillmeanthe
loss of potential in crop improvement. Maintaining the genetic diversity of wild species related to domesticated
species ensures our continued food supply.
Since the 1920s, government agriculture departments have maintained seed banks of crop varieties as a way
ofmaintainingcropdiversity.Thissystemhasflawsbecause,overtime,seedbanksarelostthroughaccidents,
and there is no way to replace them. In 2008, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault (Figure 47.9) began storing
seeds from around the world as a backup system to the regional seed banks. If a regional seed bank stores
varietiesinSvalbard,lossescanbereplacedfromSvalbard.Conditionswithinthevaultaremaintainedatideal
temperature and humidity for seed survival, but the deep underground location of the vault in the arctic means
that failure of the vault’s systems will not compromise the climatic conditions inside the vault.
Figure47.9TheSvalbardGlobalSeedVaultisastoragefacilityforseedsofEarth’sdiversecrops.(credit:Mari
Tefre, Svalbard Global Seed Vault)
The Svalbard Global Seed Vault is located on Spitsbergen island in Norway, which has an arctic climate.
Why might an arctic climate be good for seed storage?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1514
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1503
Crop success is largely dependent on the quality of the soil. Although some agricultural soils are rendered
sterile using controversial cultivation and chemical treatments, most contain a huge diversity of organisms that
maintain nutrient cycles—breaking down organic matter into nutrient compounds that crops need for growth.
Theseorganismsalsomaintainsoiltexturethataffectswaterandoxygendynamicsinthesoilthatarenecessary
for plant growth. If farmers had to maintain arable soil using alternate means, the cost of food would be much
higherthanitisnow.Thesekindsofprocessesarecalledecosystemservices.Theyoccurwithinecosystems,
such as soil ecosystems, as a result of the diverse metabolic activities of the organisms living there, but they
provide benefits to human food production, drinking water availability, and breathable air.
Plantpollinationisanotherkeyecosystemservice,providedbyvariousspeciesofbees,otherinsects,andbirds.
One estimate indicates that honey bee pollination provides the United States a $1.6 billion annual benefit.
Honey bee populations in North America have been suffering large losses caused by a syndrome known as
colonycollapsedisorder,whosecauseisunclear.(Evidencesuggeststhepossibleculpritsmaybetheinvasive
varroamitecoupledwiththeNosemagutparasiteandacuteparalysisvirus.)Lossofthesespecieswouldrender
it very difficult, if not impossible, to grow any of the 150 United States crops requiring pollination, including
grapes, oranges, lemons, peppers, most brassica (broccoli and cauliflower), and many berries, melons, and
nuts.
Finally, humans compete for their food with crop pests, most of which are insects. Pesticides control these
competitors;however,pesticidesarecostlyandlosetheireffectivenessovertimeaspestpopulationsadaptand
evolve.Theyalsoleadtocollateraldamagebykillingnon-pestspeciesandriskingthehealthofconsumersand
agriculturalworkers.Ecologistsbelievethatthebulkoftheworkinremovingpestsisactuallydonebypredators
and parasites of those pests, but the impact has not been well studied. A review found that in 74 percent of
studiesthatlookedforaneffectoflandscapecomplexityonnaturalenemiesofpests,thegreaterthecomplexity,
the greater the effect of pest-suppressing organisms. An experimental study found that introducing multiple
enemiesofpeaaphids(animportantalfalfapest)increasedtheyieldofalfalfasignificantly.Thisstudyshowsthe
importanceoflandscapediversityviathequestionofwhetheradiversityofpestsismoreeffectiveatcontrolthan
onesinglepest;theresultsshowedthistobethecase.Lossofdiversityinpestenemieswillinevitablymakeit
more difficult and costly to grow food.
Wild Food Sources
Inadditiontogrowingcropsandraisinganimalsforfood,humansobtainfoodresourcesfromwildpopulations,
primarily fish populations. In fact, for approximately 1 billion people worldwide, aquatic resources provide the
main source of animal protein. But since 1990, global fish production has declined, sometimes dramatically.
Unfortunately, and despite considerable effort, few fisheries on the planet are managed for sustainability.
Fishery extinctions rarely lead to complete extinction of the harvested species, but rather to a radical
restructuringofthemarineecosysteminwhichadominantspeciesissoover-harvestedthatitbecomesaminor
player,ecologically.Inadditiontohumanslosingthefoodsource,thesealterationsaffectmanyotherspeciesin
waysthataredifficultorimpossibletopredict.Thecollapseoffisherieshasdramaticandlong-lastingeffectson
local populations that work in the fishery. In addition, the loss of an inexpensive protein source to populations
that cannot afford to replace it will increase the cost of living and limit societies in other ways. In general, the
fishtakenfromfisherieshaveshiftedtosmallerspeciesaslargerspeciesarefishedtoextinction.Theultimate
outcome could clearly be the loss of aquatic systems as food sources.
View abrief video (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/declining_fish)discussing declining fish stocks.
Psychological and Moral Value
Finally, it has been clearly shown that humans benefit psychologically from living in a biodiverse world. A chief
proponent of this idea is Harvard entomologist E. O. Wilson. He argues that human evolutionary history has
adapted us to live in a natural environment and that city environments generate psychological stressors that
affecthumanhealthandwell-being.Thereisconsiderableresearchintothepsychologicalregenerativebenefits
PAGE: 1515
1504 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
ofnaturallandscapesthatsuggeststhehypothesismayholdsometruth.Inaddition,thereisamoralargument
that humans have a responsibility to inflict as little harm as possible on other species.
47.3 | Threats to Biodiversity
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify significant threats to biodiversity
• Explain the effects of habitat loss, the introduction of exotic species, and hunting on biodiversity
• Identify the early and predicted effects of climate change on biodiversity
The core threat to biodiversity on the planet, and therefore a threat to human welfare, is the combination of
human population growth and resource exploitation. The human population requires resources to survive and
grow,andthoseresourcesarebeingremovedunsustainablyfromtheenvironment.Thethreegreatestproximate
threats to biodiversity are habitat loss, overharvesting, and the introduction of exotic species. The first two of
theseareadirectresultofhumanpopulationgrowthandresourceuse.Thethirdresultsfromincreasedmobility
andtrade.Afourthmajorcauseofextinction,anthropogenicclimatechange,hasnotyethadalargeimpact,but
itispredictedtobecomesignificantduringthiscentury.Globalclimatechangeisalsoaconsequenceofhuman
population needs for energy and the use of fossil fuels to meet those needs (Figure 47.10). Environmental
issues, such as toxic pollution, have specific targeted effects on species, but they are not generally seen as
threats at the magnitude of the others.
Figure47.10Atmosphericcarbondioxidelevelsfluctuateinacyclicalmanner.However,theburningoffossilfuelsin
recenthistoryhascausedadramaticincreaseinthelevelsofcarbondioxideintheEarth’satmosphere,whichhave
nowreachedlevelsneverbeforeseeninhumanhistory.Scientistspredictthattheadditionofthis“greenhousegas”to
the atmosphere is resulting in climate change that will significantly impact biodiversity in the coming century.
Habitat Loss
Humansrelyontechnologytomodifytheirenvironmentandreplacecertainfunctionsthatwereonceperformed
by the natural ecosystem. Other species cannot do this. Elimination of their ecosystem—whether it is a forest,
a desert, a grassland, a freshwater estuarine, or a marine environment—will kill the individuals belonging to
the species. The species will become extinct if we remove the entire habitat within the range of a species.
Human destruction of habitats accelerated in the latter half of the twentieth century. Consider the exceptional
biodiversityofSumatra:itishometoonespeciesoforangutan,aspeciesofcriticallyendangeredelephant,and
theSumatrantiger,buthalfofSumatra’sforestisnowgone.TheneighboringislandofBorneo,hometotheother
species of orangutan, has lost a similar area of forest. Forest loss continues in protected areas of Borneo. All
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1516
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1505
threespeciesoforangutanarenowlistedasendangeredbytheInternationalUnionforConservationofNature
(IUCN), but they are simply the most visible of thousands of species that will not survive the disappearance of
theforestsinSumatraandBorneo.Theforestsareremovedfortimberandtoplantpalmoilplantations(Figure
47.11). Palm oil is used in many products including food products, cosmetics, and biodiesel in Europe. A five-
year estimate of global forest cover loss for the years 2000–2005 was 3.1 percent. In the humid tropics where
2 2
forest loss is primarily from timber extraction, 272,000 km was lost out of a global total of 11,564,000 km (or
2.4percent).Inthetropics,theselossescertainlyalsorepresenttheextinctionofspeciesbecauseofhighlevels
ofendemism—species unique to a defined geographic location, and found nowhere else.
Figure 47.11 (a) One of three species of orangutan, Pongo pygmaeus, is found only in the rainforests of Borneo,
and an other species of orangutan (Pongo abelii) is found only in the rainforests of Sumatra. These animals are
examples of the exceptional biodiversity of (c) the islands of Sumatra and Borneo. Other species include the (b)
Sumatran tiger (Panthera tigris sumatrae) and the (d) Sumatran elephant (Elephas maximus sumatranus), both
criticallyendangeredspecies.Rainforesthabitatisbeingremovedtomakewayfor(e)oilpalmplantationssuchasthis
one in Borneo’s Sabah Province. (credit a: modification of work by Thorsten Bachner; credit b: modification of work
byDickMudde;creditc:modificationofworkbyU.S.CIAWorldFactbook;creditd:modificationofworkby“Nonprofit
Organizations”/Flickr; credit e: modification of work by Dr. Lian Pin Koh)
PAGE: 1517
1506 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Preventing Habitat Destruction with Wise Wood Choices
Most consumers are not aware that the home improvement products they buy might be contributing to
habitat loss and species extinctions. Yet the market for illegally harvested tropical timber is huge, and the
woodproductsoftenfindthemselvesinbuildingsupplystoresintheUnitedStates.Oneestimateisthat10
percent of the imported timber stream in the United States, which is the world’s largest consumer of wood
products,ispotentiallyillegallylogged.In2006,thisamountedto$3.6billioninwoodproducts.Mostofthe
illegal products are imported from countries that act as intermediaries and are not the originators of the
wood.
How is it possible to determine if a wood product, such as flooring, was harvested sustainably or even
legally?TheForestStewardshipCouncil(FSC)certifiessustainablyharvestedforestproducts,therefore,
looking for their certification on flooring and other hardwood products is one way to ensure that the wood
hasnotbeentakenillegallyfromatropicalforest.Certificationappliestospecificproducts,nottoaproducer;
someproducers’productsmaynothavecertificationwhileotherproductsarecertified.Whilethereareother
industry-backed certifications other than the FSC, these are unreliable due to lack of independence from
the industry. Another approach is to buy domestic wood species. While it would be great if there was a
list of legal versus illegal wood products, it is not that simple. Logging and forest management laws vary
fromcountrytocountry;whatisillegalinonecountrymaybelegalinanother.Whereandhowaproductis
harvestedandwhethertheforestfromwhichitcomesisbeingmaintainedsustainablyallfactorintowhether
a wood product will be certified by the FSC. If you are in doubt, it is always a good idea to ask questions
about where a wood product came from and how the supplier knows that it was harvested legally.
Habitat destruction can affect ecosystems other than forests. Rivers and streams are important ecosystems
that are frequently modified through land development, damming, channelizing, or water removal. Damming
affects the water flow to all parts of a river, which can reduce or eliminate populations that had adapted to the
naturalflowoftheriver.Forexample,anestimated91percentofUnitedStatesrivershavebeenalteredinsome
way. Modifications include dams, to create energy or store water; levees, to prevent flooding; and dredging or
rerouting, to create land that is more suitable for human development. Many fish and amphibian species and
numerous freshwater clams in the United States have seen declines caused by river damming and habitat loss.
Overharvesting
Overharvesting is a serious threat to many species, but particularly to aquatic (both marine and freshwater)
species.Despiteregulationandmonitoring,therearerecentexamplesoffisherycollapse.ThewesternAtlantic
cod fishery is the among the most significant. While it was a hugely productive fishery for 400 years, the
introduction of modern factory trawlers in the 1980s caused it to become unsustainable. Fisheries collapse as
a result of both economic and political factors. Fisheries are managed as a shared international resource even
when the fishing territory lies within an individual country’s territorial waters. Common resources are subject to
aneconomicpressureknownasthetragedyofthecommons,inwhichessentiallynofisherhasamotivation
to exercise restraint in harvesting a fishery when it is not owned by that fisher. Overexploitation is a common
outcome. This overexploitation is exacerbated when access to the fishery is open and unregulated and when
technologygivesfisherstheabilitytooverfish.Inafewfisheries,thebiologicalgrowthoftheresourceislessthan
the potential growth of the profits made from fishing if that time and money were invested elsewhere. In these
cases—whales are an example—economic forces will always drive toward fishing the population to extinction.
ExploreaU.S.Fish&WildlifeServiceinteractivemap(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/habitat_map)ofcritical
habitatforendangeredandthreatenedspeciesintheUnitedStates.Tobegin,select“Visittheonlinemapper.”
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1518
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1507
Forthemostpart,fisheryextinctionisnotequivalenttobiologicalextinction—the lastfishofaspeciesisrarely
fishedoutoftheocean.Atthesametime,fisheryextinctionisstillharmfultofishspeciesandtheirecosystems.
There are some instances in which true extinction is a possibility. Whales have slow-growing populations due
to low reproductive rates, and therefore are at risk of complete extinction through hunting. There are some
speciesofsharkswithrestricteddistributionsthatareatriskofextinction.Thegroupersareanotherpopulation
ofgenerallyslow-growingfishesthat,intheCaribbean,includesanumberofspeciesthatareatriskofextinction
from overfishing.
Coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems that face immediate peril from several processes. Reefs
are home to 1/3 of the world’s marine fish species—about 4,000 species—despite making up only 1 percent
of marine habitat. Most home marine aquaria are stocked with wild-caught organisms, not cultured organisms.
Althoughnospeciesisknowntohavebeendrivenextinctbythepettradeinmarinespecies,therearestudies
showingthatpopulationsofsomespecieshavedeclinedinresponsetoharvesting,indicatingthattheharvestis
notsustainableatthoselevels.Thereareconcernsabouttheeffectofthepettradeonsometerrestrialspecies
such as turtles, amphibians, birds, plants, and even the orangutan.
Viewabriefvideo(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/ocean_matters)discussingtheroleofmarineecosystems
in supporting human welfare and the decline of ocean ecosystems.
Bush meat is the generic term used for wild animals killed for food. Hunting is practiced throughout the world,
but hunting practices, particularly in equatorial Africa and parts of Asia, are believed to threaten a number of
species with extinction. Traditionally, bush meat in Africa was hunted to feed families directly; however, recent
commercialization of the practice now has bush meat available in grocery stores, which has increased harvest
rates to the level of unsustainability. Additionally, human population growth has increased the need for protein
foodsthatarenotbeingmetfromagriculture.Speciesthreatenedbythebushmeattradearemostlymammals
including many primates living in the Congo basin.
Exotic Species
Exoticspeciesarespeciesthathavebeenintentionallyorunintentionallyintroducedintoanecosysteminwhich
theydidnotevolve.Forexample,Kudzu(Puerarialobata),whichisnativetoJapan,wasintroducedintheUnited
States in 1876. It was later planted for soil conservation. Problematically, it grows too well in the southeastern
United States—up to a foot a day. It is now an invasive pest species and covers over 7 million acres in the
southeastern United States. If an introduced species is able to survive in its new habitat, that introduction is
now reflected in the observed range of the species. Human transportation of people and goods, including the
intentional transport of organisms for trade, has dramatically increased the introduction of species into new
ecosystems, sometimes at distances that are well beyond the capacity of the species to ever travel itself and
outside the range of the species’ natural predators.
Most exotic species introductions probably fail because of the low number of individuals introduced or poor
adaptationtotheecosystemtheyenter.Somespecies,however,possesspre-adaptationsthatcanmakethem
especially successful in a new ecosystem. These exotic species often undergo dramatic population increases
in their new habitat and reset the ecological conditions in the new environment, threatening the species that
exist there. For this reason, exotic species are also called invasive species. Exotic species can threaten other
species through competition for resources, predation, or disease. For example, the Eurasian star thistle, also
called spotted knapweed, has invaded and rendered useless some of the open prairies of the western states.
However, it is a great nectar-bearing flower for the production of honey and supports numerous pollinating
insects, including migrating monarch butterflies in the north-central states such as Michigan.
PAGE: 1519
1508 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Exploreaninteractiveglobaldatabase(http://openstaxcollege.org/l/exotic_invasive)ofexoticorinvasive
species.
Lakes and islands are particularly vulnerable to extinction threats from introduced species. In Lake Victoria, as
mentionedearlier,theintentionalintroductionoftheNileperchwaslargelyresponsiblefortheextinctionofabout
200speciesofendemiccichlids.Theaccidentalintroductionofthebrowntreesnakeviaaircraft(Figure47.12)
from the Solomon Islands to Guam in 1950 has led to the extinction of three species of birds and three to five
species of reptiles endemic to the island. Several other species are still threatened. The brown tree snake is
adept at exploiting human transportation as a means to migrate; one was even found on an aircraft arriving in
Corpus Christi, Texas. Constant vigilance on the part of airport, military, and commercial aircraft personnel is
requiredtopreventthesnakefrommovingfromGuamtootherislandsinthePacific,especiallyHawaii.Islands
do not make up a large area of land on the globe, but they do contain a disproportionate number of endemic
species because of their isolation from mainland ancestors.
Figure47.12Thebrowntreesnake,Boigairregularis,isanexoticspeciesthathascausednumerousextinctionson
the island of Guam since its accidental introduction in 1950. (credit: NPS)
Itnowappearsthattheglobaldeclineinamphibianspeciesrecognizedinthe1990sis,insomepart,causedby
thefungusBatrachochytriumdendrobatidis,whichcausesthediseasechytridiomycosis(Figure47.13).There
is evidence that the fungus is native to Africa and may have been spread throughout the world by transport
of a commonly used laboratory and pet species: the African clawed toad (Xenopus laevis). It may well be
that biologists themselves are responsible for spreading this disease worldwide. The North American bullfrog,
Ranacatesbeiana,whichhasalsobeenwidelyintroducedasafoodanimalbutwhicheasilyescapescaptivity,
survivesmostinfectionsofBatrachochytriumdendrobatidis,andcanactasareservoirforthedisease.Italsois
a voracious predator in freshwater lakes.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1520
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1509
Figure47.13ThisLimosaHarlequinFrog(Atelopuslimosus),anendangeredspeciesfromPanama,diedfromafungal
disease called chytridiomycosis. The red lesions are symptomatic of the disease. (credit: Brian Gratwicke)
Early evidence suggests that another fungal pathogen, Geomyces destructans, introduced from Europe is
responsible for white-nose syndrome, which infects cave-hibernating bats in eastern North America and has
spread from a point of origin in western New York State (Figure 47.14). The disease has decimated bat
populations and threatens extinction of species already listed as endangered: the Indiana bat, Myotis sodalis,
andpotentiallytheVirginiabig-earedbat,Corynorhinustownsendiivirginianus.Howthefunguswasintroduced
is unclear, but one logical presumption would be that recreational cavers unintentionally brought the fungus on
clothes or equipment from Europe.
Figure47.14ThislittlebrownbatinGreeleyMine,Vermont,March26,2009,wasfoundtohavewhite-nosesyndrome.
(credit: Marvin Moriarty, USFWS)
Climate Change
Climate change, and specifically the anthropogenic (meaning, caused by humans) warming trend presently
escalating, is recognized as a major extinction threat, particularly when combined with other threats such as
PAGE: 1521
1510 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
habitat loss and the expansion of disease organisms. Scientists disagree about the likely magnitude of the
effects, with extinction rate estimates ranging from 15 percent to 40 percent of species destined for extinction
by 2050. Scientists do agree, however, that climate change will alter regional climates, including rainfall and
snowfall patterns, making habitats less hospitable to the species living in them, in particular, the endemic
species.Thewarmingtrendwillshiftcolderclimatestowardthenorthandsouthpoles,forcingspeciestomove
with their adapted climate norms while facing habitat gaps along the way. The shifting ranges will impose new
competitiveregimesonspeciesastheyfindthemselvesincontactwithotherspeciesnotpresentintheirhistoric
range. One such unexpected species contact is between polar bears and grizzly bears. Previously, these two
distinct species had separate ranges. Now, their ranges are overlapping and there are documented cases of
these two species mating and producing viable offspring, which may or may not be viable crossing back to
either parental species. Changing climates also throw off species’ delicate timed adaptations to seasonal food
resourcesandbreedingtimes.Manycontemporarymismatchestoshiftsinresourceavailabilityandtiminghave
already been documented.
Figure 47.15 Since 2008, grizzly bears (Ursus arctos horribilis) have been spotted farther north than their historic
range, a possible consequence of climate change. As a result, grizzly bear habitat now overlaps polar bear
(Ursusmaritimus)habitat.Thetwospeciesofbears,whicharecapableofmatingandproducingviableoffspring,are
consideredseparate“ecological”speciesbecausehistoricallytheylivedindifferenthabitatsandnevermet.However,
in 2006 a hunter shot a wild grizzly-polar bear hybrid known as a grolar bear, the first wild hybrid ever found.
Rangeshiftsarealreadybeingobserved:forexample,someEuropeanbirdspeciesrangeshavemoved91km
northward.Thesamestudysuggestedthattheoptimalshiftbasedonwarmingtrendswasdoublethatdistance,
suggestingthatthepopulationsarenotmovingquicklyenough.Rangeshiftshavealsobeenobservedinplants,
butterflies, other insects, freshwater fishes, reptiles, and mammals.
Climate gradients will also move up mountains, eventually crowding species higher in altitude and eliminating
the habitat for those species adapted to the highest elevations. Some climates will completely disappear. The
acceleratingrateofwarminginthearcticsignificantlyreducessnowfallandtheformationofseaice.Withoutthe
ice,specieslikepolarbearscannotsuccessfullyhuntseals,whicharetheironlyreliablesourceoffood.Seaice
coverage has been decreasing since observations began in the mid-twentieth century, and the rate of decline
observed in recent years is far greater than previously predicted.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1522
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1511
Finally,globalwarmingwillraiseoceanlevelsduetomeltwaterfromglaciersandthegreatervolumeofwarmer
water. Shorelines will be inundated, reducing island size, which will have an effect on some species, and a
number of islands will disappear entirely. Additionally, the gradual melting and subsequent refreezing of the
poles, glaciers, and higher elevation mountains—a cycle that has provided freshwater to environments for
centuries—willalsobejeopardized.Thiscouldresultinanoverabundanceofsaltwaterandashortageoffresh
water.
47.4 | Preserving Biodiversity
By the end of this section, you will be able to do the following:
• Identify new technologies and methods for describing biodiversity
• Explain the legislative framework for conservation
• Describe principles and challenges of conservation preserve design
• Identify examples of the effects of habitat restoration
• Discuss the role of zoos in biodiversity conservation
Preserving biodiversity is an extraordinary challenge that must be met by greater understanding of biodiversity
itself, changes in human behavior and beliefs, and various preservation strategies.
Measuring Biodiversity
The technology of molecular genetics and data processing and storage are maturing to the point where
cataloguingtheplanet’sspeciesinanaccessiblewayisnowfeasible.DNAbarcodingisonemoleculargenetic
method, which takes advantage of rapid evolution in a mitochondrial gene (cytochrome c oxidase 1) present
in eukaryotes, except for plants, to identify species using the sequence of portions of the gene. However,
plants may be barcoded using a combination of chloroplast genes. Rapid mass sequencing machines make
the molecular genetics portion of the work relatively inexpensive and quick. Computer resources store and
make available the large volumes of data. Projects are currently underway to use DNA barcoding to catalog
museumspecimens,whichhavealreadybeennamedandstudied,aswellastestingthemethodonless-studied
groups. As of mid 2017, close to 200,000 named species had been barcoded. Early studies suggest there are
significantnumbersofundescribedspeciesthatlookedtoomuchlikesiblingspeciestopreviouslyberecognized
as different. These now can be identified with DNA barcoding.
Numerouscomputerdatabasesnowprovideinformationaboutnamedspeciesandaframeworkforaddingnew
species. However, as already noted, at the present rate of description of new species, it will take close to 500
yearsbeforethecompletecatalogoflifeisknown.Many,perhapsmost,speciesontheplanetdonothavethat
much time.
Thereisalsotheproblemofunderstandingwhichspeciesknowntosciencearethreatenedandtowhatdegree
they are threatened. This task is carried out by the non-profit IUCN which, as previously mentioned, maintains
theRedList—anonlinelistingofendangeredspeciescategorizedbytaxonomy,typeofthreat,andothercriteria
(Figure 47.16). The Red List is supported by scientific research. In 2011, the list contained 61,000 species, all
with supporting documentation.
PAGE: 1523
1512 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
Figure47.16Thischartshowsthepercentageofvariousanimalspecies,bygroup,ontheIUCNRedListasof
2007.
Which of the following statements is not supported by this graph?
a. There are more vulnerable fishes than critically endangered and endangered fishes combined.
b. There are more critically endangered amphibians than vulnerable, endangered and critically
endangered reptiles combined.
c. Within each group, there are more critically endangered species than vulnerable species.
d. A greater percentage of bird species are critically endangered than mollusk species.
Changing Human Behavior
Legislation throughout the world has been enacted to protect species. The legislation includes international
treatiesaswellasnationalandstatelaws.TheConventiononInternationalTradeinEndangeredSpeciesofWild
Fauna and Flora (CITES) treaty came into force in 1975. The treaty, and the national legislation that supports
it,providesalegalframeworkforpreventingapproximately33,000listedspeciesfrombeingtransportedacross
nations’borders,thusprotectingthemfrombeingcaughtorkilledwheninternationaltradeisinvolved.Thetreaty
is limited in its reach because it only deals with international movement of organisms or their parts. It is also
limitedbyvariouscountries’abilityorwillingnesstoenforcethetreatyandsupportinglegislation.Theillegaltrade
in organisms and their parts is probably a market in the hundreds of millions of dollars. Illegal wildlife trade is
monitored by another non-profit: Trade Records Analysis of Flora and Fauna in Commerce(TRAFFIC).
Within many countries there are laws that protect endangered species and regulate hunting and fishing. In the
UnitedStates,theEndangeredSpeciesAct(ESA)wasenactedin1973.SpeciesatriskarelistedbytheAct;
the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service is required by law to develop plans that protect the listed species and bring
them back to sustainable numbers. The Act, and others like it in other countries, is a useful tool, but it suffers
becauseitisoftendifficulttogetaspecieslisted,ortogetaneffectivemanagementplaninplaceonceitislisted.
Additionally, species may be controversially taken off the list without necessarily having had a change in their
situation. More fundamentally, the approach to protecting individual species rather than entire ecosystems is
bothinefficientandfocuseseffortsonafewhighlyvisibleandoftencharismaticspecies,perhapsattheexpense
of other species that go unprotected. At the same time, the Act has a critical habitat provision outlined in the
recovery mechanism that may benefit species other than the one targeted for management.
TheMigratoryBirdTreatyAct(MBTA)isanagreementbetweentheUnitedStatesandCanadathatwassigned
into law in 1918 in response to declines in North American bird species caused by hunting. The Act now lists
over800protectedspecies.Itmakesitillegaltodisturborkilltheprotectedspeciesordistributetheirparts(much
of the hunting of birds in the past was for their feathers).
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1524
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1513
As already mentioned, the private non-profit sector plays a large role in the conservation effort both in North
America and around the world. The approaches range from species-specific organizations to the broadly
focusedIUCNandTRAFFIC.TheNatureConservancytakesanovelapproach.Itpurchaseslandandprotects
it in an attempt to set up preserves for ecosystems.
Although it is focused largely on reducing carbon and related emissions, the Paris Climate Agreement is a
significant step toward altering human behavior in a way that should affect biodiversity. If the agreement is
successful in its goal of halting global temperature rise, many species negatively affected by climate change
may benefit. Assessments of the accord’s implementation will not take place until 2023, and measurement of
itseffectswillnotbefeasibleforsometime.However,theagreement,signedbyover194countries,represents
theworld’smostconcertedandunifiedefforttoreducegreenhousegasemissions,embracealternativeenergy
sources, and ease climate pressure on ecosystems.
Conservation in Preserves
Establishmentofwildlifeandecosystempreservesisoneofthekeytoolsinconservationefforts.Apreserveis
an area of land set aside with varying degrees of protection for the organisms that exist within the boundaries
of the preserve. Preserves can be effective in the short term for protecting both species and ecosystems, but
they face challenges that scientists are still exploring to strengthen their viability as long-term solutions to the
preservation of biodiversityandthe prevention of extinction.
How Much Area to Preserve?
Duetothewayprotectedlandsareallocatedandthewaybiodiversityisdistributed,itischallengingtodetermine
how much land or marine habitat should be protected. The IUCN World Parks Congress estimated that 11.5
percent of Earth’s land surface was covered by preserves of various kinds in 2003. We should note that this
area is greater than previous goals; however, it only includes 9 out of 14 recognized major biomes. Similarly,
individual animals or types of animals are not equally represented on preserves. For example, high quality
preserves include only about 50 percent of threatened amphibian species. To guarantee that all threatened
species will be properly protected, either the protected areas must increase in size, or the percentage of high
qualitypreservesmustincrease,orpreservesmustbetargetedwithgreaterattentiontobiodiversityprotection.
Researchers indicate that more attention to the latter solution is required.
Preserve Design
Therehasbeenextensiveresearchintooptimalpreservedesignsformaintainingbiodiversity.Thefundamental
principlebehindmuchoftheresearchhasbeentheseminaltheoreticalworkofRobertH.MacArthurandEdward
[5]
O. Wilson published in 1967 on island biogeography. This work sought to understand the factors affecting
biodiversity on islands. The fundamental conclusion was that biodiversity on an island was a function of the
originofspeciesthroughmigration,speciation,andextinctiononthatisland.Islandsfartherfromamainlandare
hardertogetto,somigrationislowerandtheequilibriumnumberofspeciesislower.Withinislandpopulations,
evidence suggests that the number of species gradually increases to a level similar to the numbers on the
mainlandfromwhichthespeciesissuspectedtohavemigrated.Inaddition,smallerislandsarehardertofind,so
theirimmigrationratesfornewspeciesaretypicallylower.Smallerislandsarealsolessgeographicallydiverse
so all things being equal, there are fewer niches to promote speciation. And finally, smaller islands support
smaller populations, so the probability of extinction is higher.
As islands get larger, the number of species able to colonize the island and find suitable niches on the island
increases, although the effect of island area on species numbers is not a direct correlation. Conservation
preserves can be seen as “islands” of habitat within “an ocean” of non-habitat. For a species to persist in a
preserve, the preserve must be large enough to support it. The critical size depends, in part, on the home
rangethatischaracteristicofthespecies.Apreserveforwolves,whichrangehundredsofkilometers,mustbe
muchlargerthanapreserveforbutterflies,whichmightrangewithintenkilometersduringitslifetime.Butlarger
preserveshavemorecoreareaofoptimalhabitatforindividualspecies,theyhavemorenichestosupportmore
species, and they attract more species because they can be found and reached more easily.
Preserves perform better when there are buffer zones around them of suboptimal habitat. The buffer allows
organisms to exit the boundaries of the preserve without immediate negative consequences from predation or
lackofresources.Onelargepreserveisbetterthanthesameareaofseveralsmallerpreservesbecausethere
ismorecorehabitatunaffectedbyedges.Forthissamereason,preservesintheshapeofasquareorcirclewill
bebetterthanapreservewithmanythin“arms.”Ifpreservesmustbesmaller,thenprovidingwildlifecorridors
5. Robert H. MacArthur and Edward O. Wilson, E. O.,The Theory of Island Biogeography(Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1967).
PAGE: 1525
1514 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
between them so that individuals (and their genes) can move between the preserves, for example along rivers
and streams, will make the smaller preserves behave more like a large one. All of these factors are taken into
consideration when planning the nature of a preserve before the land is set aside.
In addition to the physical, biological, and ecological specifications of a preserve, there are a variety of policy,
legislative, and enforcement specifications related to uses of the preserve for functions other than protection
of species. These can include anything from timber extraction, mineral extraction, regulated hunting, human
habitation, and nondestructive human recreation. Many of these policy decisions are made based on political
pressures rather than conservation considerations. In some cases, wildlife protection policies have been so
strict that subsistence-living indigenous populations have been forced from ancestral lands that fell within a
preserve.Inothercases,evenifapreserveisdesignedtoprotectwildlife,iftheprotectionsarenotorcannotbe
enforced,thepreservestatuswillhavelittlemeaninginthefaceofillegalpoachingandtimberextraction.Thisis
a widespread problem with preserves in areas of the tropics.
Limitations on Preserves
Someofthelimitationsonpreservesasconservationtoolsareevidentfromthediscussionofpreservedesign.
Politicalandeconomicpressurestypicallymakepreservessmaller,ratherthanlarger,sosettingasideareasthat
are large enough is difficult. If the area set aside is sufficiently large, there may not be sufficient area to create
a buffer around the preserve. In this case, an area on the outer edges of the preserve inevitably becomes a
riskier suboptimal habitat for the species in the preserve. Enforcement of protections is also a significant issue
in countries without the resources or political will to prevent poaching and illegal resource extraction.
Climate change will create inevitable problems with the location of preserves. The species within them may
migratetohigherlatitudesasthehabitatofthepreservebecomeslessfavorable.Scientistsareplanningforthe
effectsofglobalwarmingonfuturepreservesandstrivingtopredicttheneedfornewpreservestoaccommodate
anticipated changes to habitats; however, the end effectiveness is tenuous since these efforts are prediction
based.
Finally,anargumentcanbemadethatconservationpreservesindicatethathumansaregrowingmoreseparate
from nature, and that humans only operate in ways that do damage to biodiversity. Creating preserves may
reduce the pressure on humans outside the preserve to be sustainable and non-damaging to biodiversity. On
the other hand, properly managed, high quality preserves present opportunities for humans to witness nature
inalessdamagingway,andpreservesmaypresentsomefinancialbenefitstolocaleconomies.Ultimately,the
economic and demographic pressures on biodiversity are unlikely to be mitigated by preserves alone. In order
to fully benefit from biodiversity, humans will need to alter activities that damage it.
An interactive global data system (http://openstaxcollege.org/l/protected_areas) of protected areas can
be found at this website. Review data about individual protected areas by location or study statistics on
protected areas by country or region.
Habitat Restoration
Habitat restoration holds considerable promise as a mechanism for restoring and maintaining biodiversity. Of
course, once a species has become extinct, its restoration is impossible. However, restoration can improve
the biodiversity of degraded ecosystems. Reintroducing wolves, a top predator, to Yellowstone National Park
in 1995 led to dramatic changes in the ecosystem that increased biodiversity. The wolves (Figure 47.17)
function to suppress elk and coyote populations and provide more abundant resources to the guild of carrion
eaters. Reducing elk populations has allowed revegetation of riparian areas, which has increased the diversity
of species in that habitat. Decreasing the coyote population has increased the populations of species that
were previously suppressed by this predator. The number of species of carrion eaters has increased because
of the predatory activities of the wolves. In this habitat, the wolf is a keystone species, meaning a species
that is instrumental in maintaining diversity in an ecosystem. Removing a keystone species from an ecological
communitymaycauseacollapseindiversity.TheresultsfromtheYellowstoneexperimentsuggestthatrestoring
akeystonespeciescanhavetheeffectofrestoringbiodiversityinthecommunity.Ecologistshavearguedforthe
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1526
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1515
identification ofkeystonespecieswherepossibleandforfocusingprotectioneffortsonthosespecies;likewise,
it also makes sense to attempt to return them to their ecosystem if they have been removed.
Figure47.17(a)TheGibbonwolfpackinYellowstoneNationalPark,March1,2007,representsakeystonespecies.
The reintroduction of wolves into Yellowstone National Park in 1995 led to a change in the grazing behavior of (b)
elk. To avoid predation, the elk no longer grazed exposed stream and riverbeds, such as (c) the Lamar Riverbed
in Yellowstone. This allowed willow and cottonwood seedlings to grow and recolonized large areas. The seedlings
decreased erosion and provided shading to the creek, which improved fish habitat. A new colony of (d) beaver may
alsohavebenefitedfromthehabitatchange.(credita:modificationofworkbyDougSmith,NPS;creditc:modification
of work by Jim Peaco, NPS; credit d: modification of work by “Shiny Things”/Flickr)
Otherlarge-scalerestorationexperimentsunderwayinvolvedamremoval,whichisanationalmovementthatis
accelerating in importance. In the United States, since the mid-1980s, many aging dams are being considered
forremovalratherthanreplacementbecauseofshiftingbeliefsabouttheecologicalvalueoffree-flowingrivers
and because many dams no longer provide the benefit and functions that they did when they were first built.
The measured benefits of dam removal include restoration of naturally fluctuating water levels (the purpose
of dams is frequently to reduce variation in river flows), which leads to increased fish diversity and improved
water quality. In the Pacific Northwest, dam removal projects are expected to increase populations of salmon,
which is considered a keystone species because it transports key nutrients to inland ecosystems during its
annualspawningmigrations.InotherregionssuchastheAtlanticcoast,damremovalhasallowedthereturnof
spawninganadromousfishspecies(speciesthatareborninfreshwater,livemostoftheirlivesinsaltwater,and
returntofreshwatertospawn).Someofthelargestdamremovalprojectshaveyettooccurorhavehappened
too recently for the consequences to be measured. The large-scale ecological experiments that these removal
projects constitute will provide valuable data for other dam projects slated either for removal or construction.
The Role of Captive Breeding
Zooshavesoughttoplayaroleinconservationeffortsboththroughcaptivebreedingprogramsandeducation.
The transformation of the missions of zoos from collection and exhibition facilities to organizations that are
dedicated to conservation is ongoing and gaining strength. In general, it has been recognized that, except in
somespecifictargetedcases,captivebreedingprogramsforendangeredspeciesareinefficientandoftenprone
tofailurewhenthespeciesarereintroducedtothewild.However,captivebreedingprogramshaveyieldedsome
success stories, such as the American condor reintroduction to the Grand Canyon and the reestablishment of
the Whooping Crane along the Midwest flyway.
Unfortunately, zoo facilities are far too limited to contemplate captive breeding programs for the numbers of
species that are now at risk. Education is another potential positive impact of zoos on conservation efforts,
particularlygiventheglobaltrendtourbanizationandtheconsequentreductionincontactsbetweenpeopleand
wildlife.Anumberofstudieshavebeenperformedtolookattheeffectivenessofzoosonpeople’sattitudesand
actions regarding conservation; at present, the results tend to be mixed.
PAGE: 1527
1516 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
KEY TERMS
adaptive radiation rapid branching through speciation of a phylogenetic tree into many closely related species
biodiversity variety of a biological system, typically conceived as the number of species, but also applying to
genes, biochemistry, and ecosystems
biodiversity hotspot concept originated by Norman Myers to describe a geographical region with a large
number of endemic species and a large percentage of degraded habitat
bush meat wild-caughtanimalusedasfood(typicallymammals,birds,andreptiles);usuallyreferringtohunting
in the tropics of sub-Saharan Africa, Asia, and the Americas
chemical diversity variety of metabolic compounds in an ecosystem
chytridiomycosis diseaseofamphibianscausedbythefungusBatrachochytriumdendrobatidis;thoughttobe
a major cause of the global amphibian decline
DNA barcoding moleculargeneticmethodforidentifyingauniquegeneticsequencetoassociatewithaspecies
ecosystem diversity variety of ecosystems
endemic species species native to one place
exotic species (also, invasive species) species that has been introduced to an ecosystem in which it did not
evolve
extinction disappearance of a species from Earth; local extinction is the disappearance of a species from a
region
extinction rate number of species becoming extinct over time, sometimes defined as extinctions per million
species–years to make numbers manageable (E/MSY)
genetic diversity variety of genes in a species or other taxonomic group or ecosystem, the term can refer to
allelic diversity or genome-wide diversity
heterogeneity number of ecological niches
megafauna large animals
secondary plant compound compound produced as byproducts of plant metabolic processes that is usually
toxic, but is sequestered by the plant to defend against herbivores
species-area relationship relationship between area surveyed and number of species encountered; typically
measured by incrementally increasing the area of a survey and determining the cumulative numbers of
species
tragedy of the commons economic principle that resources held in common will inevitably be overexploited
white-nose syndrome disease of cave-hibernating bats in the eastern United States and Canada associated
with the fungusGeomyces destructans
CHAPTER SUMMARY
47.1The Biodiversity Crisis
Biodiversity exists at multiple levels of organization and is measured in different ways depending on the
scientific goals of those taking the measurements. These measurements include numbers of species, genetic
diversity, chemical diversity, and ecosystem diversity. The number of described species is estimated to be 1.5
million with about 17,000 new species being described each year. Estimates for the total number of species on
Earth vary but are on the order of 10 million. Biodiversity is negatively correlated with latitude for most taxa,
meaning that biodiversity is higher in the tropics. The mechanism for this pattern is not known with certainty, but
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1528
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1517
several plausible hypotheses have been advanced.
Five mass extinctions with losses of more than 50 percent of extant species are observable in the fossil record.
Biodiversity recovery times after mass extinctions vary, but may be as long as 30 million years. Recent
extinctions are recorded in written history and are the basis for one method of estimating contemporary
extinction rates. The other method uses measures of habitat loss and species-area relationships. Estimates of
contemporary extinction rates vary, but some rates are as high as 500 times the background rate, as
determined from the fossil record, and are predicted to rise.
47.2The Importance of Biodiversity to Human Life
Humans use many compounds that were first discovered or derived from living organisms as medicines:
secondary plant compounds, animal toxins, and antibiotics produced by bacteria and fungi. More medicines will
undoubtedly be discovered in nature. Loss of biodiversity will impact the number of pharmaceuticals available
to humans.
Crop diversity is a requirement for food security, and it is being lost. The loss of wild relatives to crops also
threatens breeders’ abilities to create new varieties. Ecosystems provide ecosystem services that support
human agriculture: pollination, nutrient cycling, pest control, and soil development and maintenance. Loss of
biodiversity threatens these ecosystem services and risks making food production more expensive or
impossible. Wild food sources are mainly aquatic, but few of these resources are being managed for
sustainability. Fisheries’ ability to provide protein to human populations is threatened when extinction occurs.
Biodiversity may provide important psychological benefits to humans. Additionally, there are moral arguments
for the maintenance of biodiversity.
47.3Threats to Biodiversity
The core threats to biodiversity are human population growth and unsustainable resource use. To date, the
most significant causes of extinctions are habitat loss, introduction of exotic species, and overharvesting.
Climate change is predicted to be a significant cause of extinctions in the coming century. Habitat loss occurs
through deforestation, damming of rivers, and other disruptive human activities. Overharvesting is a threat
particularly to aquatic species, while the taking of bush meat in the humid tropics threatens many species in
Asia, Africa, and the Americas. Exotic species have been the cause of a number of extinctions and are
especially damaging to islands and lakes. Exotic species’ introductions are increasing damaging native
ecosystems around the world because of the increased mobility of human populations and growing global trade
and transportation. Climate change is forcing range changes that may lead to extinction. It is also affecting
adaptations to the timing of resource availability that negatively affects species in seasonal environments. The
impacts of climate change are greatest in the arctic. Global warming will also raise sea levels, eliminating some
islands and reducing the area of all others.
47.4Preserving Biodiversity
New technological methods such as DNA barcoding and information processing and accessibility are
facilitating the cataloging of the planet’s biodiversity. There is also a legislative framework for biodiversity
protection. International treaties such as CITES regulate the transportation of endangered species across
international borders. Legislation within individual countries protecting species and agreements on global
warming have had limited success; the Paris Climate accord is currently being implemented as a means to
reduce global climate change.
In the United States, the Endangered Species Act protects listed species but is hampered by procedural
difficulties and a focus on individual species. The Migratory Bird Act is an agreement between Canada and the
United States to protect migratory birds. The non-profit sector is also very active in conservation efforts in a
variety of ways.
Conservation preserves are a major tool in biodiversity protection. Presently, 11 percent of Earth’s land surface
is protected in some way. The science of island biogeography has informed the optimal design of preserves;
however, preserves have limitations imposed by political and economic forces. In addition, climate change will
limit the effectiveness of preserves in the future. A downside of preserves is that they may lessen the pressure
on human societies to function more sustainably outside the preserves.
Habitat restoration has the potential to restore ecosystems to previous biodiversity levels before species
become extinct. Examples of restoration include reintroduction of keystone species and removal of dams on
PAGE: 1529
1518 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
rivers. Zoos have attempted to take a more active role in conservation and can have a limited role in captive
breeding programs. Zoos also have a useful role in education.
VISUAL CONNECTION QUESTIONS
1.Figure 47.6Scientists measured the relative an arctic climate. Why might an arctic climate be
abundance of fern spores above and below the K-Pg good for seed storage?
boundary in this rock sample. Which of the following
3.Converting a prairie to a farm field is an example
statements most likely represents their findings?
of ________.
a. overharvesting
a. An abundance of fern spores from several
b. habitat loss
species was found below the K-Pg
c. exotic species
boundary, but none was found above.
d. climate change
b. An abundance of fern spores from several
species was found above the K-Pg 4.Figure 47.16Which of the following statements is
boundary, but none was found below. not supported by this graph?
c. An abundance of fern spores was found a. There are more vulnerable fishes than
both above and below the K-Pg boundary, critically endangered and endangered fishes
but only one species was found below the combined.
boundary , and many species were found b. There are more critically endangered
above the boundary. amphibians than vulnerable, endangered
d. Many species of fern spores were found and critically endangered reptiles combined.
both above and below the boundary, but the c. Within each group, there are more critically
total number of spores was greater below endangered species than vulnerable
the boundary. species.
d. A greater percentage of bird species are
2.Figure 47.9The Svalbard Global Seed Vault is
critically endangered than mollusk species.
located on Spitsbergen island in Norway, which has
REVIEW QUESTIONS
5.With an extinction rate of 100 E/MSY and an a. a new crop variety
estimated 10 million species, how many extinctions b. a new drug
are expected to occur in a century? c. a soil nutrient
a. 100 d. a pest of a crop pest
b. 10,000
10.Pollination is an example of ________.
c. 100,000
a. a possible source of new drugs
d. 1,000,000
b. chemical diversity
6.An adaptive radiation is________. c. an ecosystem service
a. a burst of speciation d. crop pest control
b. a healthy level of UV radiation
11.What is an ecosystem service that performs the
c. a hypothesized cause of a mass extinction
same function as a pesticide?
d. evidence of an asteroid impact
a. pollination
7.The number of currently described species on the b. secondary plant compounds
planet is about ________. c. crop diversity
a. 17,000 d. predators of pests
b. 150,000
12.Which two extinction risks may be a direct result
c. 1.5 million
of the pet trade?
d. 10 million
a. climate change and exotic species
8.A mass extinction is defined as ________. introduction
b. habitat loss and overharvesting
a. a loss of 95 percent of species c. overharvesting and exotic species
b. an asteroid impact introduction
c. a boundary between geological periods d. habitat loss and climate change
d. a loss of 50 percent of species
13.Exotic species are especially threatening to what
9.A secondary plant compound might be used for kind of ecosystem?
which of the following?
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1530
Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity 1519
a. deserts agreement on climate change?
b. marine ecosystems a. Red List
c. islands b. Montreal Protocol
d. tropical forests c. International Union for the Conservation of
Nature (IUCN)
14.Certain parrot species cannot be brought to the
d. Kyoto Protocol
United States to be sold as pets. What is the name of
the legislation that makes this illegal? 16.About what percentage of land on the planet is
a. Red List set aside as a preserve of some type?
b. Migratory Bird Act a. 1 percent
c. CITES b. 6 percent
d. Endangered Species Act (ESA) c. 11 percent
d. 15 percent
15.What was the name of the first international
CRITICAL THINKING QUESTIONS
17.Describe the evidence for the cause of the population growth and resource use causes
Cretaceous–Paleogene (K–Pg) mass extinction. increased extinction rates.
18.Describe the two methods used to calculate 22.Explain what extinction threats a frog living on a
contemporary extinction rates. mountainside in Costa Rica might face.
19.Explain how biodiversity loss can impact crop 23.Describe two considerations in conservation
diversity. preserve design.
20.Describe two types of compounds from living 24.Describe what happens to an ecosystem when a
things that are used as medications. keystone species is removed.
21.Describe the mechanisms by which human
PAGE: 1531
1520 Chapter 47 | Conservation Biology and Biodiversity
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1532
Appendix A 1521
APPENDIX A | THE PERIODIC TABLE
OF ELEMENTS
Figure A1
PAGE: 1533
1522 Appendix A
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1534
Appendix B 1523
APPENDIX B | GEOLOGICAL TIME
Figure B1Geological Time Clock
Figure B2Geological Time Chart
(credit: Richard S. Murphy, Jr.)
PAGE: 1535
1524 Appendix B
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1536
Appendix C 1525
APPENDIX C | MEASUREMENTS AND
THE METRIC SYSTEM
Measurements and the Metric System
Metric Approximate Standard
Measurement Unit Abbreviation
Equivalent Equivalent
nanometer nm 1 nm = 10 −9 m
1 mm = 0.039 inch
micrometer µm 1 µm = 10 −6 m
1 cm = 0.394 inch
millimeter mm 1 mm = 0.001 m
1 m = 39.37 inches
Length centimeter cm 1 cm = 0.01 m
1 m = 3.28 feet
1 m = 100 cm
1 m = 1.093 yards
meter m
1 m = 1000 mm
1 km = 0.621 miles
kilometer km 1 km = 1000 m
microgram µg 1 µg = 10 −6 g
milligram mg 1 mg = 10 −3 g 1 g = 0.035 ounce
Mass
1 kg = 2.205 pounds
gram g 1 g = 1000 mg
kilogram kg 1 kg = 1000 g
microliter µl 1 µl = 10 −6 l
1 ml = 0.034 fluid ounce
milliliter ml 1 ml = 10 −3 l
Volume 1 l = 1.057 quarts
liter l 1 l = 1000 ml 1 kl = 264.172 gallons
kiloliter kl 1 kl = 1000 l
square cm 2 1 cm 2 = 100 mm 2 1 cm 2 = 0.155 square inch
centimeter
2
1 m = 10.764 square feet
2
Area square meter m 2 1 cm m 2 = 10,000 1 m 2 = 1.196 square yards
1 ha = 2.471 acres
hectare ha 1 ha = 10,000 m 2
Temperature Celsius °C — 1 °C = 5/9 × (°F − 32)
Table C1
PAGE: 1537
1526 Appendix C
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1538
Answer Key 1527
ANSWER KEY
Chapter 1
1 Figure1.6 1: C; 2: F; 3: A; 4: B; 5: D; 6: E. The original hypothesis is incorrect, as the coffeemaker works when
pluggedintotheoutlet.Alternativehypothesesincludethatthetoastermightbebrokenorthatthetoasterwasn'tturned
on. 3Figure1.16Communitiesexistwithinpopulationswhichexistwithinecosystems. 4B 6D 8C 10C 12B 14
D 16 Answers will vary, but should apply the steps of the scientific method. One possibility could be a car which
doesn’tstart.Thehypothesiscouldbethatthecardoesn’tstartbecausethebatteryisdead.Theexperimentwouldbe
tochangethebatteryortochargethebatteryandthencheckwhetherthecarstartsornot.Ifitstarts,theproblemwas
duetothebattery,andthehypothesisisaccepted. 18Answerswillvary.Topicsthatfallinsidetheareaofbiological
study include how diseases affect human bodies, how pollution impacts a species’ habitat, and how plants respond
to their environments. Topics that fall outside of biology (the “study of life”) include how metamorphic rock is formed
and how planetary orbits function. 20 Answers will vary. Layers of sedimentary rock have order but are not alive.
Technologyiscapableofregulationbutisnot,ofitself,alive. 22Duringyourwalk,youmaybegintoperspire,which
coolsyourbodyandhelpsyourbodytomaintainaconstantinternaltemperature.Youmightalsobecomethirstyand
pause long enough for a cool drink, which will help to restore the water lost during perspiration.
Chapter 2
1 Figure2.3 Carbon-12 has six neutrons. Carbon-13 has seven neutrons. 3 Figure2.24 C 4 A 6 C 8 D 10
C 12 D 14 Ionic bonds are created between ions. The electrons are not shared between the atoms, but rather are
associated more with one ion than the other. Ionic bonds are strong bonds, but are weaker than covalent bonds,
meaning it takes less energy to break an ionic bond compared with a covalent one. 16 Buffers absorb the free
hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions that result from chemical reactions. Because they can bond these ions, they
prevent increases or decreases in pH. An example of a buffer system is the bicarbonate system in the human body.
This system is able to absorb hydrogen and hydroxide ions to prevent changes in pH and keep cells functioning
properly. 18 Carbon is unique and found in all living things because it can form up to four covalent bonds between
atomsormolecules.Thesecanbenonpolarorpolarcovalentbonds,andtheyallowfortheformationoflongchainsof
carbon molecules that combine to form proteins and DNA.
Chapter 3
1Figure3.5Glucoseandgalactosearealdoses.Fructoseisaketose. 3Figure3.33Adenineislargerthancytosine
andwillnotbeabletobasepairproperlywiththeguanineontheopposingstrand.ThiswillcausetheDNAtobulge.
DNA repair enzymes may recognize the bulge and replace the incorrect nucleotide. 4 C 6 A 8 D 10 B 12 D 14
C 16 B 18 C 20 C 21 Biological macromolecules are organic because they contain carbon. 23 Amino acids can
be linked into long chains through condensation reactions. One of the hydrogen atoms bonded to the nitrogen atom
ofanaminoacidreactswiththe–OHgroupattachedtotheterminalcarbononanotheraminoacid.Sincebothends
of the molecule can participate in condensation reactions, peptide bonds can be made in both directions to create
a long amino acid chain. 25 The β 1-4 glycosidic linkage in cellulose cannot be broken down by human digestive
enzymes.Herbivoressuchascows,koalas,andbuffalosareabletodigestgrassthatisrichincelluloseanduseitas
a food source because bacteria and protists in their digestive systems, especially in the rumen, secrete the enzyme
cellulase. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose monomers that can be used as an energy source by
the animal. 27 Fat serves as a valuable way for animals to store energy. It can also provide insulation. Waxes can
protect plant leaves and mammalian fur from getting wet. Phospholipids and steroids are important components of
animal cell membranes, as well as plant, fungal, and bacterial membranes. 29 Fats have a higher energy density
thancarbohydrates(averaging9kcal/gramversus4.3kcal/gramrespectively).Thus,onapergrambasis,moreenergy
can be stored in fats than can be stored in carbohydrates. Additionally, fats are packaged into spherical globules
to minimize interactions with the water-based plasma membrane, while glycogen is a large branched carbohydrate
that cannot be compacted for storage. 31 A change in gene sequence can lead to a different amino acid being
added to a polypeptide chain instead of the normal one. This causes a change in protein structure and function.
For example, in sickle cell anemia, the hemoglobin β chain has a single amino acid substitution—the amino acid
glutamicacidinpositionsixissubstitutedbyvaline.Becauseofthischange,hemoglobinmoleculesformaggregates,
and the disc-shaped red blood cells assume a crescent shape, which results in serious health problems. 33 The
protein must form a channel in the plasma membrane that allows water into the cell since water cannot cross the
plasma membrane by itself. Since aquaporins are embedded in the plasma membrane and connect with both the
intracellular and extracellular spaces, it must be amphipathic like the plasma membrane. The top and bottom of the
proteinmustcontainchargedorpolaraminoacids(hydrophilic)tointeractwiththeaqueousenvironments.Theexterior
transmembraneregionmustcontainnon-polaraminoacids(hydrophobic)thatcaninteractwiththephospholipidtails.
PAGE: 1539
1528 Answer Key
However,theinsideofthischannelmustcontainhydrophilicaminoacidssincetheywillinteractwiththetravelingwater
molecules. 35ThefourtypesofRNAaremessengerRNA,ribosomalRNA,transferRNA,andmicroRNA.Messenger
RNAcarriestheinformationfromtheDNAthatcontrolsallcellularactivities.ThemRNAbindstotheribosomesthatare
constructedofproteinsandrRNA,andtRNAtransfersthecorrectaminoacidtothesiteofproteinsynthesis.microRNA
regulates the availability of mRNA for translation.
Chapter 4
1 Figure4.7 Substances can diffuse more quickly through small cells. Small cells have no need for organelles and
thereforedonotneedtoexpendenergygettingsubstancesacrossorganellemembranes.Largecellshaveorganelles
thatcanseparatecellularprocesses,enablingthemtobuildmoleculesthataremorecomplex. 3Figure4.18Itwould
endupontheoutside.AfterthevesiclepassesthroughtheGolgiapparatusandfuseswiththeplasmamembrane,it
turnsinsideout. 4C 6D 8D 10B 12D 14A 16C 18D 20D 22C 24D 25Alightmicroscopewouldbeideal
whenviewingasmalllivingorganism,especiallywhenthecellhasbeenstainedtorevealdetails. 27Atransmission
electron microscope would beideal for viewing the cell’sinternal structures, because manyof the internal structures
have membranes that are not visible by the light microscope. 29 The cell theory states: All living things are
made of cells.;Cells are the most basic unit of life.;New cells arise from existing cells. All humans are multicellular
organisms whose smallest building blocks are cells. Adult humans begin with the fusion of a male gamete cell with
a female gamete cell to form a fertilized egg (single cell). That cell then divides into two cells, which each divides
into two more cells, and so forth until all the cells of a human embryo are made. As the embryo passes through all
the developmental stages to make an adult human, the cells that are added arise from division of existing cells. 31
Some microbes are beneficial. For instance, E. coli bacteria populate the human gut and help break down fiber in
the diet. Some foods such as yogurt are formed by bacteria. 33 Both are similar in that they are enveloped in a
doublemembrane,bothhaveanintermembranespace,andbothmakeATP.Bothmitochondriaandchloroplastshave
DNA,andmitochondriahaveinnerfoldscalledcristaeandamatrix,whilechloroplastshavechlorophyllandaccessory
pigmentsinthethylakoidsthatformstacks(grana)andastroma. 35“Formfollowsfunction”referstotheideathatthe
function of a body part dictates the form of that body part. As an example, compare your arm to a bat’s wing. While
the bones of the two correspond, the parts serve different functions in each organism and their forms have adapted
tofollowthatfunction. 37Centriolesandflagellaarealikeinthattheyaremadeupofmicrotubules.Incentrioles,two
rings of nine microtubule “triplets” are arranged at right angles to one another. This arrangement does not occur in
flagella. 39Amacrophageengulfsapathogenbyrearrangingitsactinmicrofilamentstobendtheplasmamembrane
around the pathogen. Once the pathogen is sealed in an endosome inside the macrophage, the vesicle is walked
alongmicrotubulesuntilitcombineswithalysosometodigestthepathogen. 41Theydifferbecauseplantcellwalls
arerigid.Plasmodesmata,whichaplantcellneedsfortransportationandcommunication,areabletoallowmovement
ofreallylargemolecules.Gapjunctionsarenecessaryinanimalcellsfortransportationandcommunication. 43E.coli
infectionsgenerallycausefoodpoisoning,meaningthattheinvadingbacteriacrossfromthelumenofthegutintothe
restofthebody.Tightjunctionsholdtheepitheliallayerthatlinesthedigestivetracttogethersothatthematerialthat
crossesintothebodyistightlyregulated.OnewayE.colicanavoidthisregulationistodestroythetightjunctionsso
that it can enter the body between the epithelial cells, rather than having to go through the cells.
Chapter 5
1Figure5.12No,itmusthavebeenhypotonicasahypotonicsolutionwouldcausewatertoenterthecells,thereby
makingthemburst. 3Figure5.19AdecreaseinpHmeansanincreaseinpositivelychargedH+ions,andanincrease
in the electrical gradient across the membrane. The transport of amino acids into the cell will increase. 4 A 6 A 8
C 10 A 12 D 14 D 16 B 18 C 20 B 21 The fluid characteristic of the cell membrane allows greater flexibility to
the cell than it would if the membrane were rigid. It also allows the motion of membrane components, required for
some types of membrane transport. 23 Peripheral proteins can bind to other molecules in the extracellular space.
However,theycannotdirectlytransmitasignaltotheinsideofthecellsincetheydonothaveatransmembranedomain
(regionthatgoesthroughtheplasmamembranetotheinsideofthecell).Theymustassociatewithintegralmembrane
proteinsinordertopassthesignaltotheinsideofthecell. 25Watermovesthroughamembraneinosmosisbecause
there is a concentration gradient across the membrane of solute and solvent. The solute cannot effectively move to
balance the concentration on both sides of the membrane, so water moves to achieve this balance. 27 Decreasing
temperaturewilldecreasethekineticenergyinthesystem.Alowertemperaturemeanslessenergyinthemolecules,
so they will move at a slower speed. Lowering temperature also decreases the kinetic energy of the molecules in
theplasmamembrane,compressingthemtogether.Thisincreasesthedensityoftheplasmamembrane,whichslows
diffusionintothecell. 29ThecellharvestsenergyfromATPproducedbyitsownmetabolismtopoweractivetransport
processes,suchastheactivityofpumps. 31Intestinalepithelialcellsuseactivetransporttofulfilltheirspecificroleas
thecellsthattransferglucosefromthedigestedfoodtothebloodstream.Intestinalcellsareexposedtoanenvironment
withfluctuatingglucoselevels.Immediatelyaftereating,glucoseinthegutlumenwillbehigh,andcouldaccumulate
inintestinalcellsbydiffusion.However,whenthegutlumenisempty,glucoselevelsarehigherintheintestinalcells.If
glucosemovedbyfacilitateddiffusion,thiswouldcauseglucosetoflowbackoutoftheintestinalcellsandintothegut.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1540
Answer Key 1529
Activetransportproteinsensurethatglucosemovesintotheintestinalcells,andcannotmovebackintothegut.Italso
ensures that glucose transport continues to occur even if high levels of glucose are already present in the intestinal
cells. This maximizes the amount of energy the body can harvest from food. 33 The proteins allow a cell to select
what compound will be transported, meeting the needs of the cell and not bringing in anything else.
Chapter 6
1 Figure6.8 A compost pile decomposing is an exergonic process; enthalpy increases (energy is released) and
entropy increases (large molecules are broken down into smaller ones). A baby developing from a fertilized egg is
an endergonic process; enthalpy decreases (energy is absorbed) and entropy decreases. Sand art being destroyed
isanexergonicprocess;thereisnochangeinenthalpy,butentropyincreases.Aballrollingdownhillisanexergonic
process;enthalpydecreases(energyisreleased),butthereisnochangeinentropy. 3Figure6.14Threesodiumions
couldbemovedbythehydrolysisofoneATPmolecule.The∆Gofthecoupledreactionmustbenegative.Movement
ofthreesodiumionsacrossthemembranewilltake6.3kcalofenergy(2.1kcal×3Na+ions=6.3kcal).Hydrolysisof
ATPprovides7.3kcalofenergy,morethanenoughtopowerthisreaction.Movementoffoursodiumionsacrossthe
membrane,however,wouldrequire8.4kcalofenergy,morethanoneATPmoleculecanprovide. 4C 6C 8B 10
A 12 A 14 C 16 Physical exercise involves both anabolic and catabolic processes. Body cells break down sugars
to provide ATP to do the work necessary for exercise, such as muscle contractions. This is catabolism. Muscle cells
alsomust repair muscletissue damaged byexercise bybuilding newmuscle. This isanabolism. 18A spontaneous
reaction is one that has a negative ∆G and thus releases energy. However, a spontaneous reaction need not occur
quicklyorsuddenlylikeaninstantaneousreaction.Itmayoccuroverlongperiodsduetoalargeenergyofactivation,
whichpreventsthereactionfromoccurringquickly. 20Theantfarmhadlowerentropybeforetheearthquakebecause
it was a highly ordered system. After the earthquake, the system became much more disordered and had higher
entropy. 22 The activation energy for hydrolysis is very low. Not only is ATP hydrolysis an exergonic process with a
large−∆G,butATPisalsoaveryunstablemoleculethatrapidlybreaksdownintoADP+Piifnotutilizedquickly.This
suggests a very low EA since it hydrolyzes so quickly. 24 Feedback inhibition allows cells to control the amounts of
metabolicproductsproduced.Ifthereistoomuchofaparticularproductrelativetothecell’sneeds,feedbackinhibition
effectivelycausesthecelltodecreaseproductionofthatparticularproduct.Ingeneral,thisreducestheproductionof
superfluous products and conserves energy, maximizing energy efficiency.
Chapter 7
1 Figure7.11 After DNP poisoning, the electron transport chain can no longer form a proton gradient, and ATP
synthasecannolongermakeATP.DNPisaneffectivedietdrugbecauseituncouplesATPsynthesis;inotherwords,
aftertakingit,apersonobtainslessenergyoutofthefoodheorsheeats.Interestingly,oneoftheworstsideeffectsof
thisdrugishyperthermia,oroverheatingofthebody.SinceATPcannotbeformed,theenergyfromelectrontransport
islostasheat. 3Figure7.14Theillnessiscausedbylactateaccumulation.Lactatelevelsriseafterexercise,making
the symptoms worse. Milk sickness is rare today but was common in the midwestern United States in the early
1800s. 4 A 6 C 8 B 10 C 12 C 14 A 16 A 18 ATP provides the cell with a way to handle energy in an efficient
manner. The molecule can be charged, stored, and used as needed. Moreover, the energy from hydrolyzing ATP
is delivered as a consistent amount. Harvesting energy from the bonds of several different compounds would result
in energy deliveries of different quantities. 20 All cells must consume energy to carry out basic functions, such as
pumpingionsacrossmembranes.Aredbloodcellwouldloseitsmembranepotentialifglycolysiswereblocked,and
itwouldeventuallydie. 22Qandcytochromecaretransportmolecules.TheirfunctiondoesnotresultdirectlyinATP
synthesis in that they are not pumps. Moreover, Q is the only component of the electron transport chain that is not
a protein. Ubiquinone and cytochrome c are small, mobile electron carriers, whereas the other components of the
electron transport chainarelargecomplexes anchored inthe innermitochondrial membrane. 24Fermentation uses
glycolysisonly.Anaerobicrespirationusesallthreepartsofcellularrespiration,includingthepartsinthemitochondria
likethecitricacidcycleandelectrontransport;italsousesadifferentfinalelectronacceptorinsteadofoxygengas. 26
Citrate can inhibit phosphofructokinase by feedback regulation.
Chapter 8
1Figure8.6Levelsofcarbondioxide(anecessaryphotosyntheticsubstrate)willimmediatelyfall.Asaresult,therate
of photosynthesis will be inhibited. 3 Figure8.18 D 4 A 6 B 8 B 10 A 12 C 14 A 16 D 18 C 20 C 21 The
outcomeoflightreactionsinphotosynthesisistheconversionofsolarenergyintochemicalenergythatthechloroplasts
can use to do work (mostly anabolic production of carbohydrates from carbon dioxide). 23 The energy carriers that
move from the light-dependent reaction to the light-independent one are “full” because they bring energy. After the
energy is released, the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dependent reaction to obtain more energy. There
isnotmuchactualmovementinvolved.BothATPandNADPHareproducedinthestromawheretheyarealsoused
andreconvertedintoADP,Pi,andNADP+. 25Thestomataregulatetheexchangeofgasesandwatervaporbetween
a leaf and its surrounding environment. When the stomata are closed, the water molecules cannot escape the leaf,
PAGE: 1541
1530 Answer Key
buttheleafalsocannotacquirenewcarbondioxidemoleculesfromtheenvironment.Thislimitsthelight-independent
reactionstoonlycontinuinguntilthecarbondioxidestoresintheleafaredepleted. 27Bothofthesemoleculescarry
energy;inthecaseofNADPH,ithasreducingpowerthatisusedtofueltheprocessofmakingcarbohydratemolecules
inlight-independentreactions. 29BecauseRuBP,themoleculeneededatthestartofthecycle,isregeneratedfrom
G3P. 31 Because G3P has three carbon atoms, and each turn of the cycle takes in one carbon atom in the form of
carbondioxide. 33Inthedefinedecosystem,energywouldradiatefromtheSun,andbeabsorbedbythechlorophyll
intheleavesofthetree.Photosynthesiswouldoccurintheleaves,transformingthelightenergyintostoredchemical
energyinthecovalentbondsofcarbonmolecules.Thegiraffewouldeattheleavesofthetree,anddigestthecarbon
molecules to release energy. In the same ecosystem, nutrients would cycle between the tree and the giraffe. The
giraffewouldconsumeoxygenandreleasecarbondioxideasitscellsperformaerobicrespirationtocreatechemical
energy. The tree will consume the released carbon dioxide during photosynthesis to create its own stored chemical
energy, and release oxygen as a by-product.
Chapter 9
1Figure9.8 C. The downstream cellular response would be inhibited. 3Figure9.17 C. 5 B 7 B 9 C 11 C 13
B 15 B 17 C 19 D 21 D 23 Intracellular signaling occurs within a cell, and intercellular signaling occurs between
cells. 25Internalreceptorsarelocatedinsidethecell,andtheirligandsenterthecelltobindthereceptor.Thecomplex
formedbytheinternalreceptorandtheligandthenentersthenucleusanddirectlyaffectsproteinproductionbybinding
tothechromosomalDNAandinitiatingthemakingofmRNAthatcodesforproteins.Cell-surfacereceptors,however,
areembeddedintheplasmamembrane,andtheirligandsdonotenterthecell.Bindingoftheligandtothecell-surface
receptor initiates a cell signaling cascade and does not directly influence the making of proteins; however, it may
involvetheactivationofintracellularproteins. 27Insulin’sreceptorisanenzyme-linkedtransmembranereceptor,as
can be determined from the “tyrosine kinase” in its name. This receptor is embedded in the plasma membrane, and
insulinbindstoitsextracellular(outer)surfacetoinitiateintracellularsignalingcascades.Normally,steroidhormones
crosstheplasmamembranetobindwithintracellularreceptors.Theseintracellularhormone-receptorcomplexesthen
interact directly with DNA to regulate transcription. This limits steroid hormones to be small, non-polar molecules so
they can cross the plasma membrane. However, since insulin does not have to cross into the cell it could be large
or polar (it is a small, polar molecule). 29 The binding of the ligand to the extracellular domain would activate the
pathway normally activated by the receptor donating the intracellular domain. 31 If a kinase is mutated so that it is
alwaysactivated,itwillcontinuouslysignalthroughthepathwayandleadtouncontrolledgrowthandpossiblycancer.
Ifakinaseismutatedsothatitcannotfunction,thecellwillnotrespondtoligandbinding. 33Possibleexplanations:
EGFR dimer cannot separate.An upstream mutation (in Ras, Raf, MEK) constitutively activates the signaling
cascade.ERKhasamutationthatpreventsitfrombindingtoitsphosphatase.Thecellhasamutationpreventingthe
expression or function of the ERK-specific phosphatase. 35 Multicellular organisms must coordinate many different
eventsindifferentcelltypesthatmaybeverydistantfromeachother.Single-celledorganismsareonlyconcernedwith
their immediate environment and the presence of other cells in the area.
Chapter 10
1Figure10.6 D.Thekinetochorebecomesattachedtothemitoticspindle.Sisterchromatidslineupatthemetaphase
plate.Cohesinproteinsbreakdownandthesisterchromatidsseparate.Thenucleusreformsandthecelldivides. 3
Figure10.14D.E6bindingmarksp53fordegradation. 4C 6D 8B 10B 12D 14A 16A 18D 20C 22C 24
D 26C 28Humansomaticcellshave46chromosomes:22pairsand2sexchromosomesthatmayormaynotforma
pair.Thisisthe2nordiploidcondition.Humangameteshave23chromosomes,oneeachof23uniquechromosomes,
one of which is a sex chromosome. This is the n or haploid condition. 30 The DNA double helix is wrapped around
histoneproteinstoformstructurescallednucleosomes.NucleosomesandthelinkerDNAinbetweenthemarecoiled
into a 30-nm fiber. During cell division, chromatin is further condensed by packing proteins. 32 The mitotic spindle
is formed of microtubules. Microtubules are polymers of the protein tubulin; therefore, it is the mitotic spindle that is
disruptedbythesedrugs.Withoutafunctionalmitoticspindle,thechromosomeswillnotbesortedorseparatedduring
mitosis. The cell will arrest in mitosis and die. 34 Many cells temporarily enter G0 until they reach maturity. Some
cells are only triggered to enter G1 when the organism needs to increase that particular cell type. Some cells only
reproducefollowinganinjurytothetissue.Somecellsneverdivideoncetheyreachmaturity. 36TheG1checkpoint
monitorsadequatecellgrowth,thestateofthegenomicDNA,adequatestoresofenergy,andmaterialsforSphase.
AttheG2checkpoint,DNAischeckedtoensurethatallchromosomeswereduplicatedandthattherearenomistakes
innewlysynthesizedDNA.Additionally,cellsizeandenergyreservesareevaluated.TheMcheckpointconfirmsthe
correct attachment of the mitotic spindle fibers to the kinetochores. 38 Cdk must bind to a cyclin, and it must be
phosphorylatedinthecorrectpositiontobecomefullyactive. 40Ifoneofthegenesthatproducesregulatorproteins
becomes mutated, it produces a malformed, possibly non-functional, cell-cycle regulator, increasing the chance that
moremutationswillbeleftunrepairedinthecell.Eachsubsequentgenerationofcellssustainsmoredamage.Thecell
cyclecanspeedupasaresultofthelossoffunctionalcheckpointproteins.Thecellscanlosetheabilitytoself-destruct
andeventuallybecome“immortalized.” 42Regulatorymechanismsthatmightbelostincludemonitoringofthequality
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1542
Answer Key 1531
of the genomic DNA, recruiting of repair enzymes, and the triggering of apoptosis. 44 The common components of
eukaryoticcelldivisionandbinaryfissionareDNAduplication,segregationofduplicatedchromosomes,anddivision
of the cytoplasmic contents.
Chapter 11
1Figure11.9Yes,itwillbeabletoreproduceasexually. 2C 4D 6C 8C 10B 12D 14D 16A 18C 19During
the meiotic interphase, each chromosome is duplicated. The sister chromatids that are formed during synthesis are
held together at the centromere region by cohesin proteins. All chromosomes are attached to the nuclear envelope
by their tips. As the cell enters prophase I, the nuclear envelope begins to fragment and the proteins holding
homologouschromosomeslocateeachother.Thefoursisterchromatidsalignlengthwise,andaproteinlatticecalled
the synaptonemal complex is formed between them to bind them together. The synaptonemal complex facilitates
crossover between nonsister chromatids, which is observed as chiasmata along the length of the chromosome. As
prophaseIprogresses,thesynaptonemalcomplexbreaksdownandthesisterchromatidsbecomefree,exceptwhere
they are attached by chiasmata. At this stage, the four chromatids are visible in each homologous pairing and are
calledatetrad. 21InmetaphaseI,thehomologouschromosomeslineupatthemetaphaseplate.InanaphaseI,the
homologous chromosomes are pulled apart and move to opposite poles. Sister chromatids are not separated until
meiosis II. The fused kinetochore formed during meiosis I ensures that each spindle microtubule that binds to the
tetradwillattachtobothsisterchromatids. 23Thechromosomesoftheindividualcannotcrossoverduringmeiosisif
theindividualcannotmakerecombinationnodules.Thislimitsthegeneticdiversityoftheindividual’sgametestowhat
occurs during independent assortment, with all daughter cells receiving complete maternal or paternal chromatids.
An individual who cannot produce diverse offspring is considered less fit than individuals who do produce diverse
offspring. 25 a. Crossover occurs in prophase I between nonsister homologous chromosomes. Segments of DNA
are exchanged between maternally derived and paternally derived chromosomes, and new gene combinations are
formed. b. Random alignment during metaphase I leads to gametes that have a mixture of maternal and paternal
chromosomes. c. Fertilization is random, in that any two gametes can fuse. 27 Sexual reproduction increases the
genetic variation within the population, because new individuals are made by randomly combining genetic material
fromtwoparents.Becauseonlyfitindividualsreachsexualmaturityandreproduce,theoverallpopulationtendstoward
increasingfitnessinitsenvironment.However,thereisalwaysapossibilitythattherandomcombinationcreatingthe
offspring’s genome will actually produce an organism less fit for the environment than its parents were. 29 Haploid-
dominant organisms undergo sexual reproduction by making a diploid zygote. The cells that make the gametes are
derivedfromhaploidcells,butthe+and–matingtypesthatproducethezygotearerandomlycombined.Thezygote
also undergoes meiosis to return to the haploid stage, so multiple steps add genetic diversity to haploid-dominant
organisms.
Chapter 12
1Figure12.5Youcannotbesureiftheplantishomozygousorheterozygousasthedatasetistoosmall:byrandom
chance,allthreeplantsmighthaveacquiredonlythedominantgeneeveniftherecessiveoneispresent.Iftheround
pea parent is heterozygous, there is a one-eighth probability that a random sample of three progeny peas will all be
round. 3Figure12.12Halfofthefemaleoffspringwouldbeheterozygous(XWXw)withredeyes,andhalfwouldbe
homozygousrecessive(XwXw)withwhiteeyes.Halfofthemaleoffspringwouldbehemizygousdominant(XWY)withe
redyes,andhalfwouldbehemizygousrecessive(XwY)withwhiteeyes. 5A 7B 9C 11C 13D 15D 17A 19
D 21D 22Thegardenpeaissessileandhasflowersthatclosetightlyduringself-pollination.Thesefeatureshelpto
preventaccidentalorunintentionalfertilizations thatcouldhavediminishedtheaccuracyofMendel’sdata. 24Since
we are calculating the probability of two independent events occurring simultaneously, we use the product rule. F1
generation:Sincegreenseedcolorisrecessive,thereisa0%probabilitythatanyplantsintheF1generationwillhave
green,roundseeds.F2generation:TheprobabilityofgrowinganF2generationplantwithgreenseedsis¼,whilethe
probabilityofgrowinganF2generationplantwithroundseedsis¾.Wecanusetheproductruletothencalculatethe
probability of a plant with green, round seeds: 1/ 4×3/ 4=3/ 16 26 Because axial is dominant, the gene(12.3)
wouldbedesignatedasA.F1wouldbeallheterozygousAawithaxialphenotype.F2wouldhavepossiblegenotypesof
AA,Aa,andaa;thesewouldcorrespondtoaxial,axial,andterminalphenotypes,respectively. 28No,malescanonly
express color blindness. They cannot carry it because an individual needs two X chromosomes to be a carrier. 30
Considering each gene separately, the cross at A will produce offspring of which half are AA and half are Aa; B will
produceallBb;CwillproducehalfCcandhalfcc.Proportionsthenare(1/2)×(1)×(1/2),or1/4AABbCc;continuingfor
theotherpossibilitiesyields1/4AABbcc,1/4AaBbCc,and1/4AaBbcc.Theproportionsthereforeare1:1:1:1. 32The
crosscanberepresentedasa4×4Punnettsquare,withthefollowinggametesforeachparent:WY,Wy,wY,andwy.
For all 12 of the offspring that express a dominant W gene, the offspring will be white. The three offspring that are
homozygous recessive for w but express a dominant Y gene will be yellow. The remaining wwyy offspring will be
green. 34Mendelianinheritancewouldpredictthatallthreegenesareinheritedindependently.Therearetherefore8
different gamete genotype possibilities: VYR, VYr, VyR, Vyr, vYR, vYr, vyR, vyr. If all three genes are found on the
PAGE: 1543
1532 Answer Key
same chromosome arm, independent assortment is unlikely to occur because the genes are close together (linked).
Chapter 13
1 Figure13.3 No. The predicted frequency of recombinant offspring ranges from 0% (for linked traits) to 50% (for
unlinkedtraits). 3Figure13.6 B. 4A 6C 8B 10C 12D 14TheChromosomalTheory ofInheritance proposed
that genes reside on chromosomes. The understanding that chromosomes are linear arrays of genes explained
linkage, and crossing over explained recombination.
Chapter 14
1Figure14.10 Compartmentalizationenablesaeukaryoticcelltodivideprocessesintodiscretestepssoitcanbuild
more complex protein and RNA products. But there is an advantage to having a single compartment as well: RNA
andproteinsynthesisoccursmuchmorequicklyinaprokaryoticcell. 3Figure14.21 Ifthreenucleotidesareadded,
one additional amino acid will be incorporated into the protein chain, but the reading frame wont shift. 4 C 6 D 8
D 10C 12D 14A 16D 18C 20B 21LiveRcellsacquiredgeneticinformationfromtheheat-killedScellsthat
“transformed”theRcellsintoScells. 23Ifthetetranucleotidehypothesisweretrue,thenDNAwouldhavetocontain
equal amounts of all four nucleotides (A=T=G=C). However, Chargaff demonstrated that A=T and G=C, but that the
four nucleotides are not present in equal amounts. 25 DNA has two strands in anti-parallel orientation. The sugar-
phosphate linkages form a backbone on the outside, and the bases are paired on the inside: A with T, and G with
C, like rungs on a spiral ladder. 27 Meselson’s experiments with E. coli grown in 15N deduced this finding. 29 At
an origin of replication, two replication forks are formed that are extended in two directions. On the lagging strand,
Okazakifragmentsareformedinadiscontinuousmanner. 311333secondsor22.2minutes. 33Primerprovidesa
3'-OHgroupforDNApoltostartaddingnucleotides.Therewouldbenoreactioninthetubewithoutaprimer,andno
bandswouldbevisibleontheelectrophoresis. 35TelomerasehasaninbuiltRNAtemplatethatextendsthe3'end,so
primerissynthesizedandextended.Thus,theendsareprotected. 37Thisisaframeshiftmutationwithadeletionof
an“A”inthe12thpositionofthecodingregion. Patient:ATGGGGATATGGCATNormal:ATGGGGATATGAGCAT
Chapter 15
1 Figure15.11 No. Prokaryotes use different promoters than eukaryotes. 3 Figure15.16 Tetracycline: a;
Chloramphenicol: c. 4 D 6 C 8 B 10 B 12 B 14 A 16 C 18 A 19 For 200 commonly occurring amino acids,
codonsconsistingoffourtypesofnucleotideswouldhavetobeatleastfournucleotideslong,because44=256.There
would be much less degeneracy in this case. 21 Met Cys Arg Asn Ser Arg The first step to writing the amino acid
sequenceistofindthestartcodonAUG.Then,thenucleotidesequenceisseparatedintotriplets:CUAUGUGUCGU
AAC AGC CGA UGA. We stop the translation at UGA because that triplet encodes a stop codon. When we convert
these codons to amino acids, the sequence becomes Met Cys Arg Asn Ser Arg. 23 Rho-dependent termination is
controlled by the rho protein, which tracks along behind the polymerase on the growing mRNA chain. Near the end
of the gene, the polymerase stalls at a run of G nucleotides on the DNA template. The rho protein collides with the
polymeraseandreleasesmRNAfromthetranscriptionbubble.Rho-independentterminationiscontrolledbyspecific
sequencesintheDNAtemplatestrand.Asthepolymerasenearstheendofthegenebeingtranscribed,itencounters
aregionrichinC–Gnucleotides.ThiscreatesanmRNAhairpinthatcausesthepolymerasetostallrightasitbegins
to transcribe a region rich in A–T nucleotides. Because A–U bonds are less thermostable, the core enzyme falls
away. 25 To determine that a RNA polymerase I mutation or deficiency is causing the defect in protein production,
the scientist would need to make observations that provide evidence that RNA polymerases II and III are working in
the cell. The observations eliminating RNA polymerase II as the defect could include: Transcription of mRNAs
in the nucleus;Presence of processed mRNAs in the cytoplasm The observations eliminating RNA polymerase III
couldinclude: IsolationofsmallnuclearRNAsfromthecell;IsolationofmicroRNAsfromthecell;Transcriptionof
5S rRNA in the nucleus;Presence of tRNAs in the cytoplasm The observations implicating RNA polymerase I could
include: A lack of functional ribosomes in the cytoplasm (RNA polymerase I or III);A lack of RNA polymerase
I protein;RNA polymerase I protein is non-functional 27 The mRNA would be: 5'-AUGGCCGGUUAUUAAGCA-3'.
The protein would be: MAGY. Even though there are six codons, the fifth codon corresponds to a stop, so the sixth
codon would not be translated. 29 Original mRNA: 5’ –UGCC AUG GUA AUA ACA CAU GAG GCC UGA AC– 3’;
Translation: Met – Val – Ile – Thr – His – Glu – Ala; Mutated mRNA: 5’ –UGCC AUG GUU AAU AAC ACA UGA
GGCCUGAAC–3’;Translation:Met–Val–Asn–Asn–Thr;Insertionmutationscanhavedramaticeffectsonproteins
becausetheyshiftthereadingframeforthecodons.ThischangestheaminoacidsencodedbythemRNA,andcan
introduce premature start or stop sites.
Chapter 16
1 Figure16.5 Tryptophan is an amino acid essential for making proteins, so the cell always needs to have some
on hand. However, if plenty of tryptophan is present, it is wasteful to make more, and the expression of the trp
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1544
Answer Key 1533
receptor is repressed. Lactose, a sugar found in milk, is not always available. It makes no sense to make the
enzymes necessary to digest an energy source that is not available, so the lac operon is only turned on when
lactose is present. 3 Figure16.13 Protein synthesis would be inhibited. 4 D 6 D 8 D 10 A 12 C 14 B 16
D 18 C 20 B 22 C 23 Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus, whereas prokaryotic cells do not. In eukaryotic cells,
DNA is confined within the nuclear region. Because of this, transcription and translation are physically separated.
This creates a more complex mechanism for the control of gene expression that benefits multicellular organisms
becauseitcompartmentalizesgeneregulation.Geneexpressionoccursatmanystagesineukaryoticcells,whereas
inprokaryoticcells,controlofgeneexpressiononlyoccursatthetranscriptionallevel.Thisallowsforgreatercontrol
of gene expression in eukaryotes and more complex systems to be developed. Because of this, different cell types
can arise in an individual organism. 25 Environmental stimuli can increase or induce transcription in prokaryotic
cells. In this example, lactose in the environment will induce the transcription of the lac operon, but only if glucose
is not available in the environment. 27 You can create medications that reverse the epigenetic processes (to add
histoneacetylationmarksortoremoveDNAmethylation)andcreateanopenchromosomalconfiguration. 29Histone
acetylation reduces the positive charge of histone proteins, loosening the DNA wrapped around the histones. This
looser DNA can then interact with transcription factors to express genes found in that region. Normally, once the
gene is no longer needed, histone deacetylase enzymes remove the acetyl groups from histones so that the DNA
becomes tightly wound and inaccessible again. However, when there is a defect in HDAC9, the deacetylation may
notoccur.Inanimmunecell,thiswouldmeanthatinflammatorygenesthatweremadeaccessibleduringaninfection
are not tightly rewound around the histones. 31 If too much of an activating transcription factor were present, then
transcription would be increased in the cell. This could lead to dramatic alterations in cell function. 33 RNA binding
proteins (RBP) bind to the RNA and can either increase or decrease the stability of the RNA. If they increase the
stabilityoftheRNAmolecule,theRNAwillremainintactinthecellforalongerperiodoftimethannormal.Sinceboth
RBPs and miRNAs bind to the RNA molecule, RBP can potentially bind first to the RNA and prevent the binding of
themiRNAthatwilldegradeit. 35Becauseproteinsareinvolvedineverystageofgeneregulation,phosphorylation
ofaprotein(dependingontheproteinthatismodified)canalteraccessibilitytothechromosome,canaltertranslation
(by altering the transcription factor binding or function), can change nuclear shuttling (by influencing modifications to
thenuclearporecomplex),canalterRNAstability(bybindingornotbindingtotheRNAtoregulateitsstability),can
modifytranslation(increaseordecrease),orcanchangepost-translationalmodifications(addorremovephosphates
orotherchemicalmodifications). 37Environmentalstimuli,likeultravioletlightexposure,canalterthemodificationsto
thehistoneproteinsorDNA.Suchstimulimaychangeanactivelytranscribedgeneintoasilencedgenebyremoving
acetylgroupsfromhistoneproteinsorbyaddingmethylgroupstoDNA. 39Thesedrugswillkeepthehistoneproteins
andtheDNAmethylationpatternsintheopenchromosomalconfigurationsothattranscriptionisfeasible.Ifageneis
silenced, these drugs could reverse the epigenetic configuration to re-express the gene.
Chapter 17
1 Figure17.7 B. The experiment would result in blue colonies only. 3Figure17.15 There are no right or wrong
answerstothesequestions.Whileitistruethatprostatecancertreatmentitselfcanbeharmful,manymenwouldrather
beawarethattheyhavecancersotheycanmonitorthediseaseandbegintreatmentifitprogresses.Andwhilegenetic
screening may be useful, it is expensive and may cause needless worry. People with certain risk factors may never
developthedisease,andpreventativetreatmentsmaydomoreharmthangood. 4B 6B 8D 10B 12A 14A 16
D 18D 20B 22SouthernblottingisthetransferofDNAthathasbeenenzymaticallycutintofragmentsandrunon
an agarose gel onto a nylon membrane. The DNA fragments that are on the nylon membrane can be denatured to
makethemsingle-stranded,andthenprobedwithsmallDNAfragmentsthatareradioactivelyorfluorescentlylabeled,
to detect the presence of specific sequences. An example of the use of Southern blotting would be in analyzing
the presence, absence, or variation of a disease gene in genomic DNA from a group of patients. 24 By identifying
an herbicide resistance gene and cloning it into a plant expression vector system, like the Ti plasmid system from
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. The scientist would then introduce it into the plant cells by transformation, and select
cells that have taken up and integrated the herbicide-resistance gene into the genome. 26 Genome mapping has
many different applications and provides comprehensive information that can be used for predictive purposes. 28
Metagenomics is revolutionary because it replaced the practice of using pure cultures. Pure cultures were used
to study individual species in the laboratory, but did not accurately represent what happens in the environment.
Metagenomicsstudiesthegenomesofbacterialpopulationsintheirenvironmentalniche. 30Proteomicshasprovided
awaytodetectbiomarkersandproteinsignatures,whichhavebeenusedtoscreenfortheearlydetectionofcancer.
Chapter 18
1 Figure18.14 Loss of genetic material is almost always lethal, so offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes are more
likelytosurvive. 3Figure18.23AnswerB 4B 6D 8A 10B 12C 14D 16C 17Theplantsthatcanbestuse
the resources of the area, including competing with other individuals for those resources will produce more seeds
themselves and those traits that allowed them to better use the resources will increase in the population of the next
generation. 19Inscience,atheoryisathoroughlytestedandverifiedsetofexplanationsforabodyofobservationsof
nature.Itisthestrongestformofknowledgeinscience.Incontrast,atheoryincommonvernacularcanmeanaguess
PAGE: 1545
1534 Answer Key
or speculation about something, meaning that the knowledge implied by the theory is very weak. 21 Organisms of
onespeciescanarrivetoanislandtogetherandthendispersethroughoutthechain,eachsettlingintodifferentniches
andexploitingdifferentfoodresourcestoreducecompetition. 23Theformationofgameteswithnewnnumberscan
occurinonegeneration.Afteracoupleofgenerations,enoughofthesenewhybridscanformtoreproducetogether
asanewspecies. 25Ifthehybridoffspringareasfitormorefitthantheparents,reproductionwouldlikelycontinue
between both species and the hybrids, eventually bringing all organisms under the umbrella of one species.
Chapter 19
1 Figure19.2 The expected distribution is 320 VV, 160Vv, and 20 vv plants. Plants with VV or Vv genotypes would
have violet flowers, and plants with the vv genotype would have white flowers, so a total of 480 plants would be
expectedtohavevioletflowers,and20plantswouldhavewhiteflowers. 3Figure19.8Mothshaveshiftedtoalighter
color. 4 C 6 D 8 C 10 A 12 D 14 A 16 p = (8*2 + 4)/48 = .42; q = (12*2 + 4)/48 = .58; p2 = .17; 2pq = .48; q2
=.34 18Redisrecessivesoq2=200/800=0.25;q=0.5;p=1-q=0.5;p2=0.25;2pq=0.5.Youwouldexpect
200homozygousblueflowers,400heterozygousblueflowers,and200redflowers. 20Thetheoryofnaturalselection
stemsfromtheobservationthatsomeindividualsinapopulationsurvivelongerandhavemoreoffspringthanothers:
thus,moreoftheirgenesarepassedtothenextgeneration.Forexample,abig,powerfulmalegorillaismuchmore
likely than a smaller, weaker one to become the population’s silverback: the pack’s leader who mates far more than
theothermalesofthegroup.Therefore,thepackleaderwillfathermoreoffspringwhosharehalfofhisgenesandare
likely to grow bigger and stronger like their father. Over time, the genes for bigger size will increase in frequency in
the population, and the average body size, as a result, will grow larger on average. 22 The peacock’s tail is a good
exampleofthehandicapprinciple.Thetail,whichmakesthemalesmorevisibletopredatorsandlessabletoescape,
isclearlyadisadvantagetothebird’ssurvival.Butbecauseitisadisadvantage,onlythemostfitmalesshouldbeable
to survive with it. Thus, the tail serves as an honest signal of quality to the females of the population; therefore, the
male will earn more matings and greater reproductive success.
Chapter 20
1Figure20.6 Catsanddogsarepartofthesamegroupatfivelevels:bothareinthedomainEukarya,thekingdom
Animalia, the phylum Chordata, the class Mammalia, and the order Carnivora. 3 Figure20.11 The largest clade
encompasses the entire tree. 4 C 6 D 8 C 10 B 12 C 14 A 16 The phylogenetic tree shows the order in which
evolutionary events took place and in what order certain characteristics and organisms evolved in relation to others.
It does not relate to time. 18 domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species 20 Phylogenetic trees
arebasedonevolutionaryconnections.Ifananalogoussimilaritywereusedonatree,thiswouldbeerroneousand,
furthermore,wouldcausethesubsequentbranchestobeinaccurate. 22Somehypothesesproposethatmitochondria
were acquired first, followed by the development of the nucleus. Others propose that the nucleus evolved first and
thatthisneweukaryoticcelllateracquiredthemitochondria.Stillothershypothesizethatprokaryotesdescendedfrom
eukaryotes by the loss of genes and complexity.
Chapter 21
1 Figure21.5 D 3 Figure21.10 C 4 B 6 D 8 A 10 B 12 D 14 D 16 A 18 D 20 C 22 Viruses pass through
filters that eliminated all bacteria which were visible in the light microscopes at the time. As the bacteria-free filtrate
could still cause infections when given to a healthy organism, this observation demonstrated the existence of very
smallinfectiousagents.Theseagentswerelatershowntobeunrelatedtobacteriaandwereclassifiedasviruses. 24
Rabiesvirusisa(-)strandRNAvirusthattranscribesmRNAsfromitsgenome(GroupV).HIV-1isasingle-stranded
RNAretrovirusthatusesreversetranscriptasetocreateadouble-strandedDNAcopyofitsgenomewhichisintegrated
intothehosthuman’sgenomepriortomakingmRNAs(GroupVI).Thegenomestructuresystemclassifiesbothviruses
as single-stranded RNA viruses with linear genomes. Baltimore classification sorts Rabies virus and HIV-1 into two
differentgroups,indicatingthatthetwoviruseshaveverydifferentlifecycles.However,genomestructureclassification
does not distinguish between the two viruses. This leaves out important information regarding virus function and
survival. 26 Reverse transcriptase is needed to make more HIV-1 viruses, so targeting the reverse transcriptase
enzymemaybeawaytoinhibitthereplicationofthevirus.Importantly,bytargetingreversetranscriptase,wedolittle
harmtothehostcell,sincehostcellsdonotmakereversetranscriptase.Thus,wecanspecificallyattackthevirusand
not the host cell when we use reverse transcriptase inhibitors. 28 Plant viruses infect crops, causing crop damage
andfailure,andconsiderableeconomiclosses. 30Rabiesvaccineworksafterabitebecauseittakesaweekforthe
virustotravelfromthesiteofthebitetothecentralnervoussystem,wherethemostseveresymptomsofthedisease
occur.Adultsarenotroutinelyvaccinatedforrabiesfortworeasons:first,becausetheroutinevaccinationofdomestic
animalsmakesitunlikelythathumanswillcontractrabiesfromananimalbite;second,ifoneisbittenbyawildanimal
oradomesticanimalthatonecannotconfirmhasbeenimmunized,thereisstilltimetogivethevaccineandavoidthe
oftenfatalconsequencesofthedisease. 32Thisprion-baseddiseaseistransmittedthroughhumanconsumptionof
infectedmeat. 34Thebotanistwouldneedtoisolateanyforeignnucleicacidsfrominfectedplantcells,andconfirm
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1546
Answer Key 1535
thatanRNAmoleculeistheetiologicalagentofdisease.ThebotanistwouldthenneedtodemonstratethattheRNA
can infect plant cells without a capsid, and that the RNA replicates, but is not translated to produce proteins.
Chapter 22
1Figure22.8Theextracellularmatrixandouterlayerofcellsprotectstheinnerbacteria.Thecloseproximityofcells
also facilitates lateral gene transfer, a process by which genes such as antibiotic-resistance genes are transferred
from one bacterium to another. And even if lateral gene transfer does not occur, one bacterium that produces an
exo-enzyme that destroys antibiotic may save neighboring bacteria. 3 Figure22.19 D 4 A 6 A 8 C 10 D 12
B 14 C 16 B 18 A 20 A 22 D 24 D 26 D 28 B 30 As the organisms are non-culturable, the presence could
bedetectedthroughmoleculartechniques,suchasPCR. 32Possibleanswersinclude: PsychrophileHypolith–
survivalinlowhumidity/waterenvironment 34Bothbacteriaandarchaeahavecellmembranesandtheybothcontain
ahydrophobicportion.Inthecaseofbacteria,itisafattyacid;inthecaseofarchaea,itisahydrocarbon(phytanyl).
Bothbacteriaandarchaeahaveacellwallthatprotectsthem.Inthecaseofbacteria,itiscomposedofpeptidoglycan,
whereasinthecaseofarchaea,itispseudopeptidoglycan,polysaccharides,glycoproteins,orpureprotein.Bacterial
andarchaealflagellaalsodifferintheirchemicalstructure. 36Responseswillvary.Inadeep-seahydrothermalvent,
thereisnolight,soprokaryoteswouldbechemotrophsinsteadofphototrophs.Thesourceofcarbonwouldbecarbon
dioxide dissolved in the ocean, so they would be autotrophs. There is not a lot of organic material in the ocean,
so prokaryotes would probably use inorganic sources, thus they would be chemolitotrophs. The temperatures are
very high in the hydrothermal vent, so the prokaryotes would be thermophilic. 38 Losing the bacteria that serve as
decomposers in the ecosystem would disrupt the carbon cycle, but not stop it completely since fungi can also serve
as decomposers. Without bacterial decomposers functioning, organic waste would accumulate in the area, and less
carbon dioxide would be released back into the atmosphere. 40 E. coli colonizes the surface of the leaf, forming a
biofilmthatismoredifficulttoremovethanfree(planktonic)cells.Additionally,bacteriacanbetakenupinthewater
that plants are grown in, thereby entering the plant tissues rather than simply residing on the leaf surface. 42 Soap
indiscriminatelykillsbacteriaonskin.Thiskillsharmfulbacteria,butcanalsoeliminate“good”bacteriafromtheskin.
When the non-pathogenic bacteria are eliminated, pathogenic bacteria can colonize the empty surface.
Chapter 23
1 Figure23.5 All eukaryotic cells have mitochondria, but not all eukaryotic cells have chloroplasts. 3 Figure23.28
C 4D 6C 8C 10D 12B 14A 16C 18D 20A 22B 23Eukaryoticcellsarosethroughendosymbioticevents
that gave rise to the energy-producing organelles within the eukaryotic cells such as mitochondria and chloroplasts.
The nuclear genome of eukaryotes is related most closely to the Archaea, so it may have been an early archaean
that engulfed a bacterial cell that evolved into a mitochondrion. Mitochondria appear to have originated from an
alpha-proteobacterium, whereas chloroplasts originated as a cyanobacterium. There is also evidence of secondary
endosymbiotic events. Other cell components may also have resulted from endosymbiotic events. 25 The ability to
performsexualreproductionallowsprotiststorecombinetheirgenesandproducenewvariationsofprogenythatmay
be better suited to the new environment. In contrast, asexual reproduction generates progeny that are clones of the
parent. 27ProtistsaredefinedasanyeukaryotesthatdonotfallintothePlantae,Fungi,orAnimalKingdoms.Since
the unifying characteristics describe what they are NOT, rather than what they are, Protista can include almost any
cellular/organismorganization.Possibleexamplesofstructurevariety: Barriertoexteriorworld:cellwall,plasma
membrane, pellicleLocomotion: flagella, cilia, pseudopodia 29 By definition, an obligate saprobe lacks the ability to
performphotosynthesis,soitcannotdirectlyobtainnutritionbysearchingforlight.Instead,achemotacticmechanism
that senses the odors released during decay might be a more effective sensing organ for a saprobe. 31 Possible
answersinclude: Twonuclei(amacronucleusandamicronucleus)insteadofonenucleusAmitoticdivision/binary
fission during asexual reproduction instead of mitotic cell divisionMitosis of the micronucleus after meiosis instead
of direct meiotic production of gametes for sexual reproduction 33 The trypanosomes that cause this disease are
capable of expressing a glycoprotein coat with a different molecular structure with each generation. Because the
immunesystemmustrespondtospecificantigenstoraiseameaningfuldefense,thechangingnatureoftrypanosome
antigens prevents the immune system from ever clearing this infection. Massive trypanosome infection eventually
leads to host organ failure and death.
Chapter 24
1 Figure24.14 A 3 Figure24.21 Without mycorrhiza, plants cannot absorb adequate nutrients, which stunts their
growth. Addition of fungal spores to sterile soil can alleviate this problem. 4 C 6 D 8 C 10 B 12 B 14 C 16 C
18 C 20 B 22 A 23 Asexual reproduction is fast and best under favorable conditions. Sexual reproduction allows
therecombinationofgenetictraitsandincreasestheoddsofdevelopingnewadaptationsbettersuitedtoachanged
environment. 25 Fungi break down decaying matter in their environment to serve as their food source. Since the
digestionoccursexternally,thelargemyceliumcansecreteexoenzymesoveralargearea.Thefungimustbeableto
absorb the small molecules released by digestion, so having a large surface area increases the amount of digested
moleculesthatarecapturedbythefungi. 27Chytridiomycota(Chytrids)mayhaveaunicellularormulticellularbody
PAGE: 1547
1536 Answer Key
structure; some are aquatic with motile spores with flagella; an example is the Allomyces. Zygomycota (conjugated
fungi)haveamulticellularbodystructure;featuresincludezygosporesandpresenceinsoil;examplesarebreadand
fruit molds. Ascomycota (sac fungi) may have unicellular or multicellular body structure; a feature is sexual spores
in sacs (asci); examples include the yeasts used in bread, wine, and beer production. Basidiomycota (club fungi)
have multicellular bodies; features includes sexual spores in the basidiocarp (mushroom) and that they are mostly
decomposers; mushroom-producing fungi are an example. 29 The bark beetles and the fungus have a mutualistic
relationship since each partner benefits from interacting with the other. The beetle can provide food for its offspring,
whilethefunguscanspreadtonewtrees. 31Dermatophytesthatcolonizeskinbreakdownthekeratinizedlayerof
deadcellsthatprotectstissuesfrombacterialinvasion.Oncetheintegrityoftheskinisbreached,bacteriacanenterthe
deeperlayersoftissuesandcauseinfections. 33Thedoughisoftencontaminatedbytoxicsporesthatfloatintheair.
It was one of Louis Pasteur’s achievements to purify reliable strains of baker’s yeast to produce bread consistently.
Chapter 25
1 Figure25.6 B. 3 Figure25.24 D. 4 A 6 C 8 C 10 C 12 D 14 A 16 B 18 D 20 D 22 D 24 Sunlight is
not filtered by water or other algae on land; therefore, there is no need to collect light at additional wavelengths
madeavailablebyotherpigmentcoloration. 26Possiblechallengesinclude: Climate:Desertsaremorearidthan
swamps, so there is less humidity in the air and less water in the soil.Reproduction: Cactuses are often not densely
populated, whereas cattails occur in groups.Temperature: During the day, deserts are usually hot, which increases
the risk of desiccation. The desert climate will also have broader temperature ranges (extremes). 28 It allows for
survival through periodic droughts and colonization of environments where the supply of water fluctuates. 30 The
bryophytesaredividedintothreephyla:theliverwortsorHepaticophyta,thehornwortsorAnthocerotophyta, andthe
mosses or true Bryophyta. 32 Similarities include: Sexual reproduction is dependent upon water in which the
male gamete swims.The haploid organism is the dominant part of the life cycle. Differences include: Bryophyte
gametotangia protect the gametes and the growing embryo.Bryophytes make sporangium to produce spores. 34
Ferns are considered the most advanced seedless vascular plants, because they display characteristics commonly
observed in seed plants—they form large leaves and branching roots.
Chapter 26
1Figure26.8B.Thediploidzygoteformsafterthepollentubehasfinishedforming,sothatthemalegenerativenuclei
canfusewiththefemalegametophyte. 3D 5C 7A 9B 11C 13B 15C 17D 19Bothpollinationandherbivory
contributed to diversity, with plants needing to attract some insects and repel others. 21 The trees are adapted to
arid weather, and do not lose as much water due to transpiration as non-conifers. 23 The resemblance between
cycadsandpalmtreesisonlysuperficial.Cycadsaregymnospermsanddonotbearflowersorfruit.Cycadsproduce
cones:large,femaleconesthatproducenakedseeds,andsmallermaleconesonseparateplants.Palmsdonot. 25
Usinganimalpollinatorspromotescross-pollinationandincreasesgeneticdiversity.Theoddsthatthepollenwillreach
another flower are greatly increased compared with the randomness of wind pollination.
Chapter 27
1Figure27.5Theanimalmightdeveloptwoheadsandnotail. 3Figure27.9D 4B 6D 8B 10C 12D 14B 16
C 18 D 19 The development of specialized tissues affords more complex animal anatomy and physiology because
differentiated tissue types can perform unique functions and work together in tandem to allow the animal to perform
more functions. For example, specialized muscle tissue allows directed and efficient movement, and specialized
nervoustissueallowsformultiplesensorymodalitiesaswellastheabilitytorespondtovarioussensoryinformation;
thesefunctionsarenotnecessarilyavailabletoothernonanimalorganisms. 21Alteredexpressionofhomeoticgenes
canleadtomajorchangesinthemorphologyoftheindividual.Hoxgenescanaffectthespatialarrangementsoforgans
andbodyparts.IfaHoxgenewasmutatedorduplicated,itcouldaffectwherealegmightbeonafruitflyorhowfar
apartaperson’sfingersare. 23Theevolutionofbilateralsymmetryledtodesignatedheadandtailbodyregions,and
promotedmoreefficientmobilityforanimals.Thisimprovedmobilityallowedformoreskillfulseekingofresourcesand
preyescapingfrompredators.Theappearanceofthecoelomincoelomatesprovidesmanyinternalorganswithshock
absorption, making them less prone to physical damage from bodily assault. A coelom also gives the body greater
flexibility,whichpromotesmoreefficientmovement.Therelativelylooseplacementoforganswithinthecoelomallows
them to develop and grow with some spatial freedom, which promoted the evolution of optimal organ arrangement.
Thecoelomalsoprovidesspaceforacirculatorysystem,whichisanadvantageouswaytodistributebodyfluidsand
gases. 25 In many cases, morphological similarities between animals may be only superficial similarities and may
notindicateatrueevolutionaryrelationship.Oneofthereasonsforthisisthatcertainmorphologicaltraitscanevolve
along very different evolutionary branches of animals for similar ecological reasons. 27 It is true that multiple mass
extinction events have taken place since the Cambrian period, when most currently existing animal phyla appeared,
andthemajorityofanimalspecieswerecommonlywipedoutduringtheseevents.However,asmallnumberofanimal
speciesrepresentingeachphylumwereusuallyabletosurviveeachextinctionevent,allowingthephylumtocontinue
to evolve rather than become altogether extinct.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1548
Answer Key 1537
Chapter 28
1 Figure28.3 B 3 Figure28.45 C 4 B 6 B 8 C 10 A 12 B 14 D 16 C 18 B 20 D 22 A 24 Pinacocytes
are epithelial-like cells, form the outermost layer of sponges, and enclose a jelly-like substance called mesohyl. In
some sponges, porocytes form ostia, single tube-shaped cells that act as valves to regulate the flow of water into
the spongocoel. Choanocytes (“collar cells”) are present at various locations, depending on the type of sponge, but
theyalwayslinesomespacethroughwhichwaterflowsandareusedinfeeding. 26Nematocystsare“stingingcells”
designedtoparalyzeprey.Thenematocystscontainaneurotoxinthatrenderspreyimmobile. 28Therearetwokey
differences between Porifera (sponges) and Cubozoans (box jellyfish) – gamete production and fertilization strategy.
Boxjellyfishhaveseparatesexes,whileasinglespongecanproducebothtypesofgametes.Boxjellyfishalsoundergo
internalfertilization,whilespongesreproducebyexternalfertilization.Internalfertilizationallowsboxjellyfishtocontrol
whichspermisusedforfertilizationandincreasesthelikelihoodofovaandspermatozoameeting. 30Molluskshave
a large muscular foot that may be modified in various ways, such as into tentacles, but it functions in locomotion.
They have a mantle, a structure of tissue that covers and encloses the dorsal portion of the animal, and secrete the
shell when it is present. The mantle encloses the mantle cavity, which houses the gills (when present), excretory
pores, anus, and gonadopores. The coelom of mollusks is restricted to the region around the systemic heart. The
main body cavity is a hemocoel. Many mollusks have a radula near the mouth that is used for scraping food. 32
Cephalopods have a closed circulatory system, while other members of the Mollusca phylum have open circulatory
systems.Havingaclosedsystemallowsbloodtobemovedmoreefficientlyandrapidlythroughtheanimal,sincethe
circulation isnot limited bydiffusion. For example, this allows the octopus to have amuch more complex body plan,
withbranchingtentacles,comparedtoasnail.Inmanycases,aclosedcirculatorysystemalsoallowsthedevelopment
of larger organisms. 34 There are nematodes with separate sexes and hermaphrodites in addition to species that
reproduce parthenogentically. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has a self-fertilizing hermaphrodite sex and a
pure male sex. 36 The Arthropoda include the Hexapoda, which are mandibulates with six legs; the Myriapoda,
which are mandibulates with many legs and include the centipedes and millipedes; the Crustacea, which are mostly
marine mandibulates; and the Chelicerata, which include the spiders and scorpions and their kin. 38 Insects are
the predominant members of the subphylum Hexapoda. Advantages: Pollination;Eliminate pests;Cheap food
source;Producefoodproducts(ex.honey)Disadvantages: Damagetofoodcrops;Transmitdiseasetoagricultural
workers;Contaminate/spoil food;Destroy buildings storing food crops
Chapter 29
1Figure29.3A 3Figure29.24TheancestorofmodernTestudinesmayatonetimehavehadasecondopeningin
theskull,butovertimethismighthavebeenlost. 4B 6A 8B 10D 12C 14D 16D 18D 20A 22B 23The
characteristic features of the phylum Chordata are a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a
post-analtail. 25Comparisonofhagfisheswithlampreysshowsthatthecraniumevolvedfirstinearlyvertebrates,as
itisseeninhagfishes,whichevolvedearlierthanlampreys.Thiswasfollowedbyevolutionofthevertebralcolumn,a
primitiveformofwhichisseeninlampreysandnotinhagfishes. 27Amoistenvironmentisrequired,asfrogeggslack
ashellanddehydratequicklyindryenvironments. 29Frogs(Anura)begintheirlivesastadpoles,organismsrestricted
toanaquaticenvironmentthatusegillstobreathe.Aftermetamorphosis,mostfrogsdeveloplungsandlosetheirgills,
althoughtheywillalsocontinuetoperformgasexchangethroughtheirskin.Thelungsofanadultfrogallowtheanimal
to move out of the water, and become terrestrial. This limits competition between adults and tadpoles by opening
new living space and food sources to the adult. 31 Lizards differ from snakes by having eyelids, external ears, and
less kinematic skulls. 33 This is suggested by similarities observed between theropod fossils and birds, specifically
in the design of the hip and wrist bones, as well as the presence of a furcula, or wishbone, formed by the fusing of
theclavicles. 35Ostrichesandpenguinsareflightlessbirds,butostrichesareentirelyterrestrial,whilepenguinsdive
andswimintheoceantofindfood.Therefore,penguinsandflightbirdsliketernshavesimilarcheststructureswitha
keelsternumandrelativelylargepectoralmuscles(penguinsusetheirwingsto“fly”throughwater).Conversely,since
ostriches move by running, they do not have a keel to their sternum. They also have smaller pectoral muscles than
wouldbepredictedforaflyingbirdtheirsize,buthavelargerthighmuscles. 37Insomemammals,thecerebralcortex
ishighlyfolded, allowingforgreater surfaceareathanasmoothcortex. Theopticlobesaredividedintotwopartsin
mammals. Eutherian mammals also possess a specialized structure that links the two cerebral hemispheres, called
thecorpuscallosum. 39ArchaicHomosapiensdifferedfrommodernhumansbyhavingathickskullandaprominent
brow ridge, and lacking a prominent chin.
Chapter 30
1Figure30.7AandB.Thecortex,pith,andepidermisaremadeofparenchymacells. 3Figure30.34B. 4C 6C 8
A 10B 12A 14B 16C 18B 20D 22C 24C 26C 27Lawngrassesandothermonocotshaveanintercalary
meristem,whichisaregionofmeristematictissueatthebaseoftheleafblade.Thisisbeneficialtotheplantbecause
it can continue to grow even when the tip of the plant is removed by grazing or mowing. 29 Stomata allow gases
to enter and exit the plant. Guard cells regulate the opening and closing of stomata. If these cells did not function
PAGE: 1549
1538 Answer Key
correctly,aplantcouldnotgetthecarbondioxideneededforphotosynthesis,norcoulditreleasetheoxygenproduced
by photosynthesis. 31 In woody plants, the cork cambium is the outermost lateral meristem; it produces new cells
towardstheinterior,whichenablestheplanttoincreaseingirth.Thecorkcambiumalsoproducescorkcellstowards
theexterior,whichprotecttheplantfromphysicaldamagewhilereducingwaterloss. 33Annualringscanalsoindicate
the climate conditions that prevailed during each growing season. 35 A tap root system has a single main root that
growsdown.Afibrousrootsystemformsadensenetworkofrootsthatisclosertothesoilsurface.Anexampleofa
taprootsystemisacarrot.Grassessuchaswheat,rice,andcornareexamplesoffibrousrootsystems.Fibrousroot
systemsarefoundinmonocots;taprootsystemsarefoundindicots. 37Monocotshaveleaveswithparallelvenation,
anddicotshaveleaveswithreticulate,net-likevenation. 39Theprocessofbulkflowmoveswaterupthexylemand
movesphotosynthates(solutes)upanddownthephloem. 41Gravitropismwillallowrootstodigdeepintothesoilto
findwaterandminerals,whereastheseedlingwillgrowtowardslighttoenablephotosynthesis. 43Topreventfurther
entry of pathogens, stomata close, even if they restrict entry of CO2. Some pathogens secrete virulence factors that
inhibit the closing of stomata. Abscisic acid is the stress hormone responsible for inducing closing of stomata.
Chapter 31
1Figure31.6Theaircontentofthesoildecreases. 3Figure31.10Soybeansareabletofixnitrogenintheirroots,
whicharenotharvestedattheendofthegrowingseason.Thebelowgroundnitrogencanbeusedinthenextseason
bythecorn. 4C 6A 8D 10B 12B 14A 16Deficienciesinthesenutrientscouldresultinstuntedgrowth,slow
growth, and chlorosis. 18 Answers may vary. Essential macronutrients include carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulfur. Essential micronutrients include iron, manganese, boron,
molybdenum, copper, zinc, chlorine, nickel, cobalt, sodium, and silicon. 20 Parent material, climate, topography,
biologicalfactors,andtimeaffectsoilformation.Parentmaterialisthematerialinwhichsoilsform.Climatedescribes
howtemperature,moisture,andwindcausedifferentpatternsofweathering,influencingthecharacteristicsofthesoil.
Topographyaffectsthecharacteristicsandfertilityofasoil.Biologicalfactorsincludethepresenceoflivingorganisms
that greatly affect soil formation. Processes such as freezing and thawing may produce cracks in rocks; plant roots
can penetrate these crevices and produce more fragmentation. Time affects soil because soil develops over long
periods. 22 Because it is natural and does not require use of a nonrenewable resource, such as natural gas. 24 A
nodule results from the symbiosis between a plant and bacterium. Within nodules, the process of nitrogen fixation
allows the plant to obtain nitrogen from the air.
Chapter 32
1Figure32.3Pollen(orsperm);carpellate;staminate. 3Figure32.20B 4B 6A 8B 10D 12A 14D 16Inside
theflowerarethereproductiveorgansoftheplant.Thestamenisthemalereproductiveorgan.Pollenisproducedin
the stamen. The carpel is the female reproductive organ. The ovary is the swollen base of the carpel where ovules
are found. Not all flowers have every one of the four parts. 18 A typical flower has four main parts, or whorls: the
calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoecium. The outermost whorl of the flower has green, leafy structures known as
sepals, which are collectively called the calyx. It helps to protect the unopened bud. The second whorl is made up
ofbrightlycoloredpetalsthatareknowncollectivelyasthecorolla.Thethirdwhorlisthemalereproductivestructure
knownastheandroecium.Theandroeciumhasstamens,whichhaveanthersonastalkorfilament.Pollengrainsare
borneontheanthers.Thegynoeciumisthefemalereproductivestructure.Thecarpelistheindividualstructureofthe
gynoeciumandhasastigma,thestalkorstyle,andtheovary. 20Manyseedsenteraperiodofinactivityorextremely
lowmetabolicactivity,aprocessknownasdormancy.Dormancyallowsseedstotideoverunfavorableconditionsand
germinateonreturntofavorableconditions.Favorableconditionscouldbeasdiverseasmoisture,light,cold,fire,or
chemicaltreatments.Afterheavyrains,manynewseedlingsemerge.Forestfiresalsoleadtotheemergenceofnew
seedlings. 22Asexualreproductiondoesnotrequiretheexpenditureoftheplant’sresourcesandenergythatwould
beinvolvedinproducingaflower,attractingpollinators,ordispersingseeds.Asexualreproductionresultsinplantsthat
are genetically identical to the parent plant, since there is no mixing of male and female gametes, resulting in better
survival. The cuttings or buds taken from an adult plant produce progeny that mature faster and are sturdier than a
seedling grown from a seed. 24 Plant species that complete their life cycle in one season are known as annuals.
Biennials complete their life cycle in two seasons. In the first season, the plant has a vegetative phase, whereas in
thenextseason,itcompletesitsreproductivephase.Perennials,suchasthemagnolia,completetheirlifecycleintwo
years or more.
Chapter 33
1 Figure33.11 A 3 Figure33.23 Pyrogens increase body temperature by causing the blood vessels to constrict,
inducingshivering,andstoppingsweatglandsfromsecretingfluid. 4A 6C 8D 10D 12C 14D 16D 18A 20
B 22C 24A 26B 28A 29Diffusioniseffectiveoveraveryshortdistance.Ifacellexceedsthisdistanceinitssize,
thecenterofthecellcannotgetadequatenutrientsnorcanitexpelenoughwastetosurvive.Tocompensateforthis,
cellscanlooselyadheretoeachotherinaliquidmedium,ordevelopintomulti-celledorganismsthatusecirculatory
andrespiratorysystemstodelivernutrientsandremovewastes. 31Inanopencirculatorysystem,theheart(s)pump
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1550
Answer Key 1539
blood into an open cavity, bathing the tissues. As the blood diffuses through the tissue space, it delivers nutrients in
exchange for receiving metabolic wastes. The blood then diffuses back to the heart to be pumped again. However,
since this system relies on diffusion, the size of animals that use an open circulatory system is limited to fairly small
volumessothatthebloodcandiffuserapidlyenoughtoefficientlyexchangemoleculeswiththetissues. 33Squamous
epithelia can be either simple or stratified. As a single layer of cells, it presents a very thin epithelia that minimally
inhibitsdiffusion.Asastratifiedepithelia,thesurfacecellscanbesloughedoffandthecellsindeeperlayersprotect
theunderlyingtissuesfromdamage. 35Inmultiplesclerosis,theimmunesystemattackstheoligodendrocytes.The
deathofoligodendrocytesresultsinthelossoftheinsulatingsheatharoundtheaxonoftheneurons.Whenthesheath
isgone,theelectricalimpulsestravelmuchmoreslowlydownthelengthoftheaxon. 37Anadjustmenttoachange
in the internal or external environment requires a change in the direction of the stimulus. A negative feedback loop
accomplishes this, while a positive feedback loop would continue the stimulus and result in harm to the animal. 39
Diabetes is often associated with a lack in production of insulin. Without insulin, blood glucose levels go up after a
meal, but never go back down to normal levels.
Chapter 34
1 Figure34.11 B 3 Figure34.19 C 4 D 6 C 8 B 10 D 12 C 14 A 16 B 18 B 20 Animals with a polygastric
digestive system have a multi-chambered stomach. The four compartments of the stomach are called the rumen,
reticulum, omasum, and abomasum. These chambers contain many microbes that breakdown the cellulose and
ferment the ingested food. The abomasum is the “true” stomach and is the equivalent of a monogastric stomach
chamber where gastric juices are secreted. The four-compartment gastric chamber provides larger space and the
microbial support necessary for ruminants to digest plant material. 22 Accessory organs play an important role in
producing and delivering digestive juices to the intestine during digestion and absorption. Specifically, the salivary
glands,liver,pancreas,andgallbladderplayimportant roles.Malfunction ofanyoftheseorganscanleadtodisease
states. 24 The stomach and the teeth both perform mechanical digestion, which is physically (as opposed to
chemically) breaking the food into smaller components. This exposes a larger surface area for chemical digestion
andreleaseofnutrients.Theteetharevitaltomastication,whichbreakslargebitesoffooddownintosmallerpieces
that are easily swallowed. The stomach’s muscle contractions churn the food to expose all particles to the acid and
digestiveenzymes. 26Minerals—suchaspotassium,sodium,andcalcium—arerequiredforthefunctioningofmany
cellularprocesses,includingmusclecontractionandnerveconduction.Whilemineralsarerequiredintraceamounts,
not having minerals in the diet can be potentially harmful. 28 Malnutrition, often in the form of not getting enough
calories or not enough of the essential nutrients, can have severe consequences. Many malnourished children have
visionanddentalproblems,andovertheyearsmaydevelopmanyserioushealthproblems. 30Fatsareanessential
component of a healthy diet, and needed by the body to function. Fats are essential for many processes, including
theabsorptionoffat-solublevitaminsandproductionofsomehormones.Fatsalsosendasatiationsignaltothebrain
that regulates hunger. Without fats in their diets many people may have actually consumed more calories, which
would have resulted in weight gain. 32 The gut microbiome includes all the bacteria that aid in chemical digestion
in the intestines. Changing its composition can change the way that food is digested since not all bacteria have
the same macromolecule-digesting enzymes. Additionally, changes in gut microbiome can lead to the establishment
of pathogenic bacteria populations that cause inflammation in the gut or other disease. 34 Hormones control the
different digestive enzymes that are secreted in the stomach and the intestine during the process of digestion and
absorption. For example, the hormone gastrin stimulates stomach acid secretion in response to food intake. The
hormone somatostatin stops the release of stomach acid. 36 Somatostatin is the hormone that inhibits the release
of HCl into the stomach lumen after the chyme has moved to the intestine. If the receptor for somatostatin is
nonfunctional, somatostatin cannot signal to the stomach parietal cells to stop acid secretion. Thus, acid secretion
will continue when there is no food present, and can cause damage to the stomach tissue. However, as long as the
stomach remains intact the mutation should not slow digestion since acid will always be present in the stomach to
digest any new boluses of food.
Chapter 35
1 Figure35.3 B 3 Figure35.26 D 4 C 6 B 8 B 10 C 12 D 14 B 16 C 18 A 20 C 22 D 24 Neurons contain
organellescommontoallcells,suchasanucleusandmitochondria.Theyareuniquebecausetheycontaindendrites,
which can receive signals from other neurons, and axons that can send these signals to other cells. 26 A single
axon means that a neuron can only send one signal at a time (one electrical impulse down the length of the axon).
However, since the axon has multiple terminals it can send the signal to several other cells at once. This ensures
that the signal is rapidly propagated to the rest of the body. 28 An action potential travels along an axon until it
depolarizesthemembraneatanaxonterminal.Depolarizationofthemembranecausesvoltage-gatedCa2+channels
toopenandCa2+toenterthecell.Theintracellularcalciuminfluxcausessynapticvesiclescontainingneurotransmitter
tofusewiththepresynapticmembrane.Theneurotransmitterdiffusesacrossthesynapticcleftandbindstoreceptors
on the postsynaptic membrane. Depending on the specific neurotransmitter and postsynaptic receptor, this action
can cause positive (excitatory postsynaptic potential) or negative (inhibitory postsynaptic potential) ions to enter the
PAGE: 1551
1540 Answer Key
cell. 30Todeterminethefunctionofaspecificbrainarea,scientistscanlookatpatientswhohavedamageinthatbrain
areaandseewhatsymptomstheyexhibit.Researcherscandisablethebrainstructuretemporarilyusingtranscranial
magneticstimulation.Theycandisableorremovetheareainananimalmodel.fMRIcanbeusedtocorrelatespecific
functions with increased blood flow to brain regions. 32 Potential answers: Frontal lobe. Alzheimer’s patients
experiencechangesinpersonality,judgment,andbehavior.;Parietallobe.Alzheimer’spatientsexperiencedifficulties
withrecallingandusinglanguageasdiseaseprogresses.;Temporallobe.Thehippocampusisoneofthemainareasof
thebrainaffectedinAlzheimer’sdisease.Patientslosetheabilitytomakenewmemoriesandaccessmemories. 34
The sensory-somatic nervous system transmits sensory information from the skin, muscles, and sensory organs
to the CNS. It also sends motor commands from the CNS to the muscles, causing them to contract. 36 Many
events in modern human life are not physical dangers; instead they are events we think of as “stress.” Finding the
money to pay your student loans or being nervous before a test still activate the sympathetic nervous system, but
thesesituationsdonotrequirethefight-or-flightresponsetosurvive. 38Possibletreatmentsforpatientswithmajor
depressionincludepsychotherapyandprescriptionmedications.MAOinhibitordrugsinhibitthebreakdownofcertain
neurotransmitters (including dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine) in the synaptic cleft. SSRI medications inhibit the
reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic neuron.
Chapter 36
1 Figure36.5 D 3 Figure36.18 A 4 B 6 A 8 B 10 B 12 A 14 B 16 D 18 B 20 B 22 D 24 Transmission of
sensoryinformationfromthereceptortothecentralnervoussystemwillbeimpaired,andthus,perceptionofstimuli,
which occurs in the brain, will be halted. 26 General sensory receptors are located throughout the body in the skin
and internal organs. Conversely, special senses are all located in the head region, and require specialized organs.
28Painisasubjectivesensationthatreliesonthebraininterpretingthenociceptionsignalsreceivedbythesensory
receptors(perception).Therefore,eventhoughtwopeopleexperienceidenticalstimuli,theirbrainscanperceivethem
asverydifferentsensoryexperiences. 30Theanimalmightnotbeabletorecognizethedifferencesinfoodsources
andthusmightnotbeabletodiscriminatebetweenspoiledfoodandsafefoodorbetweenfoodsthatcontainnecessary
nutrients,suchasproteins,andfoodsthatdonot. 32Thesoundwouldslowdown,becauseitistransmittedthrough
the particles (gas) and there are fewer particles (lower density) at higher altitudes. 34 The first step in processing a
soundinhumansisthecollectionofsoundbythepinna.Whenapersonencountersasound,thepinnaonbothsides
oftheheadwillcollectthevibrations.Sincethewavesoriginatefromasinglesite,thetwopinnaewillnotcollectthe
soundattheexactsametime.Whenthesoundisprocessedbytheauditorysystem,thebrainisabletousethisslight
difference in timing to determine the location of the sound. 36 The photoreceptors tonically inhibit the bipolar cells,
and stimulation of the receptors turns this inhibition off, activating the bipolar cells.
Chapter 37
1 Figure37.5 Proteins unfold, or denature, at higher temperatures. 3 Figure37.14 Patient A has symptoms
associated with decreased metabolism, and may be suffering from hypothyroidism. Patient B has symptoms
associated with increased metabolism, and may be suffering from hyperthyroidism. 4 C 6 D 8 D 10 A 12 C 14
A 16 B 18 C 20 C 21 Although there are many different hormones in the human body, they can be divided into
threeclassesbasedontheirchemicalstructure:lipid-derived,aminoacid-derived,andpeptidehormones.Oneofthe
keydistinguishingfeaturesofthelipid-derivedhormonesisthattheycandiffuseacrossplasmamembraneswhereas
theaminoacid-derivedandpeptidehormonescannot. 23Glucagonactsinoppositiontoinsulin,thepeptidehormone
that stimulates cellstotakeupglucosefromthebloodstream, tomaintain bloodglucosewithin healthy levels.When
glucagonisreleasedintothebloodinresponsetofallingbloodsugarlevels,thelivercatabolizesitsglycogenstores
to release glucose. If glucagon does not function properly, the blood sugar will drop too low from insulin signaling
drivingcellularuptakefromtheblood. 25Dependingonthelocationoftheproteinreceptoronthetargetcellandthe
chemical structure of the hormone, hormones can mediate changes directly by binding to intracellular receptors and
modulatinggenetranscription,orindirectlybybindingtocellsurfacereceptorsandstimulatingsignalingpathways. 27
In addition to producing FSH and LH, the anterior pituitary also produces the hormone prolactin (PRL) in females.
Prolactinstimulatestheproductionofmilkbythemammaryglandsfollowingchildbirth.Prolactinlevelsareregulated
bythehypothalamichormonesprolactin-releasinghormone(PRH)andprolactin-inhibitinghormone(PIH)whichisnow
knowntobedopamine.PRHstimulatesthereleaseofprolactinandPIHinhibitsit.Theposteriorpituitaryreleasesthe
hormoneoxytocin,whichstimulatescontractionsduringchildbirth.Theuterinesmoothmusclesarenotverysensitive
to oxytocin until late in pregnancy when the number of oxytocin receptors in the uterus peaks. Stretching of tissues
intheuterusandvaginastimulatesoxytocinreleaseinchildbirth.Contractionsincreaseinintensityasbloodlevelsof
oxytocin rise until the birth is complete. 29 The stressed patients that catch a cold must be chronically (long-term)
stressed. Long-term stress results in the production of glucocorticoids, such as cortisol. These hormones inhibit the
functionoftheimmunesystem,whichmakespeoplemoresusceptibletoinfectiousdiseases. 31Thetermhumoralis
derivedfromthetermhumor,whichreferstobodilyfluidssuchasblood.Humoralstimulirefertothecontrolofhormone
releaseinresponsetochangesinextracellularfluidssuchasbloodortheionconcentrationintheblood.Forexample,
a rise in blood glucose levels triggers the pancreatic release of insulin. Insulin causes blood glucose levels to drop,
whichsignalsthepancreastostopproducinginsulininanegativefeedbackloop.Hormonalstimulirefertotherelease
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1552
Answer Key 1541
ofahormoneinresponsetoanotherhormone.Anumberofendocrineglandsreleasehormoneswhenstimulatedby
hormonesreleasedbyotherendocrineorgans.Forexample,thehypothalamusproduceshormonesthatstimulatethe
anteriorpituitary.Theanteriorpituitaryinturnreleaseshormonesthatregulatehormoneproductionbyotherendocrine
glands. For example, the anterior pituitary releases thyroid-stimulating hormone, which stimulates the thyroid gland
to produce the hormones T3 and T4. As blood concentrations of T3 and T4 rise they inhibit both the pituitary and
the hypothalamus in a negative feedback loop. 33 The main mineralocorticoid is aldosterone, which regulates the
concentration of ions in urine, sweat, and saliva. Aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex is stimulated by a
decreaseinbloodconcentrationsofsodiumions,bloodvolume,orbloodpressure,oranincreaseinbloodpotassium
levels. 35 Damage to the posterior pituitary gland would prevent the release of ADH and oxytocin into the body.
However,thehypothalamus’sabilitytoproduceADHwouldnotbeaffected.Thehypothalamuswouldalsostillbeable
to produce and release inhibiting hormones to regulate the anterior pituitary.
Chapter 38
1Figure38.19B 3Figure38.38InthepresenceofSarin,acetycholineisnotremovedfromthesynapse,resultingin
continuous stimulation of the muscle plasma membrane. At first, muscle activity is intense and uncontrolled, but the
iongradientsdissipate,soelectricalsignalsintheT-tubulesarenolongerpossible.Theresultisparalysis,leadingto
deathbyasphyxiation. 4A 6D 8D 10C 12C 14D 16D 18A 20D 22D 24D 25Thefemalepelvisistilted
forwardandiswider,lighter,andshallowerthanthemalepelvis.Italsohasapubicanglethatisbroaderthanthemale
pelvis. 27Hydrostaticskeletonsprotectinternalorgansfromharmbycushioningthemfromexternalshock.However,
these skeletons do not provide protection from external trauma. Exoskeletons are hard structures that protect the
organsfromdamagecausedbytheirenvironment.However,sincetheyarerigid,theyprovidelittleshockabsorption,
so the animal will need to have other ways of cushioning its internal organs. 29 Compact bone tissue forms the
hardexternallayerofallbonesandconsistsofosteons.Compactbonetissueisprominentinareasofboneatwhich
stresses are applied in only a few directions. Spongy bone tissue forms the inner layer of all bones and consists of
trabeculae.Spongyboneisprominentinareasofbonesthatarenotheavilystressedoratwhichstressesarrivefrom
many directions. 31 Thalidomide effected the development of the long bones of the arms, disrupting endochondral
ossification. The bones would have been able to develop into a template made of the calcified cartilage matrix, but
new blood vessels could not be created. Since no vessels invade the template, the structure is not converted into
trabecularbone. 33Elevationisthemovementofaboneupward,suchaswhentheshouldersareshrugged,lifting
the scapulae. Depression is the downward movement of a bone, such as after the shoulders are shrugged and the
scapulaereturntotheirnormalpositionfromanelevatedposition. 35BecauseATPisrequiredformyosintorelease
fromactin,muscleswouldremainrigidlycontracteduntilmoreATPwasavailableforthemyosincross-bridgerelease.
This is why dead vertebrates undergo rigor mortis. 37 Neurons will not be able to release neurotransmitter without
calcium. Skeletal muscles have calcium stored and don’t need any from the outside.
Chapter 39
1 Figure39.7 B 3 Figure39.20 The blood pH will drop and hemoglobin affinity for oxygen will decrease. 4 A 6
B 8D 10B 12D 14C 16Themainbronchusistheconduitinthelungthatfunnelsairtotheairwayswheregas
exchangeoccurs.Themainbronchusattachesthelungstotheveryendofthetracheawhereitbifurcates.Thetrachea
isthecartilaginousstructurethatextendsfromthepharynxtotheprimarybronchi.Itservestofunnelairtothelungs.
Thealveoliarethesitesofgasexchange;theyarelocatedattheterminalregionsofthelungandareattachedtothe
respiratorybronchioles.Theacinusisthestructureinthelungwheregasexchangeoccurs. 18FEV1/FVCmeasures
theforcedexpiratoryvolumeinonesecondinrelationtothetotalforcedvitalcapacity(thetotalamountofairthatis
exhaled from the lung from a maximal inhalation). This ratio changes with alterations in lung function that arise from
diseases such as fibrosis, asthma, and COPD. 20 Oxygen moves from the lung to the bloodstream to the tissues
accordingtothepressuregradient.Thisismeasuredasthepartialpressureofoxygen.Iftheamountofoxygendrops
in the inspired air, there would be reduced partial pressure. This would decrease the driving force that moves the
oxygen into the blood and into the tissues. P isalso reduced at high elevations: P at high elevations islower
O2 O2
thanatsealevelbecausethetotalatmosphericpressureislessthanatmosphericpressureatsealevel. 22Increased
airway resistance increases the volume and pressure in the lung; therefore, the intrapleural pressure would be less
negative and breathing would be more difficult. 24 The lung is particularly susceptible to changes in the magnitude
anddirectionofgravitationalforces.Whensomeoneisstandingorsittingupright,thepleuralpressuregradientleadsto
increasedventilationfurtherdowninthelung. 26Carbonmonoxidehasahigheraffinityforhemoglobinthanoxygen.
This means that carbon monoxide will preferentially bind to hemoglobin over oxygen. Administration of 100 percent
oxygen is an effective therapy because at that concentration, oxygen will displace the carbon monoxide from the
hemoglobin.
Chapter 40
1Figure40.10C 3Figure40.17Bloodinthelegsisfarthestawayfromtheheartandhastoflowuptoreachit. 4
PAGE: 1553
1542 Answer Key
A 6 C 8 C 10 C 12 A 14 A 16 A closed circulatory system is a closed-loop system, in which blood is not free in
acavity.Bloodisseparatefromthebodilyinterstitial fluidandcontainedwithinbloodvessels.Inthistypeofsystem,
bloodcirculatesunidirectionallyfromtheheartaroundthesystemiccirculatoryroute,andthenreturnstotheheart. 18
Redbloodcellsarecoatedwithproteinscalledantigensmadeofglycolipidsandglycoproteins.WhentypeAandtype
B blood are mixed, the blood agglutinates because of antibodies in the plasma that bind with the opposing antigen.
Type O blood has no antigens. The Rh blood group has either the Rh antigen (Rh+) or no Rh antigen (Rh–). 20
Lymphcapillariestakefluidfromthebloodtothelymphnodes.Thelymphnodesfilterthelymphbypercolationthrough
connective tissue filled with white blood cells. The white blood cells remove infectious agents, such as bacteria and
viruses,tocleanthelymphbeforeitreturnstothebloodstream. 22Thecapillariesbasicallyexchangematerialswith
their surroundings. Their walls are very thin and are made of one or two layers of cells, where gases, nutrients, and
waste are diffused. They are distributed as beds, complex networks that link arteries as well as veins.
Chapter 41
1Figure41.5C 3Figure41.8Loopdiureticsdecreasetheexcretionofsaltintotherenalmedulla,therebyreducing
itsosmolality.Asaresult,lesswaterisexcretedintothemedullabythedescendinglimb,andmorewaterisexcreted
asurine. 4B 6A 8B 10C 12D 14C 16C 18Excretionallowsanorganismtoriditselfofwastemoleculesthat
couldbetoxicifallowedtoaccumulate.Italsoallowstheorganismtokeeptheamountofwateranddissolvedsolutes
in balance. 20 The loop of Henle is part of the renal tubule that loops into the renal medulla. In the loop of Henle,
thefiltrateexchangessolutesandwaterwiththerenalmedullaandthevasarecta(theperitubularcapillarynetwork).
Thevasarectaactsasthecountercurrentexchanger.Thekidneysmaintaintheosmolalityoftherestofthebodyata
constant 300 mOsm by concentrating the filtrate as it passes through the loop of Henle. 22 The removal of wastes,
which could otherwise be toxic to an organism, is extremely important for survival. Having organs that specialize in
this process and that operate separately from other organs provides a measure of safety for the organism. 24 It
is believed that the urea cycle evolved to adapt to a changing environment when terrestrial life forms evolved. Arid
conditions probably led to the evolution of the uric acid pathway as a means of conserving water. 26 Hormones
are small molecules that act as messengers within the body. Different regions of the nephron bear specialized cells,
which have receptors to respond to chemical messengers and hormones. The hormones carry messages to the
kidney.Thesehormonalcueshelpthekidneyssynchronizetheosmoticneedsofthebody.Hormoneslikeepinephrine,
norepinephrine, renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, anti-diuretic hormone, and atrial natriuretic peptide help regulate the
needs of the body as well as the communication between the different organ systems.
Chapter 42
1 Figure42.11 C 3 Figure42.16 If the blood of the mother and fetus mixes, memory cells that recognize the Rh
antigen canform late inthe first pregnancy. During subsequent pregnancies, these memorycellslaunch animmune
attackonthefetalbloodcells.Injectionofanti-Rhantibodyduringthefirstpregnancypreventstheimmuneresponse
fromoccurring. 4D 6A 8D 10B 12D 14C 16C 18D 20C 22If theMHCImoleculesexpressedondonor
cells differ from the MHC I molecules expressed on recipient cells, NK cells may identify the donor cells as “non-
self” and produce perforin and granzymes to induce the donor cells to undergo apoptosis, which would destroy the
transplantedorgan. 24Anantigenisamoleculethatreactswithsomecomponentoftheimmuneresponse(antibody,
B cell receptor, T cell receptor). An epitope is the region on the antigen through which binding with the immune
componentactuallyoccurs. 26TheTH1responseinvolvesthesecretionofcytokinestostimulatemacrophagesand
CTLsandimprovetheirdestructionofintracellularpathogensandtumorcells.Itisassociatedwithinflammation.The
TH2responseisinvolvedinthestimulationofBcellsintoplasmacellsthatsynthesizeandsecreteantibodies. 28T
cellsbindantigensthathavebeendigestedandembeddedinMHCmoleculesbyAPCs.Incontrast,Bcellsfunction
themselvesasAPCstobindintact,unprocessedantigens. 30Crossreactivityofantibodiescanbebeneficialwhenit
allows an individual's immune system to respond to an array of similar pathogens after being exposed to just one of
them.Apotentialcostofcrossreactivityisanantibodyresponsetopartsofthebody(self)inadditiontotheappropriate
antigen.
Chapter 43
1 Figure43.8 D 3 Figure43.17 B 4 A 6 D 8 A 10 A 12 C 14 A 16 A 18 C 20 D 22 A 24 B 26 B 28 D 30
D 31 Sexual reproduction produces a new combination of genes in the offspring that may better enable them to
survivechangesintheenvironmentandassistinthesurvivalofthespecies. 33Externalfertilizationcancreatelarge
numbers of offspring without requiring specialized delivery or reproductive support organs. Offspring develop and
maturequicklycomparedtointernallyfertilizingspecies.Adisadvantageisthattheoffspringareoutintheenvironment
and predation can account for large loss of offspring. The embryos are susceptible to changes in the environment,
whichfurtherdepletestheirnumbers.Internallyfertilizingspeciescontroltheirenvironmentandprotecttheiroffspring
frompredatorsbutmusthavespecializedorganstocompletethesetasksandusuallyproducefewerembryos. 35In
phaseone(excitement),vasodilationleadstovasocongestionandenlargementoferectiletissues.Vaginalsecretions
are released to lubricate the vagina during intercourse. In phase two (plateau), stimulation continues, the outer third
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1554
Answer Key 1543
of the vaginal wall enlarges with blood, and breathing and heart rate increase. In phase three (orgasm), rhythmic,
involuntarycontractionsofmusclesoccur.Inthemale,reproductiveaccessoryglandsandtubulesconstrict,depositing
semen in the urethra; then, the urethra contracts, expelling the semen through the penis. In women, the uterus and
vaginal muscles contract in waves that may last slightly less than a second each. In phase four (resolution), the
processes listed in the first three phases reverse themselves and return to their normal state. Men experience a
refractory period in which they cannot maintain an erection or ejaculate for a period of time ranging from minutes to
hours. Women do not experience a refractory period. 37 Negative feedback in the male system is supplied through
twohormones:inhibinandtestosterone.InhibinisproducedbySertolicellswhenthespermcountexceedssetlimits.
ThehormoneinhibitsGnRHandFSH,decreasingtheactivityoftheSertolicells.Increasedlevelsoftestosteroneaffect
thereleaseofbothGnRHandLH,decreasingtheactivityoftheLeydigcells,resultingindecreasedtestosteroneand
sperm production. 39 The first trimester lays down the basic structures of the body, including the limb buds, heart,
eyes, and the liver. The second trimester continues the development of all of the organs and systems established
during the first trimester. The placenta takes over the production of estrogen and high levels of progesterone and
handlesthenutrientandwasterequirementsofthefetus.Thethirdtrimesterexhibitsthegreatestgrowthofthefetus,
culminating in labor and delivery. 41 Multiple sperm can fuse with the egg, resulting in polyspermy. The resulting
embryoisnotgeneticallyviableanddieswithinafewdays. 43Organsformfromthegermlayersthroughtheprocess
of differentiation. During differentiation, the embryonic stem cells express a specific set of genes that will determine
their ultimate fate as a cell type. For example, some cells in the ectoderm will express the genes specific to skin
cells.Asaresult,thesecellswilldifferentiateintoepidermalcells.Theprocessofdifferentiationisregulatedbycellular
signaling cascades.
Chapter 44
1Figure44.10Tropicallakesdon’tfreeze,sotheydon’tundergospringturnoverinthesamewaytemperatelakesdo.
However,stratificationdoesoccur,aswellasseasonalturnover. 3Figure44.21B.thephoticzone,theintertidalzone,
theneriticzone,andtheoceaniczone 4B 6D 8D 10D 12C 14Ecologistsworkinginorganismalorpopulation
ecology might ask similar questions about how the biotic and abiotic conditions affect particular organisms and,
thus, might find collaboration to be mutually beneficial. Levels of ecology such as community ecology or ecosystem
ecology might pose greater challenges for collaboration because these areas are very broad and may include many
different environmental components. 16 Ocean upwelling is a continual process that occurs year-round. Spring and
fallturnoverinfreshwaterlakesandponds,however,isaseasonalprocessthatoccursduetotemperaturechanges
inthewaterthattakeplaceduringspringtimewarmingandautumncooling.Bothoceanupwellingandspringandfall
turnover enable nutrients in the organic materials at the bottom of the body of water to be recycled and reused by
living things. 18 Fire is less common in desert biomes than in temperate grasslands because deserts have low net
primary productivity and, thus, verylittle plant biomass to fuel afire. 20Bogs arelow inoxygen and high inorganic
acids. The low oxygen content and the low pH both slow the rate of decomposition. 22 Natural processes such as
theMilankovitchcycles,variationinsolarintensity,andvolcaniceruptionscancauseperiodic,intermittentchangesin
globalclimate.Humanactivity,intheformofemissionsfromtheburningoffossilfuels,hascausedaprogressiverise
in the levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Chapter 45
1Figure45.2Smalleranimalsrequirelessfoodandotherresources,sotheenvironmentcansupportmoreofthem. 3
Figure45.16 Stage 4 represents a population that is decreasing. 4 C 6 A 8 A 10 D 12 C 14 A 16 D 18 A 20
B 22 D 24 C 26 D 28 B 30 The researcher would mark a certain number of penguins with a tag, release them
backintothepopulation,and,atalatertime,recapturepenguinstoseewhatpercentageoftherecapturedpenguins
wastagged.Thispercentagewouldallowanestimationofthesizeofthepenguinpopulation. 32Parentalcareisnot
feasiblefororganismshavingmanyoffspringbecausetheydonothavetheenergyavailabletotakecareofoffspring.
Mostoftheirenergybudgetisusedintheformationofseedsoroffspring,sothereislittleleftforparentalcare.Also,
thesheernumberofoffspringwouldmakeindividualparentalcareimpossible. 34Inthefirstpartofthecurve,when
few individuals of the species are present and resources are plentiful, growth is exponential, similar to a J-shaped
curve. Later, growth slows due to the species using up resources. Finally, the population levels off at the carrying
capacity of the environment, and it is relatively stable over time. 36 If a natural disaster such as a fire happened in
thewinter,whenpopulationsarelow,itwouldhaveagreatereffectontheoverallpopulationanditsrecoverythanif
the same disaster occurred during the summer, when population levels are high. 38 Continued exponential human
population growth results in the human population requiring more resources to sustain itself. These resources are
usually taken at the expense of the environment and the organisms that rely on the resources in that environment
(e.g.,habitatdestructionforhumandevelopment,waterreroutingforirrigation,etc.).Thecontinueduseoffossilfuels
to generate power for human activities also contributes to climate change, changing climates in some areas so that
certainspeciescannolongersurvivethere. 40JaguarsareanapexpredatorintheAmazon,eatingavarietyofprey
animals and not serving as prey to any other predators. Through predation, they control the population sizes of the
smallerherbivoresandomnivores.Ifjaguarsweretodisappearfromtheecosystem,thesmallerherbivorepopulations
woulddramaticallyincrease,andcouldoverconsumetheplantpopulations. 42Animalsthatuseauralorpheromone
PAGE: 1555
1544 Answer Key
signals to communicate with potential mates are able to signal over longer distances. Sound waves and chemicals
can diffuse out into an environment while visual cues require a direct line of sight between the sender and receiver.
Animalsthatuseauralcuestoacquirematesprobablyexhibitalowerpopulationdensitythananimalsthatusevisual
cues.
Chapter 46
1Figure46.8 Accordingtothefirstlawofthermodynamics,energycanneitherbecreatednordestroyed.Eventually,
allenergyconsumedbylivingsystemsislostasheatorusedforrespiration,andthetotalenergyoutputofthesystem
mustequaltheenergythatwentintoit. 3Figure46.17C:Nitrificationbybacteriaconvertsnitrates(NO3 −)tonitrites
(NO2 −). 4D 6B 8A 10D 12D 14D 16B 18C 20D 22B 24B 26Foodwebsshowinteractinggroupsof
differentspeciesandtheirmanyinterconnectionswitheachotherandtheenvironment.Foodchainsarelinearaspects
offoodwebsthatdescribethesuccessionoforganismsconsumingoneanotheratdefinedtrophiclevels.Foodwebs
areamoreaccuraterepresentationofthestructureanddynamicsofanecosystem.Foodchainsareeasiertomodel
and use for experimental studies. 28 Grazing food webs have a primary producer at their base, which is either a
plant for terrestrial ecosystems or a phytoplankton for aquatic ecosystems. The producers pass their energy to the
varioustrophiclevelsofconsumers.Atthebaseofdetritalfoodwebsarethedecomposers,whichpassthisenergyto
avarietyofotherconsumers.Detritalfoodwebsareimportantforthehealthofmanygrazingfoodwebsbecausethey
eliminatedeadanddecayingorganicmaterial,thus,clearingspaceforneworganismsandremovingpotentialcauses
of disease. By breaking down dead organic matter, decomposers also make mineral nutrients available to primary
producers;thisprocessisavitallinkinnutrientcycling. 30Conceptualmodelsallowecologiststoseethe“bigpicture”
ofhowdifferentcomponentsoftheecosysteminteractwitheachother,energysources,andresources.However,this
approachismoredescriptivethanquantitative,soitisdifficulttomakeconclusionsabouttheresistanceorresilience
of a system. Analytical modeling creates a model that can predict how the ecosystem’s relationships will change in
response to disturbances, but does not convey the complexity of the relationships seen with conceptual modeling.
32NPEmeasurestherateatwhichonetrophiclevelcanuseandmakebiomassfromwhatitattainedintheprevious
level, taking into account respiration, defecation, and heat loss. Endotherms have high metabolism and generate a
lot of body heat. Although this gives them advantages in their activity level in colder temperatures, these organisms
are10timeslessefficientatharnessingtheenergyfromthefoodtheyeatcomparedwithcold-bloodedanimals,and
thushavetoeatmoreandmoreoften. 34Inthisecologicalmodel,theoaktrees(producers)wouldbeatthebottom,
the blue jays would be in the middle level (primary consumer of acorns), and the parasites would be at the top level
(secondaryconsumer).However,thepyramidwouldbeinvertedsinceeachbirdcouldsupportseveralparasites,and
eachtreecouldsupportseveralbirds.Thispyramidwouldappeartobetheoppositeoftheenergyflowpyramid. 36
Manyfactorscankilllifeinalakeorocean,suchaseutrophicationbynutrient-richsurfacerunoff,oilspills,toxicwaste
spills,changesinclimate,andthedumpingofgarbageintotheocean.Eutrophicationisaresultofnutrient-richrunoff
from land using artificial fertilizers high in nitrogen and phosphorus. These nutrients cause the rapid and excessive
growthofmicroorganisms,whichdepletelocaldissolvedoxygenandkillmanyfishandotheraquaticorganisms. 38
Human activity has greatly increased the amount of carbon dioxide gas in the Earth’s atmosphere. The oceanic and
atmosphericlevelsofcarbondioxidearelinkedsothatwhenatmosphericcarbondioxidelevelsincrease,theamount
ofdissolvedcarbondioxideintheoceanalsoincreases(partialpressureofoxygen).Whencarbondioxidedissolvesin
wateritproducestheweakacidbicarbonate.SincetheIndustrialRevolutionthepHoftheoceanhasdropped0.1pH
units, a 30% increase in acidity.
Chapter 47
1 Figure47.6 A. An abundance of fern spores from several species was found below the K-Pg boundary, but none
wasfoundabove. 3B 5C 7C 9B 11D 13C 15D 17ThehypothesizedcauseoftheK–Pgextinctioneventis
anasteroidimpact.Thefirstpieceofevidenceoftheimpactisaspikeiniridium(anelementthatisrareonEarth,but
commoninmeteors)inthegeologicallayersthatmarktheK–Pgtransition.Thesecondpieceofevidenceisanimpact
crater off the Yucatán Peninsula that is the right size and age to have caused the extinction event. 19 Crop plants
arederivedfromwildplants,andgenesfromwildrelativesarefrequentlybroughtintocropvarietiesbyplantbreeders
to add valued characteristics to the crops. If the wild species are lost, then this genetic variation would no longer be
available. 21Humanpopulationgrowthleadstounsustainableresourceuse,whichcauseshabitatdestructiontobuild
newhumansettlements,createagriculturalfields,andsoon.Largerhumanpopulationshavealsoledtounsustainable
fishingandhuntingofwildanimalpopulations.Excessiveuseoffossilfuelsalsoleadstoglobalwarming. 23Larger
preserveswillcontainmorespecies.Preservesshouldhaveabufferaroundthemtoprotectspeciesfromedgeeffects.
Preserves that are round or square are better than preserves with many thin arms.
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1556
Index 1545
INDEX activators,438 alpha cell,1172
active site,187,194 alpha cells,1168
Active transport,159 alpha-helix structure (α-helix),
Symbols
active transport,168 101
acute disease,572,583 alteration,1025,1028
(macroevolution),518
adaptation,495,512 alternation of generations,322
(microevolution),518
adaptive evolution,527,533 alveolar duct,1245
3' UTR,449,455
Adaptive immunity,1309 alveolar ducts,1228
5' cap,449,455
5' UTR,449,455 adaptive immunity,1330 alveolar P O2 ,1245
adaptive radiation,503,512,
60S ribosomal subunit,450
7-methylguanosine cap,421, 1490,1516 alveolar P O2 ,1233
430 Addison’s disease,1162,1172 alveolar sac,1245
α-helix,92 Adduction,1201 alveolar sacs,1228
β-pleated sheet,92 adduction,1215 alveolar ventilation,1238,1245
“degenerate.”,410 adenosine triphosphate,185 alveoli,1228
adenylate cyclase,1172 alveolus,1245
A adenylyl cyclase,1150 Alzheimer’s disease,1096,
adhesion,53,63 1102
A horizon,957,967 adrenal cortex,1167,1172 ambulacral (water vascular)
abdomen,833 adrenal gland,1172 system,838
Abduction,1200 adrenal glands,1167 amino acid,101
abduction,1215 adrenal medulla,1168,1172 amino acid-derived hormone,
abiotic,1375,1403 adrenocorticotropic hormone 1172
aboral madreporite,838 (ACTH),1161,1172 amino acid-derived hormones,
above-ground biomass,1382, Adventitious,721 1146
1403 adventitious,726 Amino acids,87
abscisic acid,940 adventitious root,943 aminoacyl tRNA synthetase,
abscisic acid (ABA),943 adventitious roots,915 430
abscission,939,943 aerobic,605 aminoacyl tRNA synthetases,
absorption spectrum,235,245 aerobic respiration,206,223 426
abstract,18,29 afferent arteriole,1284,1296 aminopeptidase,1054,1060
abyssal zone,1391,1403 affinities,1325 ammonia,1290,1296
Acanthostega,895 affinity,1330 ammonification,607,621
accessory fruit,999 age structure,1411,1451 ammonotelic,1290,1296
Accessory fruits,991 Age structure,1427 amnion,868,895
acclimatization,1025,1028 aggregate fruit,991,999 amniote,895
acellular,583 aggressive display,1451 amniote embryo,867
acetyl CoA,206,223 Aggressive displays,1444 amniotic egg,867
acetylcholine,1093,1102 Agnatha,855 amoebocyte,841
acetylcholinesterase,1213, air sacs,878 amoebocytes,791,791
1215 aldosterone,1151,1172 Amphiarthroses,1200
acid,54,63 aleurone,989,999 amphiarthrosis,1215
Acid rain,1483 algal bloom,1394,1403 Amphibia,895
acid rain,1484 alimentary canal,1035,1060 amphibolic,209
acidophile,621 aliphatic hydrocarbon,63 amphiphilic,145,168
acoelomate,785 aliphatic hydrocarbons,57 ampulla of Lorenzini,895
acoelomates,772 alkaliphile,621 ampullae,838
acromegaly,1160,1172 allantois,867,895 ampullae of Lorenzini,858
acrosomal reaction,1365 allele,355 amygdala,1090,1102
acrosomal reactions,1359 allele frequency,519,533 Amyloplasts,938
Actin,1207 alleles,334 Anabolic,176
actin,1215 allergy,1327,1330 anabolic,194
Actinopterygii,860,895 Allopatric speciation,502 anaerobic,204,223,621
action potential,1076,1102 allopatric speciation,512 anaerobic cellular respiration,
activation energy,181,194 allopolyploid,505,512 214,223
activator,455 allosteric inhibition,190,194 analogy,543,556
PAGE: 1557
1546 Index
analytical model,1466,1484 Apocrine glands,882 atomic number,37,63
Anaphase,286 Apoda,863,895 ATP,185,194
anaphase,300 apodeme,1028 ATP synthase,223
anapsid,895 apodemes,1007 atria,1255
Anatomical dead space,1240 apomixis,993,999 atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP),
anatomical dead space,1245 apoptosis,267,273,568 1170,1172
androecium,744,972,999 aposematic coloration,1432, atriopore,852
androgen,1172 1451 atrioventricular valve,1262,
androgens,1152 appendicular skeleton,1186, 1272
aneuploid,369,375 1215 atrium,852,1272
aneuploidy,512 applied science,17,29 attention deficit hyperactivity
angina,1264,1272 Appositional growth,1196 disorder (ADHD),1102
Angiotensin converting enzyme appositional growth,1215 attention deficit/hyperactivity
(ACE),1294 aquaporin,168 disorder (ADHD),1099
angiotensin converting enzyme Aquaporins,154 attenuating,575
(ACE),1296 aquatic biomes,1382 attenuation,583
angiotensin I,1294,1296 arachnoid mater,1085,1102 Audition,1124
angiotensin II,1294,1296 arboreal hypothesis,880 audition,1138
angular movement,1215 arbuscular mycorrhiza,696 auditory ossicle,1215
Angular movements,1200 arbuscular mycorrhizae,684 auditory ossicles,1183
anion,63 Arbuscular mycorrhizae,696 Australopithecus,895
anions,45 Archaeopteryx,895 Autism spectrum disorder
Annelida,841 archegonium,705,726 (ASD),1098
anoxic,591,621 archenteron ,836,841 autism spectrum disorder
antenna protein,245 archosaur,895 (ASD),1102
antenna proteins,237 archosaurs,869,879 autoantibodies,1328
anterior pituitary,1165,1172 arcuate arteries,1283 autoantibody,1330
anther,744,758 arcuate artery,1296 autocrine signal,273
antheridium,705,726 aromatic hydrocarbon,63 Autocrine signals,254
Anthophyta,748,758 aromatic hydrocarbons,57 autoimmune response,1316,
anthropoid,895 Arteries,1266 1330
anti-diuretic hormone (ADH), arteriole,1272 Autoimmunity,1328
1294,1296 arterioles,1266 autoimmunity,1330
antibiotic,614,621 artery,1272 autoinducer,273
antibiotic resistance,466,484 Arthropoda,841 Autoinducers,269
antibody,1322,1330 articulation,1188,1198,1215 autonomic nervous system,
anticodon,424,430 ascending limb,1296 1091,1102
antidiuretic hormone (ADH), ascending limbs,1284 autopolyploid,512
1151,1172 ascocarp,679,696 autopolyploidy,505
antigen,1309,1330 Ascomycota,678,696 autosome,375
antigen-presenting cell (APC), ascus,679 autosomes,341,355,367
1309,1330 Asexual reproduction,1336 auxin,943
antioxidant,1293,1296 asexual reproduction,1365 Auxins,939
antipodal,977 Assimilation,1470 avidity,1326,1330
antipodals,999 assimilation,1484 axial skeleton,1182,1215
antiporter,160,168 assortative mating,526,533 axillary bud,906,943
Anura,863,895 astrocyte,1102 axon,1068,1102
anus,1045,1060 Astrocytes,1072 axon hillock,1068,1102
aorta,1262,1272 Asymmetrical,1006 axon terminal,1102
apex consumer,1484 asymmetrical,1028 axon terminals,1068
apex consumers,1461 asymptomatic disease,583 AZT,583
aphotic zone,1389,1403 asymptomatic infection,572
B
apical bud,906,943 Atherosclerosis,1264
apical meristem,943 atherosclerosis,1272
B cell,1330
Apical meristems,905 atom,22,29,36,63
B cells,1306
apocrine gland,895 atomic mass,37,63
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1558
Index 1547
B horizon,967 biochemistry,27,29 boreal forest,1387
back mutation,583 biodiversity,1490,1516 botany,28,29
back mutations,575 biodiversity hotspot,1516 bottleneck effect,524,533
background extinction,1499 Biodiversity hotspots,1495 botulism,621
bacteriophage,382,583 bioenergetics,174,194 Bowman's capsule,1284,1296
bacteriophages,561 biofilm,594,621 brachiation,895
balanced chemical equation,44, biogeochemical cycle,1473, brainstem,1090,1102
63 1484 branch point,538,556
ball-and-socket joint,1215 Biogeography,1376,1494 bronchi,1228
Ball-and-socket joints,1205 biogeography,1403 bronchiole,1245
Barcoding,757 biological carbon pump,663 bronchioles,1228
barcoding,758 biological community,1374 bronchus,1245
bark,909,943 biological macromolecule,101 Brumation,870
basal angiosperms,758 biological macromolecules,70 brumation,895
basal ganglia,1089,1102 Biological nitrogen fixation,617 Bryophytes,710
basal metabolic rate (BMR), biological nitrogen fixation,621 budding,568,583,1365
1008,1028 biology,10,29 Budding,1337
basal nuclei,1089,1102 bioluminescence,649,663 buffer,63
basal taxon,538,556 Biomagnification,1471 buffer zones,1513
base,54,63 biomagnification,1484 Buffers,55
Basic science,17 biomarker,483,484 bulb,913,943
basic science,29 Biomass,1469 bulbourethral gland,1343,1365
basidia,681 biomass,1484 Bush meat,1507
basidiocarp,682,696 biome,1403 bush meat,1516
Basidiomycota,681,696 biomes,1376 Bhorizon,957
basidium,681,696 bioremediation,619,621
C
basilar membrane,1126,1138 biosphere,24,29,1376
basophil,1305,1330 Biotechnology,462
C horizon,957,967
Batesian mimicry,1432,1451 biotechnology,484,618,621
CA-MRSA,614,621
bedrock,957,967 biotic,1375,1403
CAAT box,418,430
Behavior,1441 biotic potential (rmax),1451
caecilian,895
behavior,1451 biotic potential, orrmax,1418
caecilians,865
Behavioral biology,1441 bipolar neuron,1138
Calcification,1191
behavioral biology,1451 bipolar neurons,1119
calcification,1215
Behavioral isolation,507 biramous,841
calcitonin,1159,1172
behavioral isolation,512 birth rate (B),1417,1451
calorie,51,63
benthic realm,1389,1391,1403 Black Death,610,621
Calvin cycle,240,245
beta cell,1172 blastocyst,1360,1365
calyces,1282
beta cells,1168 blastomeres,766
calyx,744,758,1296
beta-pleated sheet (β-pleated), blastopore,773,785
Cambrian explosion,779,785
101 blastula,766,785
camouflage,1431,1451
bicarbonate (HCO − ) ion,1245 bleaching,1393
3 cAMP-dependent kinase (A-
blending theory of inheritance,
bicarbonate buffer system, kinase),264
355
1243,1245 canaliculi,1018
bicarbonate ions (HCO − ), Blood pressure (BP),1268 canaliculus,1028
3 blood pressure (BP),1272
candela,1131,1138
1243
blood urea nitrogen,1291
canopy,1383,1403
bicuspid valve,1262,1272
blood urea nitrogen (BUN),
capillaries,1267
Bilateral symmetry,770
1296
capillary,1272
bilateral symmetry,785
blotting,466
capillary action,53,63
Bile,1044
body plan,764,785
capillary bed,1272
bile,1060
bolus,1040,1060
Capillary beds,1267
binary (prokaryotic) fission,297
Bone,1191
capsid,561,583
binary fission,300
bone,1215
capsomere,583
binomial nomenclature,540,
Bone remodeling,1197
capsomeres,561
556
bone remodeling,1215
PAGE: 1559
1548 Index
capsule,621,716,726 centimorgan (cM),375 chondrocyte,1028
captacula,841 centimorgans (cM),365 chondrocytes,1017
carapace,833,875 central dogma,408,430 Chordata,841,850,895
carbaminohemoglobin,1243, central vacuole,121,136 chorioallantoic placenta,885
1245 centriole,300 chorion,867,895
carbohydrate,101 centrioles,284 choroid plexus,1085,1102
carbohydrates,71 centromere,282,300 chromatid,300
carbon,241 centrosome,119,136 chromatids,282
carbon fixation,245 cephalic phase,1058,1060 chromatin,116,136
Carbonic anhydrase (CA),1243 Cephalochordata,852,895 chromatophores,816
carbonic anhydrase (CA),1245 cephalophorax,833 chromophore,935,943
carboxypeptidase,1053,1060 cephalothorax,833,841 Chromosomal Theory of
cardiac cycle,1264,1272 cerebellum,1090,1102 Inheritance,362,375
Cardiac muscle tissue,1207 cerebral cortex,1086,1102 chromosome,136
cardiac muscle tissue,1215 cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),1085, chromosome inversion,373,
cardiac output,1272 1102 375
cardiomyocyte,1272 chain termination method,484 chromosomes,116,280
Cardiomyocytes,1264 channel,1394,1403 chronic infection,583
carnivore,1060 channel protein,168 chronic infections,572
Carnivores,1034 Channel proteins,154 chylomicron,1060
carotenoid,245 chaperone,101 chylomicrons,1055
carotenoids,235 chaperones,95 chyme,1043,1060
carpel,758 Chargaff’s rules,383 chymotrypsin,1053,1060
carpus,1188,1215 charophyte,726 Chytridiomycetes,676
carrier protein,155,168 Charophytes,702 chytridiomycosis,1508,1516
carrying capacity (K),1451 chelicera,841 Chytridiomycota,696
carrying capacity, orK,1418 chelicerae,830 cilia,129
Cartilage,1017 chemical bond,63 cilium,136
cartilage,1028 chemical bonds,44 cingulate gyrus,1090,1102
cartilaginous joint,1215 chemical diversity,1491,1516 circadian,1137,1138
Cartilaginous joints,1199 chemical energy,178,194 Circumduction,1201
Casineria,895 chemical reaction,63 circumduction,1215
Casparian strip,917,943 Chemical reactions,44 cis-acting element,446,455
catabolic,176,194 chemical reactivity,40,63 citric acid cycle,207,223
catabolite activator protein chemical synapse,273 cladistics,546,556
(CAP),439,455 chemical synapses,253 class,540,556
Catarrhini,895 Chemiosmosis,203 classical conditioning,1448,
cation,63 chemiosmosis,223 1451
Cations,45 chemoautotroph,245,1484 Clathrates,1400
caveolin,164,168 chemoautotrophs,228 clathrates,1403
cDNA library,484 Chemoautotrophs,1469 clathrin,163,168
cell,23,29 chemotroph,621 clavicle,1215
cell cycle,283,300,300 Chemotrophs,605 clavicles,1188
cell necrosis,571,583 chiasmata,322 clay,956,967
cell plate,286,300 chitin,78,101,821 cleavage,766,785
cell theory,136 chloride shift,1243,1245 cleavage furrow,286,300
cell wall,119,136,596 chlorophyll,120,136 Climate,1396
cell-cycle checkpoint,300 Chlorophylla,235 climate,1403
cell-cycle checkpoints,290 chlorophylla,245 Climate change,1509
cell-mediated immune chlorophyllb,235,245 climax community,1441,1451
response,1309,1330 Chlorophytes,702 cline,527,533
cell-surface receptor,273 chloroplast,136,230,245 clitellum,818,841
Cell-surface receptors,255 Chloroplasts,120 clitoris,1344,1365
cellular cloning,468,484 choanocyte,841 cloaca,878,1341,1365
Cellulose,77 cholecystokinin,1059,1060 clonal selection,1313,1330
cellulose,101 Chondrichthyes,895 clone,484
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1560
Index 1549
closed circulatory system,1252, cone,1138 coxal bone,1215
1272 cones,1132 coxal bones,1188
club mosses,718,726 Conidiospores,674 cranial bone,1215
Cnidaria,794,841 conifer,758 cranial bones,1182
cnidocyte,794,841 Conifers,741 cranial nerve,1102
cochlea,1126,1138 conispiral,841 cranial nerves,1094
codominance,339,355 conjugation,603,621 Craniata,895
codon,430 connective tissue,1028 Craniata (or Vertebrata),854
codons,410 Connective tissues,1015 cranium,854,895
coelom,772,785,803,838 consensus,430 cristae,632
coelomic pouches,836 Conservation biogeography, Crocodilia,872,895
coenocytic hypha,696 1494 crop,758
coenzyme,194 conspecifics,1374,1403 Cross reactivity,1326
coenzymes,191 contig,477,484 cross reactivity,1330
cofactor,194 Continuous variation,328 Cross-pollination,981
cofactors,191 continuous variation,355 cross-pollination,999
cognitive learning,1449,1451 contour feather,895 crossing over,309
cohesin,308,322 Contour feathers,876 crossover,309,322
cohesion,52,63 contraception,1357,1365 Cryogenian period,779,785
coleoptile,990,999 contractile vacuole,663 cryptobiosis,826
coleorhiza,990,999 contractile vacuoles,650 cryptochrome,943
colinear,408,430 control,29 Cryptochromes,938
collenchyma cell,943 control group,13 cryptofauna,1392,1403
Collenchyma cells,908 convergent evolution,496,512 ctenidium,841
colloid,1166,1172 coral reef,1403 cuboidal epithelia,1028
columella,879 Coral reefs,1391 Cuboidal epithelial,1013
columnar epithelia,1028 core enzyme,414,430 Cushing’s disease,1162,1172
Columnar epithelial,1013 corm,943 cutaneous respiration,895
commensal,1434 Corms,913 cuticle,829,921,932,943,943
Commensalism,691 cornea,1131,1138 cuticle (animal),841
commensalism,696,1451 corolla,744,758 cutting,999
community,24,29 corona,808,841 cuttings,995
Compact bone,1193 coronary arteries,1264 cyanobacteria,591,621
compact bone,1215 coronary artery,1272 cycad,758
companion cell,943 coronary vein,1272 Cycads,741
Companion cells,911 coronary veins,1264 cyclic AMP (cAMP),264,273
competitive exclusion principle, corpus callosum,1086,1102 cyclic AMP-dependent kinase,
1433,1451 cortex,911,943,1282 273
competitive inhibition,189,194 cortex (animal),1296 cyclin,300
complement system,1307, Cortical,1283 cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk),
1330 cortical nephron,1296 300
complementary DNA (cDNA) cortical nephrons,1283 cyclin-dependent kinases,292
libraries,474 cortical radiate artery,1296 cyclins,292
compliance,1239,1245 corticosteroid,1172 cypris,841
compound,63 corticosteroids,1162 cysts,639
compound leaf,920,943 cortisol,1162,1172 cytochrome complex,245
compounds,45 cotyledon,758,999 Cytogenetic mapping,474
concentration gradient,151,168 cotyledons,747,987 cytogenetic mapping,484
conceptual model,1466,1484 countercurrent exchanger,1287, cytokine,1304,1330
conclusion,19,29 1296 cytokinesis,283,300
condensin,300 countercurrent multiplier,1287, Cytokinesis,286
condensin proteins,285 1296 cytokinin,939,943
conditioned behavior,1451 courtship display,1451 cytopathic,583
Conditioned behaviors,1448 Courtship displays,1444 cytopathic effects,568
condyloid joint,1215 covalent bond,63 cytoplasm,115,136
Condyloid joints,1204 covalent bonds,46 cytoplasmic streaming,663
PAGE: 1561
1550 Index
cytoskeleton,126,136 deuterostome,785 dominant lethal,345,355
cytosol,115,136 Deuterostomes,773 Dominant traits,331
cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL), diabetes insipidus,1151,1172 dormancy,990,999
1330 diabetes mellitus,1155,1172 dorsal cavity,1010,1028
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), diabetogenic effect,1159,1172 dorsal hollow nerve cord,851,
1311 diacylglycerol (DAG),264,273 896
diaphragm,1228,1245 Dorsiflexion,1201
D
diaphysis,1192,1215 dorsiflexion,1215
diapsid,896 double circulation,1255,1272
dead space,1240,1245
Diarthroses,1200 double fertilization,987,999
dead zone,1480,1484
diarthrosis,1215 down feather,896
death rate (D),1417,1451
diastole,1264,1272 down feathers,876
decomposer,621
Dicer,450,455 down-regulation,1148,1172
decomposers,606
dicot,758 downstream,430
Deductive reasoning,12
dicots,750 duodenum,1044,1060
deductive reasoning,29
dideoxynucleotide,484 dura mater,1085,1102
degeneracy,430
dideoxynucleotides,477
dehydration synthesis,70,101 E
Diffusion,152
demographic-based models,
diffusion,168
1425 eccrine gland,896
Digestion,1052
demographic-based population Eccrine glands,882
digestion,1060
model,1451 ecdysis,827,830
dihybrid,347,355
demography,1408,1451 Ecdysozoa,776,785
dikaryon,679
denaturation,87,101 Echinodermata,841
dimer,261,273
denature,188,194 Ecological biogeography,1494
dimerization,261,273
dendrite,1102 ecological pyramid,1484
dimorphic,795
Dendrites,1068 Ecological pyramids,1470
Dinosaurs,871
dendritic cell,1330 Ecology,1372
dioecious,738,758
Dendritic cells,1309 ecology,1403
dipeptidase,1054,1060
denitrification,621 ecosystem,24,29,1460,1484
diphyodont,896
density-dependent,1421 ecosystem diversity,1491,1516
diphyodonts,882
density-dependent regulation, ecosystem dynamics,1465,
diploblast,785
1451 1484
diploblasts,771
density-independent,1421 Ecosystem ecology,1375
diploid,280,300,308
density-independent regulation, ecosystem services,1403,1503
diplontic,703,726
1451 ectomycorrhiza,696
directional selection,528,533
dentary,882,896 Ectomycorrhizae,686,696
disaccharide,101
deoxynucleotide,476,484 ectotherm,1028
Disaccharides,74
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), ectothermic,1008
discontinuous variation,328,
96,101 ectotherms,870
355
dephosphorylation,202,223 Ediacaran Period,778
discussion,19,29
depolarization,1077,1102 Ediacaran period,785
Dispersal,502
Depression,1201 effector cell,1330
dispersal,512
depression,1215 effector cells,1315
dissociation,52,63
Dermal tissue,905 efferent arteriole,1284,1296
distal convoluted tubule (DCT),
dermal tissue,943 elastase,1053,1060
1284,1296
descending,1284 elastic recoil,1237,1245
distraction display,1451
descending limb,1296 elastic work,1238,1245
Distraction displays,1444
Descriptive (or discovery) electrocardiogram (ECG),1265,
divergent evolution,496,512
science,12 1272
diversifying selection,528,533
descriptive science,29 electrochemical gradient,159,
DNA barcoding,1511,1516
desmosome,136 168
DNA fingerprinting,381
desmosomes,133 electrogenic pump,162,168
DNA methylation,455
determinate cleavage,774,785 electrolyte,63,1278,1296
DNA microarray,484
detrital food web,1464,1484 electrolytes,46
DNA microarrays,479
Deuteromycota,684,696 electromagnetic spectrum,233,
dominant,355
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1562
Index 1551
245 1216 Estrogen,1349
electron,63 endosperm,746,986,999 estrogens,1173
electron configuration,43,63 endospermic dicot,999 Estuaries,1393
electron microscope,136 endospermic dicots,989 estuary,1403
electron microscopes,109 endosymbiosis,631,663 ethology,1441,1452
electron orbital,63 endosymbiotic theory,631,663 Ethylene,940
electron orbitals,42 endotherm,1008,1028 ethylene,943
electron transfer,45,63 endotherms,870 eucoelomate,785
electron transport chain,210, energy budget,1413,1451 eucoelomates,772
238,245 enhancer,455 eukaryote,29
electronegativity,47,63 enhancers,446 eukaryote-first,552
Electrons,37 enterocoelom,836,841 eukaryote-first hypothesis,556
electrophoresis,402 enterocoely,773,785 eukaryotes,23
element,64 enthalpy,179,194 eukaryotic cell,136
Elements,36 entropy,183 eukaryotic cells,113
Elevation,1201 entropy (S),194 eukaryotic initiation factor-2
elevation,1216 envelope,561,583 (eIF-2),450,455
embryonic mesoderm,836 environmental disturbance, Eumetazoa,776,785
embryophyte,726 1451 euploid,369,375
embryophytes,704 environmental disturbances, eutherian mammal,896
Emergent vegetation,1395 1440 eutrophication,1479,1484
emergent vegetation,1403 enzyme,101 evaporation,51,64
emerging disease,611,621 enzyme-linked receptor,273 Eversion,1201
Emsleyan/Mertensian mimicry, Enzyme-linked receptors,258 eversion,1216
1432,1451 Enzymes,87 evolution,24,29
Enantiomers,60 eosinophil,1305,1330 evolutionary (Darwinian) fitness,
enantiomers,64 Ependymal,1072 527
Enantiornithes,896 ependymal,1102 evolutionary fitness,533
end-Permian extinction,1497 epicardium,1264,1272 excitatory postsynaptic potential
endemic,1403 epicotyl,989,999 (EPSP),1080,1103
endemic disease,609,621 epidemic,609,621 exergonic,194
endemic species,1376,1516 epidermis,841,909,943 exergonic reactions,179
Endemic species,1493 epigenetic,436,455 exine,977,999
endemism,1505 epilepsy,1101,1103 exocarp,991,999
endergonic,194 epinephrine,1161,1172 Exocytosis,166
endergonic reactions,179 epiphyseal plate,1196,1216 exocytosis,168
endocardium,1263,1272 epiphyses,1192 exon,430
endocarp,991,999 epiphysis,1216 exons,422,447
Endochondral ossification,1196 epiphyte,965,967 exoskeleton,1180,1216
endochondral ossification,1216 epiphytes,1384 Exotic species,1507
endocrine,1059 epistasis,352,355 exotic species,1516
endocrine cell,273 epithelial tissue,1028 expiratory reserve volume
endocrine cells,254 Epithelial tissues,1012 (ERV),1232,1245
endocrine gland,1172 epitope,1330 exponential growth,1417,1452
endocrine glands,1171 epitopes,1311 expressed sequence tag (EST),
endocrine signal,273 equilibrium,45,64,1484 474,484
endocrine signals,254 Equilibrium,1461 extant,706,726
endocrine system,1060 Erythropoietin (EPO),1171 Extension,1200
Endocytosis,163 erythropoietin (EPO),1172 extension,1216
endocytosis,168 esophagus,1040,1060 external fertilization,1339,1365
endodermis,916,943 essential,952 extinct,706,726
endomembrane system,136 essential nutrient,1060 extinction,1490,1516
Endomycorrhizae,686 essential nutrients,1047 extinction rate,1516
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), esthetes,813 extinction rates,1499
122,136 estivation,1009,1028,1381 extracellular digestion,841
endoskeleton,790,837,1181, estrogen,1146,1365 extracellular domain,255,273
PAGE: 1563
1552 Index
extracellular matrix,131,136 (FSH),1349,1365 gamete,300
extremophile,621 follicle-stimulating hormone gametes,280,308
extremophiles,592 (FSH),1152,1173 gametic barrier,507,512
food chain,1461,1484 gametophyte,322,971,999
F
food web,1463,1484 gametophytes,320
foodborne disease,621 gap junction,136
F1,329,355
foot,811,812 Gap junctions,134
F2,329,355
Foraging,1443 gastric inhibitory peptide,1059,
facial bone,1216
foraging,1452 1060
facial bones,1183
forced expiratory volume (FEV), gastric phase,1059,1060
facilitated transport,154,168
1232,1245 gastrin,1059,1060
FACT,419,430
forearm,1188,1216 gastrodermis,841
facultative anaerobes,671,696
foreign DNA,466,484 gastrovascular cavity,841,
fall and spring turnover,1403
Forest Stewardship Council, 1035,1060
fallout,1482,1484
1506 gastrula,785
false negative,483,484
fouling.,815 Gastrulation,766
falsifiable,13,29
Foundation species,1436 gastrulation,1360,1365
family,540,556
foundation species,1452 GC-rich box,430
Fecundity,1414
founder effect,519,533 GC-rich boxes,418
fecundity,1452
fovea,1133,1138 Gel electrophoresis,386,463
Feedback inhibition,192
fragmentation,839,1365 gel electrophoresis,484
feedback inhibition,194
Fragmentation,1337 gemma,726
femur,1189,1216
free energy,179,194 gemmae,712,712
fermentation,214,223
free nerve ending,1115,1138 gemmule,841
fern,726
frequency-dependent selection, Gemmules,793
ferns,721
529,533 gene,300
fertilization,322
frog,896 gene expression,436,455
FEV1/FVC ratio,1232,1245
frontal (coronal) plane,1028 gene flow,525,533
fibrous connective tissue,1028
frontal lobe,1088,1103 gene pool,519,533
Fibrous connective tissues,
frontal plane,1009 Gene targeting,469
1016
fruit,758 gene targeting,484
fibrous joint,1216
FtsZ,297,300 Gene therapy,470
fibrous joints,1198
functional group,64 gene therapy,484,579,583
fibrous root system,915,943
Functional groups,60 gene transfer agent (GTA),556
fibula,1189,1216
functional residual capacity gene transfer agents (GTAs),
field,1110
(FRC),1232,1245 550
filament,744,758
functional vital capacity (FVC), genes,280
first messenger,1150,1173
1239,1245 genetic diagnosis,470,484
Fission,1336
furcula,877,896 Genetic diversity,1490
fission,1365
fusiform,1006,1028 genetic diversity,1516
fixation,241
fusion,572,583 genetic drift,522,533
fixed action pattern,1442,1452
Genetic engineering,469
flagella,129 G
genetic engineering,484
flagellum,136
genetic map,472,484
flame cell,1296 G-protein,1150,1173
genetic marker,472,484
flame cells,804,1289 G-protein-linked receptor,273
genetic recombination,473,484
flat bone,1216 G-protein-linked receptors,256
genetic structure,519,533
Flat bones,1192 G0phase,287,300
genetic testing,470,484
Flexion,1200 G1checkpoint,291
genetic variance,522,533
flexion,1216 G1phase,283,300
genetically modified organism,
flight feather,896 G2phase,284,300
469
Flow-resistive,1238 gall,583 genetically modified organism
flow-resistive,1245 gallbladder,1045,1060 (GMO),484
flower,758 galls,571 genome,280,300
fluid mosaic model,144,168 Gametangia,705 genome annotation,478,484
follicle stimulating hormone gametangium,726 genome fusion,551,556
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1564
Index 1553
Genome mapping,472 glycoproteins,145 hormone (GHIH),1160,1173
genome mapping,484 glycosidic bond,74,101 growth hormone-releasing
genomic libraries,474 gnathostome,896 hormone (GHRH),1160,1173
genomic library,484 gnathostomes,855 guanine diphosphate (GDP),
Genomics,472 Gnathostomes,857 455
genomics,484 gnetophyte,758 guanine triphosphate (GTP),
genotype,334,355 gnetophytes,742 455
genus,540,556 goiter,1158,1173 guanosine triphosphate (GTP),
geographical variation,527,533 Golgi apparatus,124,136 450
geometric isomer,64 Golgi tendon organ,1138 guard cells,909,944
Geometric isomers,58 Golgi tendon organs,1117 gustation,1119,1138
germ cells,319,322 Gomphoses,1199 gymnosperm,758
germ layer,785 gomphosis,1216 Gymnosperms,738
germ layers,766 gonadotropin,1173 gynoecium,744,758,972,999
gestation,1353,1365 gonadotropin-releasing gyri,1086
gibberellin (GA),943 hormone (GnRH),1348,1365 gyrus,1103
Gibberellins,939 gonadotropins,1152
H
gigantism,1160,1173 Gondwana,866
gill circulation,1254,1272 good genes hypothesis,531,
habitat isolation,507,512
gills,811 533
Habituation,1447
ginkgophyte,758 Gorilla,888,896
habituation,1452
ginkgophytes,742 gradual speciation model,510,
hagfish,896
gizzard,1037,1060 512
hair,882
glabrous,1115,1138 grafting,994,999
hairpin,430
glia,1068,1103 Gram negative,601,621
halophile,621
gliding movement,1216 Gram positive,601,621
handicap principle,531,533
Gliding movements,1200 granum,230,245
haplodiplodontic,726
Global climate change,1396 granzyme,1307,1330
haplodiplontic,703
global climate change,1403 gravitropism,999
haploid,280,300,308
Glomeromycota,684,696 grazing food web,1464,1484
haplontic,703,726
glomerular filtration,1285,1296 Great Barrier Reef,1391
haustoria,672,696
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR), greenhouse effect,1399,1403
Haversian canal,1193,1216
1286 greenhouse gases,1399,1403
haze-effect cooling,1399,1403
glomerular filtration rate (GFR), gross primary productivity,1469,
heat,194
1296 1484
Heat energy,181
glomeruli,1124 Ground tissue,905
heat energy,183,194
glomerulus,1138,1284 ground tissue,943
heat of vaporization,51
glomerulus (renal),1296 Group I,566
heat of vaporization of water,64
glucagon,1156,1173 group I virus,583
heirloom seed,758
glucocorticoid,1173 Group II,566
Heirloom seeds,757
glucocorticoids,1162 group II virus,583
helicase,402
gluconeogenesis,1156,1173 Group III,566
glucose-sparing effect,1159, group III virus,583
helper T (TH) lymphocytes,
1311
1173 Group IV,566
GLUT (glucose transporter) group IV virus,583
helper T lymphocyte (TH),1330
hemal system,838
proteins,220 Group V,566
heme group,1241,1245
GLUT protein,223 group V virus,583
hemizygous,342,355
GLUT proteins,204 Group VI,566
hemocoel,813,829,841,1252,
Glycogen,77,217 group VI virus,583
1272
glycogen,101 Group VII,566
Hemoglobin,1241
glycogenolysis,1156,1173 group VII virus,583
hemoglobin,1245
glycolipid,168 growth factor,273
hemolymph,1252,1272
glycolipids,145 growth factors,266
herbaceous,750,758
Glycolysis,204 Growth hormone (GH),1159
herbivore,1060
glycolysis,223 growth hormone (GH),1173
Herbivores,1034
glycoprotein,168 growth hormone-inhibiting
PAGE: 1565
1554 Index
herbivory,751,758 horizontal transmission,571, hypha,696
Heritability,522 583 hypocotyl,989,999
heritability,533 Hormonal stimuli,1163 hypoglycemia,1155,1173
hermaphrodite,841 hormonal stimuli,1173 hypophyseal portal system,
Hermaphroditism,1338 hormone,101,1148 1165,1173
hermaphroditism,1365 hormone receptor,1173 hypoplasia,571,583
heterodont tooth,896 Hormones,87 hypothalamus,1090,1103,
heterogeneity,1494,1516 hornworts,726 1164
heterospecifics,1374,1403 horsetail,726 hypothesis,10,29
heterosporous,726 horsetails,719 hypothesis-based science,12,
Heterothallic,675 host,1301,1331,1435,1452 29
heterothallic,696 host DNA,466,485 Hypothyroidism,1158
heterotroph,245 Hox gene,785 hypothyroidism,1173
heterotrophs,228 Hoxgenes,767 hypotonic,156,168
heterozygous,334,355 human beta chorionic
I
hibernation,1009,1028 gonadotropin (β-HCG),1353,
Hibernation,1381 1365
ileum,1044,1060
hilum,1282,1296 human growth hormone (HGH
immune tolerance,1316,1331
hinge joint,1216 or hGH),290
Immunodeficiency,1327
hinge joints,1203 humerus,1188,1216
immunodeficiency,1331
hippocampus,1088,1103 humoral immune response,
Imperfect fungi,684
histone,300 1309,1331
Imprinting,1447
histone acetylation,452,455 humoral stimuli,1173
imprinting,1452
histone proteins,281 humoral stimulus,1163
inbreeding,522,533
Historical biogeography,1494 humus,956,967
inbreeding depression,522,533
HIV (human immunodeficiency hybrid,501,512
incomplete dominance,338,
virus),568 hybrid inviability,508
355
holistic ecosystem model,1466, hybrid zone,509,512
incus,1125,1138
1484 hybridization,355
indeterminate cleavage,774,
holoblastic,1359,1365 hybridizations,329
785
Holocene, mass extinction, hydrocarbon,64
induced fit,188,194
1499 Hydrocarbons,56
induced mutation,402
holoenzyme,414,430 hydrogen bond,48,64
Induced mutations,400
homeostasis,22,29,1028 hydrogenosome,663
inducible operon,455
Homeostasis,1023 hydrolysis,101
Inductive reasoning,12
homeotherms,870 hydrolysis reactions,70
inductive reasoning,29
hominin,896 hydrophilic,49,64,145,168
inert,42
hominoid,896 hydrophobic,49,64,168
inert gas,64
Homo,888,896 Hydrophobic,145
inferior vena cava,1262,1272,
Homo sapiens sapiens,894, hydrosphere,1473,1485
1283,1296
896 hydrostatic skeleton,1180,1216
Infertility,1358
homologous,280 hydrothermal vent,590,622
infertility,1365
homologous chromosomes,300 Hylobatidae,888,896
inflammation,1305,1331
homologous recombination, Hylonomus,896
ingestion,1052,1061
363,375 hyoid bone,1184,1216
inhibin,1349,1365
homologous structures,497, hyperextension,1200,1216
inhibitor,266,273
512 hyperglycemia,1155,1173
inhibitory postsynaptic potential
homosporous,726 hyperopia,1132,1138
(IPSP),1103
homothallic,675,696 hyperplasia,571,583
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials
homozygous,334,355 hyperpolarization,1103
(IPSPs),1080
honest signal,531,533 hyperpolarizes,1077
initiation complex,426,450,455
horizon,957,967 hypersensitivities,1327,1331
initiation site,413,430
Horizontal gene transfer (HGT), hyperthermophile,622
initiator tRNA,426,430
549 Hyperthyroidism,1158
innate behavior,1452
horizontal gene transfer (HGT), hyperthyroidism,1173
innate behaviors,1441
556 hypertonic,156,168
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1566
Index 1555
Innate immunity,1302 1173 jejunum,1044,1061
innate immunity,1331 intracellular hormone receptors, joint,1198,1216
inner cell mass,1360,1365 1148 juxtaglomerular cell,1296
inner ear,1126,1138 intracellular mediator,273 juxtaglomerular cells,1288
inorganic compound,952,967 intracellular mediators,254 juxtamedullary nephron,1297
Inorganic nutrients,1381 intracellular signaling,252,273 juxtamedullary nephrons,1283
inositol phospholipid,273 Intramembranous ossification,
K
inositol phospholipids,264 1195
inositol triphosphate (IP3),264, intramembranous ossification,
K-selected species,1423,1452
273 1216
karyogamy,675,696
insectivorous,965 intrapleural space,1237,1246
karyogram,366,375
insectivorous plant,967 intrasexual selection,1446,
karyokinesis,284,301
inspiratory capacity (IC),1232, 1452
karyotype,366,375
1245 intraspecific competition,1419,
keratin,882
inspiratory reserve volume 1452
keystone species,1437,1452,
(IRV),1232,1245 introduction,19,29
1514
Insulin,1155 intron,430
kidney,1297
insulin,1173 introns,422
kidneys,1281
insulin-like growth factor (IGF), Inversion,1201
kin selection,1445,1452
1173 inversion,1216
kinase,263,273
insulin-like growth factors invertebrata,842
kinesis,1442,1452
(IGFs),1159 ion,64
kinesthesia,1110,1138
integral protein,168 ion channel-linked receptor,273
kinetic energy,177,194
Integral proteins,147 Ion channel-linked receptors,
kinetochore,285,301
integument,738,758 256
kinetoplast,663
intercalary meristem,944 ionic bond,64
kingdom,540,556
Intercalary meristems,905 Ionic bonds,46
Koch's postulates,594
intercellular signaling,252,273 ions,42
Kozak’s rules,426,430
intercostal muscle,1246 iridophores,816
Krebs cycle,207,223
intercostal muscles,1237 iris,1131,1138
interferon,1304,1331 irregular bone,1216 L
interkinesis,313,322 Irregular bones,1192
interlobar arteries,1283 irreversible,45 labia majora,1344,1365
interlobar artery,1296 irreversible chemical reaction, labia minora,1344,1365
intermediate filament,136 64 labyrinth,1126,1138
Intermediate filaments,129 island biogeography,1437, lacoperon,440,455
intermittent,572 1452 lactase,1061
intermittent symptom,583 islets of Langerhans,1168 lactases,1053
internal fertilization,1339,1365 islets of Langerhans (pancreatic lacuna,1028
internal receptor,273 islets),1174 lacunae,1017
Internal receptors,255 isomerase,204,223 lagging strand,393,402
internode,906,944 isomers,58,64 lamella,1217
interphase,283,301 isotonic,157,168 lamellae,1193
intersexual selection,1446, isotope,64 lamina,918,944
1452 Isotopes,38 lamprey,896
interspecific competition,1421, isthmus,1165,1174 lancelet,896
1452 Iteroparity,1414 large 60S ribosomal subunit,
interstitial cell of Leydig,1365 iteroparity,1452 455
interstitial cells of Leydig,1349 large intestine,1044,1061
J
interstitial fluid,1252,1273 larynx,1227,1246
intertidal zone,1390,1404 late Devonian extinction,1497
J-shaped growth curve,1417,
intervertebral disc,1216 latency,570,583
1452
Intervertebral discs,1185 lateral line,859,896
Jacobson's organ,875
intestinal phase,1059,1061 lateral meristem,944
Jasmonates,941
intine,977,999 Lateral meristems,905
jasmonates,944
intracellular hormone receptor, lateral rotation,1201,1217
PAGE: 1567
1556 Index
Laurasia,866 lobes of the kidney,1282,1297 malleus,1125,1138
Laurentia,866 locus,280,301 Malpighian tubule,1297
law of dominance,346,355 logistic growth,1418,1452 Malpighian tubules,1289
law of independent assortment, long bone,1217 maltase,1061
347,355 Long bones,1192 maltases,1053
law of mass action,45,64 Long-term depression (LTD), mammal,896
law of segregation,346,355 1084 Mammals,881
Layering,995 long-term depression (LTD), mammary gland,896
layering,999 1103 Mammary glands,882
leading strand,393,402 Long-term potentiation (LTP), mantle,811,812,812,842
learned behavior,1452 1084 mark and recapture,1410,1452
learned behaviors,1441 long-term potentiation (LTP), marsupial,896
lens,1131,1138 1103 mass extinction,782,785,1490
lenticel,944 loop of Henle,1284,1297 mass extinctions,1496
lenticels,912 loose (areolar) connective mass number,37,64
lepidosaur,896 tissue,1028 mast cell,1305,1331
lepidosaurs,869 Loose connective tissue,1016 mastax,808,842
leptin,1171,1174 Lophotrochozoa,776,785 materials and methods,19,29
leucophores,816 lower limb,1189,1217 mating factor,268,274
lichen,696 lung capacities,1231 matrix,1015,1028
Lichens,688 lung capacity,1246 matrix protein,584
life cycle,322 lung volume,1246 matrix proteins,563
life cycles,318 lung volumes,1231 Matter,36
life history,1413,1452 luteinizing hormone (LH),1349, matter,64
life science,29 1366 maximum parsimony,548,556
life sciences,11 lycophyte,726 mechanoreceptor,1110,1138
life table,1452 Lycopodiophyta,718 medial rotation,1201,1217
life tables,1408 Lymph,1320 medulla,1282,1297
ligand,252,273 lymph,1331 medusa,842
ligase,393,402 lymph node,1273 megafauna,1498,1516
light harvesting complex,245 Lymph nodes,1269 megagametogenesis,977,999
light microscope,136 lymphocyte,1331 megapascal (MPa),944
light microscopes,108 Lymphocytes,1306 megapascals,926
light-dependent reaction,245 lysis,568,584 megaphyll,726
light-dependent reactions,231 lysis buffer,462,485 megaphylls,718
light-harvesting complex,237 lysogenic cycle,570,584 megasporangium,977,999
light-independent reaction,245 lysosome,137 megaspore,726
light-independent reactions,231 lysosomes,119 megasporocyte,739,758
lignin,717,726 lytic cycle,570,584 megasporogenesis,977,1000
limbic system,1090,1103 megasporophyll,1000
M
linkage,349,355 megasporophylls,979
linkage analysis,472,485 meiosis,307,322
macroevolution,533
lipase,1040,1061 Meiosis,308
macromolecule,29
lipid,101 meiosis I,308,322
macromolecules,22
lipid hormones,1146 Meiosis II,308
macronutrient,967
lipid-derived hormone,1174 meiosis II,322
macronutrients,953
Lipids,80 Meissner’s corpuscle,1138
macrophage,1302,1331
litmus,54 Meissner’s corpuscles,1116
macula densa,1288,1297
litmus paper,64 membrane potential,1073,1103
madreporite,838,842
Little Ice Age,1398 memory cell,1317,1331
Major depression,1101
liver,1045,1061 meninge,1103
major depression,1103
Liverworts,711 meninges,1085
major histocompatibility class
liverworts,726 menopause,1352,1366
(MHC) I molecules,1306
loam,967 menstrual cycle,1349,1366
major histocompatibility class
loams,956 meristem,944
(MHC) I/II molecule,1331
lobe,1088,1088,1088 Meristematic tissue,905
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1568
Index 1557
meristematic tissue,944 microsporocytes,738 monosulcate,749
meristems,905 microsporophyll,1000 monotreme,896
Merkel's disk,1138 microsporophylls,979 monotremes,884
Merkel’s disks,1115 microtubule,137 morganucodonts,884
meroblastic,1359,1366 microtubules,129 morning sickness,1366
mesocarp,991,1000 microvilli,1289,1297 mortality rate,1412,1452
mesocosm,1466,1485 middle ear,1125,1139 mosses,714,726
mesoglea,842 midsagittal plane,1009,1028 motor end plate,1212,1217
mesohyl,791,842 Migration,1380,1442 MRSA,622
mesophyll,230,245 migration,1452 mucin,1229,1246
messenger RNA (mRNA),96, Milankovitch cycles,1399,1404 Mucosa-associated lymphoid
101 mineral,1061 tissue (MALT),1315
metabolism,174,194 mineral soil,967 mucosa-associated lymphoid
metabolome,482,485 mineral soils,956 tissue (MALT),1331
Metabolomics,482 mineralocorticoid,1151,1174 mucus,1229,1246
metabolomics,485 Minerals,1047 Müllerian mimicry,1432,1453
metacarpus,1188,1217 mismatch repair,398,402 multiple cloning site (MCS),466,
Metagenomics,480 mitochondria,118,137 485
metagenomics,485 mitochondria-first,552 Multiple fruit,991
metamerism,818,842 mitochondria-first hypothesis, multiple fruit,1000
Metaphase,286 556 muscle spindle,1139
metaphase,301 mitosis,284,301 Muscle spindles,1117
metaphase plate,286,301 mitosome,663 mutation,402
metatarsal,1217 mitotic phase,283,301 Mutations,400
metatarsals,1190 mitotic spindle,284,301 Mutualism,1374
Metazoa,776,785 mixotroph,663 mutualism,1435,1453
methicillin-resistant mixotrophs,638 Myc,453
Staphylococcus aureus model organism,478,485 myc,455
(MRSA),614 model system,328,356 mycelium,670,696
MHC II molecules,1306 modern synthesis,518,533 Mycetismus,691
microbial mat,590,622 molality,1279,1297 mycetismus,696
Microbiology,27 molarity,1279,1297 Mycologists,669
microbiology,29 mold,684,696 mycology,668,696
microcosm,1466,1485 mole,1279,1297 Mycorrhiza,686
microevolution,533 molecular biology,27,30 mycorrhiza,696
microfilament,137 molecular cloning,485 mycorrhizae,668,696
microfilaments,127 molecular systematics,543,556 mycosis,691,697
Microglia,1072 molecule,22,30,64 Mycotoxicosis,691
microglia,1103 Molecules,40 mycotoxicosis,697
micronutrient,967 Mollusca,842 myelin,1068,1103
micronutrients,954 molting,827,829 myocardial infarction,1264,
microphyll,726 monocarpic,997,1000 1273
microphylls,718 monocot,749,759 myocardium,1263,1273
Micropropagation,996 monocyte,1302,1331 myofibril,1217
micropropagation,1000 monoecious,738,759,794 myofibrils,1207
micropyle,978,1000 monogamous,1446 myofilament,1217
microRNA (miRNA),455 monogamy,1452 myofilaments,1208
microRNAs,450 monogastric,1036,1061 Myopia,1132
microsatellite polymorphism, monohybrid,335,356 myopia,1139
485 monomer,101 myosin,1207,1217
microsatellite polymorphisms, monomers,70 Myxini,856,896
473 monophyletic,821
N
microscope,108,137 monophyletic group,546,556
microsporangium,975,1000 monosaccharide,101
nacre,842
microspore,726 Monosaccharides,71
nasal cavity,1226,1246
microsporocyte,758 monosomy,369,375
PAGE: 1569
1558 Index
natural killer (NK) cell,1331 nitrogenase,962,967 occipital lobe,1103
natural killer (NK) cells,1306 noble gas,64 Ocean upwelling,1379
natural science,30 noble gases,42 ocean upwelling,1404
natural sciences,11 nociception,1118,1139 oceanic zone,1404
Natural selection,493 node,944 Octamer box,430
natural selection,512 Nodes,906 octamer boxes,418
Nature Conservancy,1513 nodes of Ranvier,1068,1103 octet rule,41,65
nauplius,842 nodule,622 odorant,1139
nectar,759 nodules,617,962,967 Odorants,1119
nectar guide,983,1000 non-electrolyte,1278,1297 Okazaki fragment,402
negative feedback loop,1023, non-endospermic dicot,1000 Okazaki fragments,393
1028 non-endospermic dicots,989 olfaction,1119,1139
negative gravitropism,938,944 non-vascular plant,726 olfactory bulb,1124,1139
negative polarity,566,584 non-vascular plants,707 olfactory epithelium,1119,1139
negative regulator,455 noncellular,561 olfactory receptor,1119,1139
negative regulators,439 nondisjunction,368,375 oligodendrocyte,1103
nematocyst,842 nonparental (recombinant) type, Oligodendrocytes,1072
nematocysts,794 375 oligosaccharin,944
Nematoda,842 nonparental types,363 Oligosaccharins,941
Nemertea,842 nonpolar covalent bond,64 Omega,83
Neognathae,896 Nonpolar covalent bonds,47 omega fat,101
Neornithes,879,897 nonrandom mating,526,533 omnivore,1061
Nephridia,815 nonrenewable resource,1477, Omnivores,1035
nephridia,1289,1297 1485 oncogene,301
nephridiopore,1289,1297 nonsense codon,430 oncogenes,295
nephron,1297 nonsense codons,410 oncogenic virus,584
nephrons,1282 nontemplate strand,413,430 oncogenic viruses,573
neritic zone,1391,1404 norepinephrine,1093,1103, oncolytic virus,584
nerve net,797 1161,1174 Oncolytic viruses,579
Net consumer productivity,1470 Northern blotting,466,485 one-child policy,1429,1453
net consumer productivity,1485 notochord,850,897 oogenesis,1346,1366
Net primary productivity,1382, nuclear envelope,116,137 open circulatory system,1252,
1469 nucleic acid,101 1273
net primary productivity,1404, Nucleic acids,96 operant conditioning,1448,
1485 nucleoid,111,137,596 1453
Net production efficiency (NPE), nucleolus,117,137 operator,439,455
1470 nucleoplasm,116,137 operculum,815
net production efficiency (NPE), nucleosome,281,301 operon,455
1485 nucleotide,101 operons,438
neural stimuli,1164,1174 nucleotide excision repair,399, Opposition,1201
neural tube,1363,1366 402 opposition,1217
neurobiology,27,30 nucleotides,96 opsonization,1307,1331
neurodegenerative disorder, nucleus,36,64,116,137 orbital,65
1103 nucleus-first,552 orbitals,40
Neurodegenerative disorders, nucleus-first hypothesis,556 order,540,556
1096 nutrient,622 Ordovician-Silurian extinction,
neuron,1103 nutrients,590,605 1496
neurons,1067 organ,30
O
neurotransmitter,274 organ of Corti,1127,1139
neurotransmitters,253 organ system,24,30
O horizon,957,967
neutron,37,64 organelle,30,137
obligate aerobes,671,697
neutrophil,1305,1331 organelles,23,113
obligate anaerobes,671,697
next-generation sequencing, organic compound,952,967
obstructive disease,1246
478,485 organic molecule,65
Obstructive diseases,1239
nitrification,622 organic molecules,56
occipital,1088
nitrogen fixation,607,622 organic soil,967
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1570
Index 1559
organic soils,955 ovulation,1350,1366 Parenchyma cells,907
organism,30 ovule,759 parent material,957,967
Organisms,24 oxidative phosphorylation,203, Parental types,363
organogenesis,766,785,1362, 223 parental types,375
1366 oxygen,49 parietal,1088
Organs,23 oxygen dissociation curve, parietal lobe,1103
origin,297,301 1242,1246 Parkinson’s disease,1097,
Ornithorhynchidae,884,897 oxygen-carrying capacity,1242, 1103
Ornithurae,880 1246 Parthenogenesis,1338
osculum,791,842 oxytocin,1155,1174 parthenogenesis,1366
osmoconformer,1297 Partial pressure,1230
P
osmoconformers,1280 partial pressure,1246
Osmolarity,156 particulate matter,1229,1246
osmolarity,168
P0,329,356
passive immunity,1324,1331
p21,294,301
osmophile,622 Passive transport,151
p53,294,301
osmoreceptor,1174 passive transport,169
P680,238,245
osmoreceptors,1151 patella,1189,1217
P700,239,245
Osmoregulation,1278 pathogen,584,1331
Pacinian corpuscle,1139
osmoregulation,1297 pathogen-associated molecular
Pacinian corpuscles,1117
osmoregulator,1297 pattern (PAMP),1331
packing,442
osmoregulatory,1280 pathogen-associated molecular
pairwise-end sequencing,478
Osmosis,155 patterns (PAMPs),1302
Paleognathae,897
osmosis,169 pathogens,579,608,1301
Paleontology,28
osmotic balance,1278,1297 pattern recognition receptor
paleontology,30
osmotic pressure,1278,1297 (PRR),1332
Paleoptera,835
osseous tissue,1191,1217 pattern recognition receptors
palmately compound leaf,920,
ossicle,1139 (PRRs),1302
944
ossicles,1125 peat moss,724,726
Pan,888,897
Ossification,1195 pectoral girdle,1187,1217
pancreas,1045,1061,1168,
ossification,1217 pedalia,800
1174
Osteichthyes,860,897 pedicellaria,837
pandemic,609,622
osteoblast,1217 pedigree analysis,337
Pangaea,866
Osteoblasts,1195 pedipalp,842
papilla,1139
osteoclast,1217 pedipalps,830
papillae,1121
Osteoclasts,1195 peer-reviewed manuscript,30
papulae,838
osteocyte,1217 Peer-reviewed manuscripts,18
parabronchi,878
Osteocytes,1195 pelagic realm,1389,1404
paracentric,373,375
osteon,1028,1217 pellicle,663
paracrine signal,274
osteons,1018 pellicles,637
paracrine signals,253
Osteons,1193 pelvic girdle,1188,1217
parafollicular cell,1174
Osteoprogenitor cells,1195 penis,1343,1366
parafollicular cells,1166
ostia,1252 Pepsin,1042
parapodia,819
ostium,842,1273 pepsin,1061
parapodium,842
ostracoderm,897 pepsinogen,1042,1061
parasite,1435,1453
outer ear,1125,1139 peptide bond,89,102
parasitic plant,963,967
oval window,1126,1139 peptide hormone,1174
Parasitism,690
ovarian cycle,1349,1366 peptide hormones,1147
parasitism,697
ovary,744,759 peptidoglycan,601,622
parasympathetic nervous
oviduct,1366 peptidyl transferase,427,431
system,1094,1103
oviducts,1345 Perception,1112
parathyroid gland,1174
oviger,842 perception,1139
parathyroid glands,1166
ovigers,,830 perfect flowers,747
parathyroid hormone (PTH),
oviparity,1341,1366 perforin,1307,1332
1158,1174
ovoviparity,1341,1366 perianth,744,759,972,1000
Parazoa,785
ovulate cone,759 pericardium,1264,1273
parenchyma cell,944
ovulate cones,739 pericarp,991,1000
PAGE: 1571
1560 Index
pericentric,373,375 photoact,238,245 Plantar flexion,1201
pericycle,917,944 photoautotroph,245 plantar flexion,1217
periderm,912,944 photoautotrophs,228 planuliform,842
periodic table,40,65 Photomorphogenesis,935 plasma,1255,1273
peripheral protein,169 photomorphogenesis,944 plasma cell,1313,1332
Peripheral proteins,148 photon,237,245 plasma membrane,115,137
peripheral resistance,1270, Photoperiodism,935 plasma membrane hormone
1273 photoperiodism,944 receptor,1174
perirenal fat capsule,1282, photosystem,237,245 plasma membrane hormone
1297 photosystem I,237,246 receptors,1149
peristalsis,1040,1061 photosystem II,237,246 plasmid,431
peristome,726 phototroph,622 plasmids,413
peritubular capillary network, phototrophs,591 plasmodesma,137
1284,1297 Phototrophs,605 plasmodesmata,132
permafrost,1388,1404 phototropin,944 plasmogamy,675,697
permanent tissue,905,944 phototropins,937 plasmolysis,158,169
Permian extinction,1401 Phototropism,935 plastid,633,663
permissive,567,584 phototropism,944 plastron,875
peroxisome,137 phyllotaxy,919,944 platelet,1273
Peroxisomes,118 phylogenetic tree,30,538,556 platelets,1255
petal,759 phylogeny,537,556 Platyrrhini,897
Petals,744 phylum,540,556 Pleistocene Extinction,1498
petiole,918,944 physical map,472,485 Plesiadapis,897
Petromyzontida,857 physical science,30 pleura,1237,1246
Petromyzontidae,897 physical sciences,11 Pleurisy,1238
pH paper,65 physiological dead space,1240, pleurisy,1246
pH scale,54,65 1246 plumule,989,1000
phage therapy,579,584 phytochrome,944 pneumatic bone,897
phagolysosome,637,663 phytochromes,936 Pneumatic bones,877
phalange,1217 Phytoplankton,1394 point mutation,402
phalanges,1188 pia mater,1085,1103 polar covalent bond,46,65
Pharmacogenomics,480 pigment,230,246 polar microtubules,285
pharmacogenomics,485 pilidium,842 polar nuclei,977,1000
pharyngeal nerve ring,822 pilus,622 pollen grain,759
pharyngeal slit,897 pinacocyte,842 pollen tube,759
Pharyngeal slits,851 pinna,1125,1139 pollination,752,759,981,1000
pharynx,1227,1246 pinnately compound leaf,944 poly-A tail,422,431,449,455
Phenology,1402 Pinnately compound leaves, polyandrous,1446
phenotype,334,356 920 polyandry,1453
pheromone,1121,1139 pinocytosis,164,169 Polycarpic,997
pheromones,835 pioneer species,1440,1453 polycarpic,1000
Phloem,717 pistil,744,759 polygenic,479,485
phloem,727 pith,911,944 Polygynous,1446
phosphatase,274 pituitary dwarfism,1160,1174 polygyny,1453
phosphatases,268 pituitary gland,1164,1174 polymer,102
phosphoanhydride bond,194 pituitary stalk,1164,1174 polymerase chain reaction
phosphoanhydride bonds,185 pivot joint,1217 (PCR),485
phosphodiester,97,102 Pivot joints,1203 polymers,70
phosphodiesterase,268,274, placenta,1354,1366 polymorphic,842
1150 plagiarism,19,30 polynucleotide,96,102
phosphodiesterase (PDE),1174 planar joint,1217 polyp,842
phospholipid,102 Planar joints,1202 polypeptide,102
Phospholipids,84 planktivore,1404 polyploid,370,375
Phosphorylation,202 planktivores,1392 polysaccharide,76,102
phosphorylation,223 plankton,649,663 polysome,425,431
photic zone,1389,1404 planospiral,842 polyspermy,1359,1366
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1572
Index 1561
polytomy,538,556 progesterone,1366 psychrophile,622
Pongo,888,897 prognathic jaw,897 pterosaurs,870
population,24,30,1374 progymnosperm,759 pterygotes,834
population density,1408,1453 prokaryote,30,111,137 pulmocutaneous circulation,
population genetics,518,533 Prokaryotes,23 1255,1273
population growth rate,1417, prolactin (PRL),1155,1174 pulmonary circulation,1255,
1453 prolactin-inhibiting hormone, 1273
population size (N),1408,1453 1174 pump,169
population variation,521,534 prolactin-inhibiting hormone pumps,160
Porifera,776,790,842 (PIH),1155 punctuated equilibrium,510,
positive feedback loop,1024, prolactin-releasing hormone, 512
1028 1174 Punnett square,335,356
positive gravitropism,938,944 prolactin-releasing hormone pupil,1139
positive polarity,584 (PRH),1155 pure culture,480,485
positive regulator,456 Prometaphase,285 purine,102
positive regulators,439 prometaphase,301 purines,97
post-anal tail,851,897 promoter,414,431,445 pygostyle,880
post-transcriptional,436,456 Pronation,1201 pyloric caeca,838
post-translational,436,456 pronation,1217 pyrimidine,102
posterior pituitary,1165,1174 proofreading,397,402 pyrimidines,97,383
postzygotic barrier,506,512 prophage,570,584 pyruvate,204,223
potential energy,177,194 Prophase,285
Q
potocytosis,164,169 prophase,301
precapillary sphincter,1273 proprioception,1088,1103,
quadrat,1409,1453
predator,1404 1110,1139
quaternary structure,94,102
preening,878 prosimian,897
quiescent,287,301
preinitiation complex,431 prostate gland,1343,1366
quorum sensing,269,274
presbyopia,1132,1139 prosthetic group,210,223
prezygotic barrier,506,512 protease,485 R
primary (main) bronchi,1228 proteases,462
Primary active transport,160 proteasome,451,456 r-selected species,1424,1453
primary active transport,169 protein,102 radial cleavage,774,786
primary bronchus,1246 protein signature,483,485 Radial glia,1072
primary consumer,1485 Proteins,87 radial glia,1103
primary consumers,1461 proteome,482,485 Radial symmetry,770
primary electron acceptor,238, Proteomics,482 radial symmetry,786
246 proteomics,485 radiate arteries,1283
primary feather,897 proto-oncogene,301 Radiation hybrid mapping,474
Primary feathers,877 proto-oncogenes,295 radiation hybrid mapping,485
primary growth,911,944 proton,37,65 radicle,989,1000
primary producer,1485 protonema,714,727 radioisotope,65
primary producers,1461 protonephridia,811,1289 radioisotopes,38
primary structure,91,102 protostome,786 radioresistant,592,622
primary succession,1440,1453 Protostomes,773 radius,1188,1217
primase,392,402 Protraction,1201 radula,811,812,842
Primates,897 protraction,1217 raphe,653,663
primer,392,402 proventriculus,1037,1061 reactant,65
prion,584 proximal convoluted tubule reactants,44
Prions,579 (PCT),1284,1297 reaction center,237,246
probe,485 PrP c ,580,584 reading frame,410,410,431
probes,465 sc reception,1110,1139
PrP ,580,584
product,65 receptive,1110
pseudocoelomate,786
product rule,332,356 receptive field,1139
pseudocoelomates,773
productive,570,584 receptor,274
pseudopeptidoglycan,602,622
products,44 receptor potential,1110,1139
pseudostratified,1014,1028
Progesterone,1349 receptor-mediated endocytosis,
PAGE: 1573
1562 Index
165,169 reproductive cloning,485 ribonuclease,486
receptors,252,1148 reproductive isolation,506,512 ribonucleases,462
recessive,356 Residence time,1474 ribonucleic acid (RNA),96,102
recessive lethal,344,356 residence time,1485 Ribosomal RNA (rRNA),99
Recessive traits,331 residual volume (RV),1232, ribosomal RNA (rRNA),102
reciprocal cross,331,356 1246 ribosome,137,425
recombinant DNA,466,485 Resilience,1461 Ribosomes,117
recombinant protein,485 resilience (ecological),1485 ribs,1185
recombinant proteins,466 resistance,1239,1246 ring of life,554,556
recombination frequency,365, Resistance,1461 RISC,456
375 resistance (ecological),1485 RNA editing,421,431
recombination nodules,309, resorption,1217 RNA stability,456
322 respiratory bronchiole,1246 RNA-binding protein (RBP),456
recruitment,1240,1246 respiratory bronchioles,1228 RNA-binding proteins,449
rectum,1045,1061 respiratory distress syndrome, RNA-induced silencing complex
red blood cell,1273 1239,1246 (RISC),450
Red blood cells,1256 respiratory quotient (RQ),1233, RNAs,417
Red List,1499 1246 rod,1139
redox reaction,223 respiratory rate,1238,1246 rods,1132
redox reactions,200 respiratory trees,839 root cap,915,945
reduction,241,246 restriction endonuclease,485 root hair,945
reduction division,322 Restriction endonucleases,466 Root hairs,916
reductional division,316 restriction fragment length root system,904,945
reflex action,1441,1453 polymorphism (RFLP),485 rooted,538,556
refractory period,1077,1104 restriction fragment length Rotational movement,1201
regulatory T (Treg) cell,1332 polymorphisms,473 rotational movement,1218
regulatory T (Treg) cells,1316 restrictive disease,1246 rough endoplasmic reticulum
reinforcement,509,512 restrictive diseases,1239 (RER),122,137
relative fitness,527,534 results,19,30 roughage,1038,1061
Relative species abundance, resuscitation,594,622 Ruffini ending,1139
1437 retina,1131,1139 Ruffini endings,1116
relative species abundance, retinoblastoma protein (Rb), ruminant,1061
1453 294,301 Ruminants,1038
renal arteries,1283 Retraction,1201 runner,945
renal artery,1297 retraction,1217 Runners,913
renal capsule,1282,1297 reverse genetics,485
S
renal column,1297 reverse transcriptase,566,584
renal columns,1282 reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-
S phase,284,301
renal corpuscle,1283,1297 PCR),465,486
S-layer,622
renal fascia,1282,1297 reversible chemical reaction,65
S-shaped curve,1418
renal pelvis,1282,1297 Reversible reactions,45
S-shaped growth curve,1453
renal pyramid,1297 review article,30
saddle joint,1218
renal pyramids,1282 Review articles,19
Saddle joints,1204
renal tubule,1283,1298 Rhabdites,803
sagittal plane,1009,1029
renal vein,1298 rhizobia,962,967
salamander,897
renal veins,1283 rhizoids,714,727
Salamanders,863
renette cells,822 rhizome,913,945
salivary amylase,1040,1061
renin,1152,1174 rhizosphere,957,967
saltatory conduction,1078,
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone, Rho-dependent termination,415
1104
1294,1298 rho-dependent termination,431
sand,956,967
replication fork,402 rho-independent,431
saprobe,697
replicative intermediate,584 Rho-independent termination,
saprobes,671
replicative intermediates,566 415
saprophyte,964,967
repressor,456 rhodopsin,1133,1139
sarcolemma,1207,1218
Repressors,438 rhynchocoel,810,842
sarcomere,1218
Reproductive cloning,468 rib,1217
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1574
Index 1563
sarcomeres,1208 Semelparity,1414 signal,1453
Sarcopterygii,860,897 semelparity,1453 signal integration,262,274
Sargassum,1391,1404 Semen,1343 signal sequence,429,431
Satellite glia,1072 semen,1366 signal transduction,261,274
satellite glia,1104 semi-permeable membrane, signaling cell,274
saturated fatty acid,81,102 1298 signaling cells,252
sauropsid,897 semi-permeable membranes, signaling pathway,261,274
Sauropsids,868 1278 signals,1443
Savannas,1384 semicircular canal,1140 silent mutation,402
scapula,1218 semicircular canals,1129 silt,956,967
scapulae,1188 semilunar valve,1262,1273 simple epithelia,1012,1029
Scarification,990 seminal vesicle,1366 simple fruit,991,1000
scarification,1000 seminal vesicles,1343 simple leaf,920,945
schizocoelom,803,842 seminiferous tubule,1366 simulation model,1466,1485
schizocoely,773,786 seminiferous tubules,1342 single nucleotide polymorphism
Schizophrenia,1100 senescence,997,1000 (SNP),486
schizophrenia,1104 sensory receptor,1110,1140 single nucleotide
Schwann cell,1072,1104 sensory transduction,1110, polymorphisms,473
science,10,30 1140 single-strand binding protein,
scientific method,10,30 sensory-somatic nervous 402
scion,994,1000 system,1091,1104 Single-strand binding proteins,
sclerenchyma cell,945 sepal,759 392
Sclerenchyma cells,908 sepals,744 sink,945
sclerocyte,842 septa,670,697,798 sinks,933
scrotum,1342,1366 septum,297,301,670 sinoatrial (SA) node,1265,1273
scutellum,989,1000 Sequence mapping ,474 siphonophore,843
scutes,875 sequence mapping,486 siphonophores,801
sebaceous gland,897 serendipity,18,30 sister taxa,538,557
Sebaceous glands,882 Serial hermaphroditism,834 Skeletal muscle tissue,1207
second messenger,274 serotype,622 skeletal muscle tissue,1218
Second messengers,263 Sertoli cell,1366 skull,1182,1218
Secondary active transport,160 Sertoli cells,1349 sliding clamp,393,402
secondary active transport,169 serum,1259,1273 small 40S ribosomal subunit,
secondary consumer,1485 sesamoid bone,1218 456
Secondary consumers,1461 Sesamoid bones,1192 small intestine,1043,1061
secondary feather,897 sessile,918,945 small nuclear,417
Secondary feathers,877 set point,1023,1029 small nuclear RNA,431
Secondary growth,911 seta,716,727 smooth endoplasmic reticulum
secondary growth,945 seta/chaeta,843 (SER),123,137
secondary plant compound, setae,819 Smooth muscle tissue,1207
1516 sex-linked,356 smooth muscle tissue,1218
secondary plant compounds, sexual dimorphism,534 Soil,955
1501 sexual dimorphisms,530 soil,967
secondary structure,92,102 sexual reproduction,1336,1366 soil profile,957,967
secondary succession,1440, shared ancestral character,547, Solar intensity,1399
1453 556 solar intensity,1404
secretin,1059,1061 shared derived character,547, solute,155,169
seed,744,759 556 solutes,154
seedless vascular plant,727 Shine-Dalgarno sequence,431 solvent,52,65
segmental arteries,1283 shoot system,904,945 somatic cell,308,322
segmental artery,1298 short bone,1218 somatosensation,1088,1104
selection pressure,522 Short bones,1192 somatostatin,1059,1061
selective pressure,534 shotgun sequencing,477,486 somite,1366
selectively permeable,151,169 sickle cell anemia,1242,1246 somites,1363
Self-pollination,981 sieve-tube cell,945 soredia,697
self-pollination,1000 sieve-tube cells,911 source,945
PAGE: 1575
1564 Index
source water,1394,1404 start codon,426,431 sutural bone,1218
sources,933 statolith,945 Sutural bones,1193
Southern blotting,466,486 statoliths,938 suture,1218
speciation,501,512 stele,916,945 Sutures,1198
species,500,512,540 stereocilia,1127,1140 Svalbard Global Seed Vault,
species dispersion pattern,1453 stereoscopic vision,886,897 1502
Species dispersion patterns, sternum,1185,1218 swim bladder,860,897
1411 steroid,102 symbiont,964,968
Species richness,1437 steroids,85 symbioses,1434
species richness,1453 stigma,744,759 Symbiosis,686
species-area relationship,1500, stipule,945 symbiosis,1453
1516 stipules,918 Symbiotic nitrogen fixation,617
specific heat capacity,51,65 stolon,945 sympathetic nervous system,
spectrophotometer,236,246 Stolons,913 1093,1104
spermatheca,1341,1366 stoma,246 Sympatric speciation,502
spermatogenesis,1346,1366 stomach,1041,1061 sympatric speciation,512
spermatophore,863 stomata,230 symphyses,1199
spermatophyte,759 stone canal,838 symphysis,1218
Sphenodontia,873,897 stratified epithelia,1012,1029 symporter,160,169
sphere of hydration,52,65 streptophytes,727 synapse,1104
sphincter,1041,1061 strigolactone,945 synapses,1068
spicule,843 Strigolactones,941 synapsid,897
spinal cord,1090,1104 Strobili,718 Synapsids,868
spinal nerve,1104 strobili,727 synapsis,309,322
Spinal nerves,1095 strobilus,732,738,759 synaptic cleft,1079,1104
spiracles. ,829 stroke volume,1271,1273 synaptic signal,253,274
spiral cleavage,773,786 stroma,230,246 synaptic vesicle,1104
spirometry,1232,1247 stromatolite,591,622 synaptic vesicles,1079
splicing,422,431 Structural isomers,58 synaptonemal complex,308,
spongocoel,790,843 structural isomers,65 322
spongy bone,1194 style,744,759 synarthrosis,1200,1218
spongy bone tissue,1218 subduction,1477,1485 synchondrosis,1199,1218
spontaneous mutation,402 substituted hydrocarbon,65 syncytium,804,821
Spontaneous mutations,400 substituted hydrocarbons,60 Syndesmoses,1199
sporangium,673,697,711 substrate,194 syndesmosis,1218
spore,322,697 substrate-level phosphorylation, synergid,977,1000
spores,667 203,223 synovial joint,1218
sporocyte,727 substrates,187 Synovial joints,1199
sporocytes,704 Subtropical deserts,1384 syrinx,878
sporophyll,727 sucrase,1061 system,1059
sporophylls,718,738 sucrases,1053 Systematics,539
sporophyte,320,322,711,971, sulci,1086 systematics,557
1000 sulcus,1104 systemic circulation,1254,1273
sporopollenin,705,727 sum rule,333,356 systems biology,482,486
spring-and-fall turnover,1379 summation,1081,1104 systole,1264,1273
Squamata,873,897 superior colliculus,1137,1140
T
squamous epithelia,1029 superior vena cava,1262,1273
Squamous epithelial,1012 Supination,1201
T cell,1332
stabilizing selection,528,534 supination,1218
T cells,1306
stable hairpin,415 suprachiasmatic nucleus,1137,
Tachyglossidae,884,897
stamen,759 1140
tadpole,897
Stamens,744 surface tension,52,65
taiga,1387
standard metabolic rate (SMR), Surfactant,1238
tap root system,915,945
1008,1029 surfactant,1247
target cell,274
stapes,1125,1140 survivorship curve,1412,1453
target cells,252
starch,71,102 suspensor,987,1000
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1576
Index 1565
tarsal,1218 thermodynamics,194 trans fat,82,102
tarsals,1190 thermophile,622 trans-acting element,456
tastant,1140 thermoregulation,1027,1029 transcription,100,102
tastants,1122 theropod,898 transcription bubble,431
taste bud,1121,1140 thick filament,1218 transcription bubble.,413
TATA box,431 Thick filaments,1208 transcription factor,456
taxis,1442,1453 Thigmomorphogenesis,941 transcription factor binding site,
taxon,540,557 thigmomorphogenesis,945 456
Taxonomy,540 thigmonastic,941,945 transcription factors,444
taxonomy,557 thigmotropism,941,945 transcriptional,436
TCA cycle,207,223 thin filament,1218 transcriptional start site,439,
tectorial membrane,1126,1140 Thin filaments,1208 456
tegmen,989,1000 thoracic cage,1185,1218 transduction,603,622
teichoic acid,622 thorn,945 Transfer RNA (tRNA),100
teloblastic growth,818 Thorns,914 transfer RNA (tRNA),102
telomerase,396,402 threshold of excitation,1104 transformation,380,402,603,
telomere,402 thylakoid,246 622
Telophase,286 thylakoid lumen,230,246 transgenic,469,486
telophase,301 thylakoids,230 transition state,181,195
Temperate forests,1386 thymus,1171,1174 Transition substitution,400
Temperate grasslands,1386 thyroglobulin,1157,1174 transition substitution,402
template strand,413,431 thyroid gland,1165,1174 Transitional,1014
temporal,1088 thyroid-stimulating hormone transitional epithelia,1029
temporal fenestra,897 (TSH),1157,1174 translation,100,102
Temporal fenestrae,868 thyroxine,1157 translational,436
temporal isolation,506,512 thyroxine (tetraiodothyronine, translocation,374,375,933,
temporal lobe,1104 T4),1175 945
tendril,945 Ti plasmid,486 translocations,368
Tendrils,914 Ti plasmids,472 transpiration,909,945
terminal bronchiole,1247 tibia,1189,1218 Transpiration,929,931
terminal bronchioles,1228 Tidal volume (TV),1232 transport maximum,1287,1298
Terrestrial biomes,1382 tidal volume (TV),1247 transport protein,169
terrestrial hypothesis,880 tight junction,133,137 transport proteins,154
tertiary consumer,1485 tissue,30 transporter,169
Tertiary consumers,1461 tissues,23 transporters,160
tertiary structure,93,102 tobacco mosaic disease,560 transverse (horizontal) plane,
test,663 tonic activity,1136,1140 1029
test cross,337,356 Tonicity,156 transverse plane,1009
testa,989,1000 tonicity,169 Transversion substitution,401
testes,1342,1366 topoisomerase,402 transversion substitution,402
Testosterone,1349 Torpor,1009 triacylglycerol (also,
testosterone,1367 torpor,1029 triglyceride),102
tests,647 torsion,815 triacylglycerols,81
Testudines,875,898 total lung capacity (TLC),1232, Triassic–Jurassic,1497
tetrad,322 1247 trichome,945
tetrads,309 trabecula,1029 Trichomes,909
Tetrapod,855 trabeculae,1018,1194,1218 tricuspid valve,1262,1273
tetrapod,898 trachea,1227,1247 triglycerides,81
thalamus,1089,1104 tracheid,945 triiodothyronine,1157
Thalassemia,1242 Tracheids,910 triiodothyronine (T3),1175
thalassemia,1247 tracheophyte,727 triploblast,786
thallus,697 tracheophytes,716 triploblasts,771
The chaparral,1385 tragedy of the commons,1506, trisomy,369,375
theory,11,30 1516 trochophore,843
thermocline,1379,1404 trait,330,356 trochophore larva,812
Thermodynamics,182 trans,122 trophic level,1461,1485
PAGE: 1577
1566 Index
trophic level transfer efficiency vaccine,584 viable-but-non-culturable
(TLTE),1470,1485 Vaccines,575 (VBNC) state,622
trophoblast,1360,1367 vacuole,137 vicariance,502,513
Tropical wet forests,1383 vacuoles,118 villi,1043,1061
Tropomyosin,1212 vagina,1346,1367 viral receptor,584
tropomyosin,1218 valence shell,41,65 viral receptors,562
Troponin,1212 van der Waals interaction,65 virion,584
troponin,1218 van der Waals interactions,48 virions,560
trpoperon,456 variable,13,30 viroid,584
trypsin,1053,1061 variable number of tandem Viroids,580
Tryptophan,438 repeats (VNTRs),486 virus core,563,584
tryptophan,456 variants,339 visceral mass,811,812
tryptophan (trp) operon,438 variation,495,513 Vision,1130
tube feet,838 vasa recta,1284,1298 vision,1140
tuber,946 vascular bundle,905,946 vital capacity (VC),1232,1247
Tubers,913 vascular cylinder,905 vitamin,1061
tubular reabsorption,1285, vascular plant,727 Vitamins,1047
1298 vascular stele,905,946 viviparity,1341,1367
tubular secretion,1285,1298 vascular tissue,905,946 vomerine teeth,862
tumor suppressor gene,301 vasoconstriction,1267,1273
W
Tumor suppressor genes,295 vasodilation,1267,1273
tunicate,898 vasodilator,1295,1298
Water potential,926
tunicates,852 vasopressin,1295,1298
tympanum,1125,1140 vein,718,727,1274
water potential (Ψw),946
water vascular system,843
Veins,1267
U wavelength,233,246
veliger,812,843
Wax,84
velum,801
ubiquinone,210,223 wax,102
vena cava,1274
ulna,1188,1219 weather,1396,1404
venation,919,946
ultrasound,1124,1140 web of life,553,557
venous P ,1234,1247
umami,1119,1140 CO2 Wetlands,1395
unidirectional circulation,1273 venous P ,1247 whisk fern,727
unidirectionally,1252
O2
whisk ferns,720
unified cell theory,109,137 venous P O2 ,1234 white blood cell,1274
uniporter,160,169 ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) white blood cells,1255
uniramous,843 mismatch,1240,1247 white-nose syndrome,1509,
unsaturated,82 ventral cavity,1010,1029 1516
unsaturated fatty acid,102 ventricle,1104,1255,1274 Whole-genome sequencing,476
untranslated region,456 ventricles,1085 whole-genome sequencing,486
untranslated regions,449 venule,1274 whorled,920,946
up-regulation,1148,1175 venules,1267 wild type,339
upstream,431 vernalization,990,1000 wildlife corridors,1513
urate salts,878
vertebrae,854
X
urea cycle,1291,1298
vertebral column,898,1184,
ureotelic,1291,1298
1219
X inactivation,371,375
ureter,1282,1298
Vertebrata,898
X-linked,341,356
uric acid,1292,1298
vertical transmission,571,584
Xylem,717
urinary bladder,1282,1298
vesicle,137
xylem,727
urine,1281,1298
Vesicles,118
Urochordata,852,898
vessel element,946 Y
Urodela,863,898
Vessel elements,910
uropygial gland,878 Vestibular sensation,1110 yeast,697
uterus,1345,1367 vestibular sense,1140 yolk sac,867
vestigial structure,513
V Z
vestigial structures,497
viable-but-non-culturable,594
vaccination,575 zero population growth,1418,
This OpenStax book is available for free at http://cnx.org/content/col24361/1.8
PAGE: 1578
Index 1567
1453
zoea,843
zona pellucida,1359,1367
Zoology,28
zoology,30
Zoonoses,611
zoonosis,622
zoonotic diseases,881
Zooplankton,1394
Zygomycota,677,697
zygospore,697
zygospores,677
